     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Odes and Psalms of Solomon, Vol. II: The Translation
      Creator(s): Anonymous (the Odes and Psalms themselves - early
                  Christian hymnbook, composed c. 100-125+ CE; provenance,
                  date, and original language are all disputed)
                  Harris, J. Rendel (Editor/Translator)
                  Mingana, Alphonse (Editor/Translator)
     Print Basis: Re-edited for the Governors of the John Rylands Library.
                  Manchester: at the University Press; London: Longmans,
                  Green & Company, and Bernard Quaritch, 1920.
          Rights: Public Domain
    Rights Basis: Public domain by publication date - a 1920 volume,
                  clearing the "to ~1929" rule this corpus otherwise holds
                  to (the same basis as chronicle-of-edessa_cowper.txt, not
                  the weaker transcriber-declaration basis
                  aphrahat_demonstrations-2-7_hallock1932.txt rests on). No
                  copyright notice appears anywhere in this scan (checked
                  directly, whole file).
Source Collection: Internet Archive (archive.org/details/odespsalmsofsolo02harruoft),
                  scanned from the University of California Libraries' copy;
                  OCR text fetched directly from archive.org's own
                  djvu.txt derivative, 2026-09-13
     __________________________________________________________________

THE   ODES   AND    PSALMS 
OF   SOLOMON 


PI  BLISHBD  FOR  THE  JOHN'  RYLANDS  LIBRARY  AT 

llli:    UNIVERSITY    PRESS    (H.    M.    McKechnie,    Secretary) 

19  Lime  Grove,   Oxford  Road,   Manchester 

LONGMANS,    GREEN   AND   CO. 

London  :   39  Paternoster  Row 

New  York:    443-449  Fourth  Avenue  and  Thirtieth  Street 

Bombay :    8  Hornby  Road 

Calcutta:   6  Old  Court  House  Street 

Madras:    167   Mount  Road 

BERNARD   QUARITCH    LIMITED 
11    Grafton  Street,   New  Bond  Street,   London.  W. 


So\ 
H 

"THE  ODES  AND  PSALMS " 
OF  SOLOMON 

RE-EDITED     FOR 

THE  GOVERNORS  OF 
THE  JOHN  RYLANDS  LIBRARY 

BY 

RENDEL   HARRIS 

AND 

ALPHONSE  MINGANA 
VOL.  II:    THE    TRANSLATION 

WITH  INTRODUCTION  AND  NOTES 


MANCHESTER :  AT  THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS 

LONDON :  LONGMANS,  GREEN  &  COMPANY,  AND 

BERNARD  QUARITCH 

NEW  YORK,  BOMBAY,  CALCUTTA,  MADRAS : 

LONGMANS,  GREEN  &  COMPANY 

1920 


PRINTED    AT    OXFORD,    ENGLAND 

BY    FREDERICK    HALI. 

PRINTER    TO    THE    UNIVERSITY 


PREFACE 

The  present  volume  contains  the  translation  of  the 
text  of  the  Odes  and  Psalms  of  Solomon,  as  they  are 
edited  in  the  previous  volume.  A  critical  introduction  is 
prefixed  dealing  with  the  main  questions  that  affect  the 
time  and  place  of  production  of  these  Odes  and  Psalms 
and  their  interpretation,  and  accompanied  by  detailed 
notes  to  each  of  the  Odes. 

We  have  availed  ourselves,  as  far  as  possible,  of  the 
great  efflux  of  literature  caused  by  the  discovery  of  the 
Odes,  but  it  has  not  been  found  practicable  to  give  exact 
credit  to  everything  that  has  been  wisely  said,  nor  is  it 
consistent  with  the  laws  of  charity  to  register  all  the 
mistakes  of  translation  and  interpretation  that  have  been 
perpetrated  by  the  various  writers  who  have  discoursed 
on  the  theme,  including  ourselves.  We  are  sensible  that 
much  yet  remains  to  be  done  in  the  explication  of  the  Odes 


vi  PREFAC1 

nf  Solomon,  just  as  wo  are  hopeful  that  a  real  advance  will 
lie  registered  in  the  present  volume. 

We  hope,  also,  that  the  microscopic  dissection  of  the 
text  of  these  Odes,  and  the  corresponding  attempts  to 
reach  the  mentality  of  their  composer,  will  not  wholly 
obliterate  '  the  first  fine  careless  rapture'  that  accompanied 
their  resurrection. 

R.   H. 
A.  M. 


CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION  : 

I.  The  Identification  of  the  Odes  .... 

II.  Quotations  of  Odes  in  the  Early  Fathers  . 

III.  Quotations  of  Odes  in  the  Early  Fathers  {continued) 

IV.  The  Origin  and  Time  of  the  Composition  of  the  Odes 
V.  Christ  and  Solomon    . 

VI.  The  Christology  of  the  Odes      . 

VII.  The  Odes  and  the  Biblical  Targum 

VIII.  Style  of  the  Odes 

IX.  The  Style  of  the  Odes  and  that  of  the  Psalms  of  Solomon 
compared      ..... 

X.  The  Biblical  Quotations  of  the  Odes 

XI.  Poetry  of  the  Odes     . 

XII.  Unity  of  the  Odes       . 

XIII.  Syriac  or  Greek? 

XIV.  Syriac  or  Greek?  {continued') 
XV.  The  Coptic  (Sahidic)  Version 

XVI.  The  Odes  and   Baptism 

XVII.  Harnack  and  the  Odes 

XVIII.  Gnosticism  in  the  Odes 


THE    ODES   OF   SOLOMON  :    Translation,  w 
Expository  Notes  . 


THE    PSALMS   OF   SOLOMON  :    Translation 
Concordance  to  the  Odes  of  Solomon  < 
Bibliographical'  Index  to  the  Odes  of  Solomon 


ith   Critical  and 


page 

i 
16 

40 
61 
69 

72 
85 
91 

106 

no 
125 
*33 
138 
*59 
J75 
187 
197 
203 

207 
410 

435 
455 


INTRODUCTION 

CHAPTER   I 
The  Identification  of  the  Odes. 

We  have  given  in  the  previous  volume  a  brief  summary  of  the 
materials  upon  which  this  edition  of  the  Odes  and  Psalms  of 
Solomon  is  based  ;  and  it  is  not  necessary  to  repeat  the  descriptions 
which  are  there  presented.  For  the  sake  of  historical  completeness 
we  repeat,  however,  the  evidence  for  the  identification  of  the  new 
Odes  with  the  lost  book  which  the  Early  Church  spoke  of  under 
the  title  of  The  Odes  of  Solomon.  The  identification  is  the  more 
necessary  since  the  beginning  of  these  Odes  and  the  ending  of  the 
Psalms  of  Solomon  are  missing  in  the  Rylands  MS.,  and  in  the 
Nitrian  MS.  the  greater  part  of  the  book  is  wanting,  including  the 
opening  and  the  close.  Thus  we  are  precluded  from  appealing  to 
introductory  matter  or  to  an  attached  colophon  which  might  have 
contained  a  reference  to  Solomon,  or  to  the  songs  themselves  as 
either  Odes  or  Psalms. 

We  begin,  obviously,  with  the  recognition  that  the  latter  part 
of  the  book  contains,  nearly  complete,  the  collection  known  to 
scholars  as  the  Psalms  of  Solomon,  a  collection  extant  in  Greek 
in  a  number  of  MSS.,  and  thought  by  most  scholars  to  be  directly 
derived  from  a  Hebrew  original.  These  Psalms  are  eighteen  in 
number,  a  volume  to  themselves,  and  our  MSS.  show  that  they 
have  been  attached  to  a  similar  collection  of  Syriac  hymns,  forty- 
two  in  number.  No  distinction  is  made  in  our  MSS.  between  the 
two  collections,  which  are  numbered  continuously  and  described 
n  B 


2  INTRODUCTION 

simply  as  Psalms.  We  arc  to  show  that  the  first  forty-two  hymns 
arc  the  lost  Odes  of  Solomon,  and  then  we  separate  the  two  collec- 
tions, and  assign  to  them  the  titles  of  Odes  of  Solomon  and  Psalms 
of  Solomon  respectively  :  for  it  is  certain  that  the  two  collections 
did  not  always  stand  together. 

In  the  Codex  Alexandrinus  of  the  New  Testament  (Codex  A) 
the  index  at  the  end  of  the  MS.  shows  that  there  once  stood  in  the 
volume  the  eighteen  Psalms  of  Solomon,  the  close  of  the  index- 
being  as  follows  : 

'AttokolXv^ls  'Icadvvov 
K\rjfi€ifT09  emcrToXr)   a. 
KXrjfitvTOS   emcrToXr)   ft'. 

dfxov  fiifiXia  — . 
WaXfxol    ?£oXoiia>VTO<i  ir]  . 

Here  we  see  the  Psalms  of  Solomon  standing  just  outside  the 
accepted  Christian  books  of  the  New  Testament  in  the  very 
penumbra  of  canonicity.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  Odes  of 
Solomon  stood  with  them,  though  if  we  judged  by  the  contents 
they  are  much  nearer  to  the  New  Testament  than  their  companions. 
At  a  later  date  we  shall  find  the  two  collections  fused  together, 
with  the  priority  given  to  the  Psalms  over  the  Odes. 

Thus  in  the  Synopsis  Sanctac  Scriptnrac,  which  passes  under 
the  name  of  Athanasius,  though  it  belongs  to  a  much  later  date 
(say  the  sixth  century)  we  find  after  the  enumeration  of  the 
AnttUgomena  of  the  Old  Testament  as  follows: 

Svi'  tKtivois  Se   Ktzl  tcivtci.   r)pidfirji/rar 

MaKKafiaiKCL  fiifiXi'a  S' . 

IlToXcfxaiKd.. 

WaXfiol   Kal  wSr]   ^oAo/zcoito?. 

Sdocrai'i'a, 

Here  a>8r)  is  clearly  a  misunderstanding  for  cpSai,  under  the  influence 
of  the  canonical  Song  of  Solomon. 

We  turn  in  the  next  place  to  the  Stichowetry  of  Nicephorus, 


THE   IDENTIFICATION   OF   THE  ODES  3 

Patriarch  of  Constantinople,  in  the  ninth  century,  where  we  find  as 
follows : 

ocrcu  avTikkyovrai  kcu  ovk  kKK\r)crid£ovTCLi' 

MaKKafiaiKO.  y' '    crri\'  JST. 

2o(j)ia    ^oXofMCOPTO^'     CTTL\'  ' dp '. 

2o<pia  vlov  tov  Hipd)('    arty  fiat . 
Wa.Xp.ol  Kctl  g>8t)  ^oXopS>vros'  crrr^"  $?'• 
"Ecrdrjp'    0~TI\'  TV  . 
'IovSlO'    arty  ,ayjr. 
^axTavva'    crTi\'  <j)  . 
Too(3it,  6  kolI  Toofiias'    <ttlx'  yjr. 

In- this  list  we  again  seethe  form  <o8ri  for  d>8al:  we  edit  the 
singular  because  it  occurs  in  some  MSS.  of  Nicephorus,  and  because 
it  gives  us  evidence  that  these  two  book-lists  have  a  common 
element ;  but  we  do  not  justify  it  as  Zahn  tried  to  do,  by  a 
reference  to  the  LXX  of  1  Kings  viii.  5$  (ovk  ISov  avrrj  ykypairrai 
kv  (3t(3\a>  7-779  cp8r)$ ;)  it  is  clearly  a  mistake  which  has  come  down 
on  two  separate  lines:  the  recognition  of  the  error  shows  us,  as 
Bernard  points  out,  that  we  have  to  qualify  our  statement  that 
the  junction  of  the  Psalms  with  the  Odes  may  be  dated  in  the 
sixth  century.     After  all  it  may  be  earlier. 

We  observe  that  Nicephorus  has  given  us  the  content  of  the 
joined  Odes  and  Psalms  as  2,100  verses.  It  is  easy  to  show  from 
the  MSS.  of  the  Psalms  of  Solomon  extant  in  Greek  that  they 
were  credited  with  a  compass  of  950  verses.  Thus  the  proportion 
of  the  two  books  is  : 

Odes  to  Psalms  as  1,150  to  950. 
or  as        33  to  19. 

Now  let  us  turn  back  to  our  MS.  and  we  shall  find  as  follows : 
at  the  beginning,  three  leaves  are  missing,  the  book  being  arranged 
in  quires  of  ten  leaves ;  these  three  leaves  contained  the  first  two 
Odes  and  the  opening  of  the  third  Ode.  The  Odes  then  run  con- 
tinuously till  the  fourth  quire,  where  they  stop  on  the  verso  of 
the  fourth  leaf :  this  makes  34  leaves  for  the  first  group  of  songs  in 

B  2 


4  INTRODUCTION 

the  MS.  Then  we  come  to  the  known  Psalms  of  Solomon  for 
which  we  reckon  26  leaves,  and  if  we  estimate  the  space  required 
for  the  missing  portion,  we  may  say  that  the  Psalms  occupied 
28  leaves,  and  that  the  proportion  between  the  two  parts  is  Odes  to 
Psalms  as  34  to  2<S.  This  agrees  closely  with  the  estimate  furnished 
by  the  Stichometries,  being  in  each  case  a  proportion  of  i-2  to  I, 
which  enables  us  to  identify  our  first  group  of  songs  with  the 
Odes  of  Solomon  spoken  of  by  ps.-Athanasius  and  Niccphorus. 

Before  we  pass  away  from  this  part  of  the  investigation  we  may 
find  it  important  to  note  that  there  is  a  suspicion  that  both  the 
Odes  and  the  Psalms  had  been  discarded  from  the  canonical  and 
deutcro-canonical  literature  of  the  Church  at  Carthage  at  a  very 
early  date.  The  evidence  is  as  follows  :  we  possess  a  catalogue 
written  in  the  year  A. D.  359,  and  of  North  African  origin,  known 
as  the  Cheltenham  Stichometry,  from  its  discovery  in  the  Phillipps 
Library  at  Cheltenham  by  Mommsen  ; x  in  this  catalogue,  the 
Salomonic  writings  are  introduced  as  follows: 
'  Psalmi  David  CLI  ver  v. 

Salomonis  ver  V  D 

profetas  maiores  ver  XVI  CCCLXX.  numero  IIII.' 

This  is  at  first  sight  somewhat  perplexing :  it  seems  as  if  the 
Cheltenham  list  had  only  one  book  of  Solomon,  or  several  books 
reckoned  as  one,  and  that  the  total  extent  of  this  book  or  books  is 
5.500  verses.  But,  as  Prcuschen  2  has  suggested,  the  real  reckoning 
for  Solomon  has  got  into  the  next  line,  and  we  should  read: 

'  Salomonis  lib.  V.  ver  vTi.  CCCXX. 
profetas  maiores  numero  IIII.' 

If  this  restoration  be  correct  we  should  have  the  Cheltenham 
list  in  evidence  for  five  books  of  Solomon,  but  without  any  clue  to 
the  identification  of  the  five  books,  or  any  means  of  comparison 
with  the  stichometry  of  the  Psalms  and  Odes  as  given  by 
Nicephorus. 

1  Sunday,  in  Studia  Biblica'.  vol.  iii.  217  sqq. 

2  Preuschen,  Analccta,  pp.  135  ff. 


THE   IDENTIFICATION   OF   THE   ODES  5 

Now  that  Preuschen  is  correct  -as  regards  the  numbers  may  be 
seen  from  the  fact  that  the  figure  7,320  agrees  with  the  count  which 
we  find  in  the  Vulgate  MSS.1     For  here  we  have: 


'  Proverbs   .... 

1,740  verses 

Ecclesiastes 

800      „ 

Canticles  .... 

280      „ 

Wisdom    .         .         . 

1,700      „ 

Ecclesiasticus    . 

2,800      „ 

Total     7,320      „ ' 

This  justifies  Preuschen's  restoration,  and  shows  that  five  books 
of  Solomon  were  reckoned  amongst  the  canonical  and  semi- 
canonical  books  in  North  Africa  in  the  middle  of  the  fourth 
century,  but  the  Psalms  and  Odes  of  Solomon  are  not  amongst 
the  five.  The  very  same  thing  follows  from  the  consideration  of 
the  list  of  canonical  Scriptures  contained  in  the  Acts  of  the  Council 
of  Carthage  in  A.  D.  397,  for  the  entry  in  the  list  of  canonical  books, 
'  Salomonis  libri  quinque,' 

can  hardly  be  referred  to  any  other  grouping  than  that  which 
we  have  already  described.  From  this  time  onwards  the  tradition 
of  the  Church  is  steady  that  there  are  five  books  of  Solomon. 
Thus  we  find  in  Innocentius,  writing  at  the  beginning  of  the  fifth 
century : 

'  Prophetarum  libri  sexdecim,  Salomonis  libri  quinque, 
Psalterium  ; ' 2 

And  in  Cassiodorus,  writing  at  the  middle  of  the  sixth  century : 3 

'Psalterium  librum  unum  ;  Salomonis  libros  quinque,  i.e. 
Proverbia,  Sapientiam,  Ecclesiasticum,  Ecclesiasten,  Canticum 
Canticorum  ; ' 

and  so  in  other  places. 

1  Sanday,  1.  c,  p.  266. 

2  Ad  Exsuperium  (Galland,  BibL,  vol.  viii,  pp.  561  ff.). 
8  De  insiit.  div.  litt.,  cap.  xiv. 


6  INTRODUCTION 

[sidore  of  Seville,  in  the  early  part  of  the  seventh  century, 
divides  the  five  Salomonic  writings  into  groups  of  three  and  two 
respectively,  and  explains  that  the  two  which  he  detaches  (Wisdom 
and  Ecclesiasttcus)  were  really  the  works  of  Jesus  the  son  of  Sirach, 
but  have  been  credited  to  Solomon  on  the  ground  of  style  : * 

'  Duo  quoque  illi  egregii  et  sanctae  institutions  libelli, 
Sapientiam  dico  ct  alium  qui  vocatur  Ecclesiasticus :  qui  dum 
dicantur  a  Iesu  filio  Sirach  cditi,  tamen  propter  quandam 
eloquii  similitudinem  Salomonis  titulo  sunt  praenotati.' 2 

We  have  been  at  some  pains  to  show  the  persistence  of  the 
tradition  of  five  books  of  Solomon  in  the  Church,  on  account  of 
its  importance  in  regard  to  the  question  of  the  reception  or  the 
rejection  of  the  Psalms  and  Odes  of  Solomon  in  the  African 
Church.  If  they  were  ever  extant  in  the  Church  of  Carthage,  it 
would  seem  that  they  were  very  early  discarded,  and  perhaps  by 
the  authority  of  Cyprian  himself;  but  we  must  not  assume  too 
hastily  that  cither  the  Odes  or  the  Psalms  were  extant  in  a  Latin 
dress.  We  need  not  spend  more  time  over  this  paleographical  and 
statistical  identification  ;  and  there  are,  as  far  as  we  know,  no 
further  references  to  the  Psalms  or  Odes  of  Solomon  in  the  lists 
of  canonical  books  that  have  come  down  to  us,  unless  there  should 
be  a  cryptic  allusion  to  them  in  the  '  new  book  of  Psalms  written 
for  Marcion  ',  which  the  Muratorian  Canon  (sec.  ii-iii)  condemns,  or 
the  ylraXfxol  ISkotlkoi  which  the  Council  of  Laodicea  (c.  A.D.  360) 
prohibits  from  being  used  in  the  Church.  In  the  latter  case  we 
have  the  opinion  of  John  Zonaras  in  favour  of  the  identification. 
Hut  Zonaras  in  the  twelfth  century  was  probably,  like  ourselves, 
engaged  in  speculation.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  might  describe 
^raX^ol  ISicoriKot  as  meaning  Psalms  of  personal  experience,  the 
term  would  exactly  suit  our  collection  of  Odes. 

We  pass  on,  then,  from  catalogues  of  canonical  books  and  their 

1  Isidore,  De  orditU  libb.  S.  Script.,  P.  L.  lxxxiii.  155  flf. 

2  For  the  persistence  of  the  tradition  as  to  the  five  Salomonic  books  see 
Nestle,  ZcitsJirift /.  alttest.  fViss.,  1909,  xxvii.  294  ff. 


THE   IDENTIFICATION   OF   THE   ODES  7 

stichometry  to  the  evidence  furnished  for  the  Odes  of  Solomon  by 
actual  patristic  and  quasi-patristic  quotation. 

We  begin  with  a  reference  in  the  Divine  Institutes  of  Lactantius, 
to  which,  as  far  as  we  know,  the  attention  of  English  readers  was 
first  drawn  by  Whiston  in  his  Authentic  Records}  Here  we  find 
Lactantius  saying  in  the  fourth  book  2  as  follows  : 

'  Salomon  in  Ode  undevicesima  ita  dicit :  Infirmatus  est 
uterus  Virginis  et  accepit  foetum  et  gravata  est,  et  facta  est  in 
multa  miseratione  mater  virgo.' 

Lactantius  tells  us  to  look  for  this  passage  in  the  19th  Ode  of 
Solomon,3  and  we  immediately  verify  this  on  turning  to  our  text. 
The  only  discordance  appears  to  be  the  first  word  infirmatus,  which 
stands  in  the  place  of  an  obscure  Syriac  word,  and  is  itself  obscure 
in  the  meaning.     Of  this  more  presently. 

Before  the  discovery  of  the  actual  text  of  the  Odes  had  made 
this  identification  possible,  it  had  been  acutely  suggested  by  Ryle 
and  James,  in  their  edition  of  the  eighteen  Psalms  of  Solomon, 
that  the  reference  of  Lactantius  proved  that  at  one  time  more 
Salomonic  matter  was  available  than  the  eighteen  known  Psalms ; 
and  that  it  was  probable  that  the  original  collection  of  the  Psalms 
of  Solomon  was  fitted  with  an  appendix  of  the  Odes  of  Solomon, 
the  added  matter  being  approximately  equal  in  length  to  the 
original  collection,  and  either  Christian  or  marked  by  distinctly 
Christian  interpolations.  This  was  a  brilliant  piece  of  divination. 
It  was  not,  however,  necessary  that  the  supposed  appendix  should 
come  last.  Our  text  shows  it  in  the  front  place.  No  doubt  there 
are  two  traditions  as  regards  the  order,  as  we  shall  see  more  clearly 
presently. 

1  Vol.  i.  155.  2  De  Div.  Inst.  iv.  12. 

3  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the  reference  which  is  in  all  MSS.  of  the 
apparatus  of  Brandt's  edition:  the  number  is  wanting  in  the  MS.  Kk.  4.  17 
of  the  Cambridge  University  Library,  but  is  found  in  Gg.  4.  24  of  the  same 
collection.  We  must  certainly  edit  '  undevicesima '  in  Lactantius"s  text  :  the  fact 
that  no  number  is  given  in  the  Epitome  of  the  Institutes  does  not  invalidate 
this  conclusion.     The  number  was  not  wanted  in  an  Epitome. 


s  INTRODUCTION 

It  was  not  unnatural  to  infer  from  the  existence  of  the  aforesaid 
quotation  in  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century,  taken  along  with 
the  fact  that  Lactantius,  when  quoting  Greek  books,  such  as 
Hermes  Trisnicgistus  or  the  Sibyl,  quotes  in  Greek  and  does  not 
offer  a  translation,  that  the  Odes  were  current  in  a  Latin  version  at 
the  date  mentioned.  Further  examination  throws  grave  doubt  on 
the  accuracy  of  this  suggestion,  On  reading  over  the  fourth  book 
of  Lactantius's  Institutes  we  came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was 
based  throughout  upon  a  volume  of  Tcstimonia  adversus  Iudaeos, 
agreeing  closely  with  the  treatment  of  Cyprian  of  the  same  theme, 
and  that,  in  particular,  the  quotation  about  the  Virgin  Birth  is  one 
of  the  anti-Judaic  extracts  in  the  collection.  We  thus  arrived  in 
this  examination  at  the  same  result  as  Pichon,  in  his  study  of 
Lactantius,  who  is  followed  pretty  closely  by  Bernard  in  his 
introduction  to  the  Odes  of  Solomon.  The  matter  is  so  important 
in  view  of  recent  investigations,  which  confer  an  almost  apostolic 
authority  on  the  primitive  collections  of  Testimonia,  that  we  must 
examine  the  question  more  in  detail. 

Bernard,  then,  whose  attention  had  been  drawn  to  the  matter 
by  Lawlor,  put  the  case  as  follows : 

'  In  Fichon's  study  of  Lactantius,  it  is  pointed  out  that  his 
Bible  quotations  do  not  exhibit  any  special  familiarity  with 
the  Old  Testament — he  only  became  a  Christian  while  living 
in  Nicomcdia — and  Pichon  thinks  that  he  may  have  got  them 
from  a  collection  of  Testimonia  like  Cyprian's.  If  this  be  a 
well-grounded  opinion,  we  can  understand  how  Lactantius, 
alone  among  the  Fathers,  Eastern  or  Western,  could  have  made 
the  mistake  of  quoting  the  Odes  as  genuine  Solomonic  prophecy. 
He  did  not  accurately  know  the  limits  or  contents  of  the  Old 
Testament.  Other  Fathers  may  have  known  the  Odes,  and 
probably  some  of  them  did,  but  they  knew  that  they  were  not 
Scripture,  so  they  did  not  quote  them.' 

'  The  evidence,  then,  of  Lactantius  amounts  to  this — that 
the  Odes  were  known,  and  were  ascribed  to  Solomon  before 
the  year  305  in  the  district  of  Nicomedia.  We  cannot  be  sure 
of  the  existence  of  a  Latin  version,  nor  even  whether  Lactantius 


THE    IDENTIFICATION    OF   THE    ODES  9 

had  access  to  them  in  Greek  or  Syriac,  but  we  can  be  sure 
that  he  counted  them  genuine  writings  of  Solomon.' 

We  agree  that  there  is  no  evidence  for  the  existence  of  a  Latin 
Version  ;  there  is,  however,  evidence  for  the  existence  of  a  Latin 
Testimony  Book,  containing  one  sentence  of  the  Odes  of  Solomon. 
It  is  the  composer  of  this  Testimony  Book,  or  the  person  who  inter- 
polated Solomon  into  it,  to  whom  Bernard's  remarks  appiy  about 
his  not  knowing  accurately  the  contents  of  the  Old  Testament. 
Thus  Lactantius  moves  off  the  scene  altogether,  and  we  have  instead 
to  chase,  and  if  possible  to  catch,  the  editor  of  the  Testimony 
Book  who  is  responsible  for  the  insertion  of  the  passage.  To  do 
this  we  must  move  into  a  much  earlier  time  than  Lactantius.  We 
note  in  passing  that  if  it  can  be  established  that  Lactantius  and 
Cyprian  are  using  the  same  Latin  collection  of  Testimonies, 
Cyprian  has  dropped  the  Odes  from  his  tradition ;  this  agrees 
with  what  we  have  shown  above,  that  they  were  not  a  part  of 
the  canonical  Scriptures  at  Carthage  in  Cyprian's  day.  But,  if 
Cyprian  dropped  the  passage,  to  what  Father,  at  an  earlier  date, 
are  we  to  credit  their  insertion  ?  It  is  almost  certain,  as  a  result  of 
recent  investigations,  that  the  Testimony  Book  in  its  earliest  form 
antedates  the  New  Testament,  and  is  of  Apostolic  origin.  How 
far  back  towards  such  an  early  origin  does  the  quotation  of 
Lactantius  take  us  ?  The  answers  to  these  questions  are  of  the 
first  importance.  We  shall  return  to  them  again,  when  we  come 
to  discuss  the  date  and  authorship  of  the  Odes  in  a  subsequent 
chapter.  For  the  present  we  content  ourselves  with  stating  the 
following  positions : 

(i)  Lactantius  in  his  fourth  book  of  Divine  Institutes  is  working 
from  a  Testimony  Book  as  the  foundation  of  his  argument. 

(ii)  This  Testimony  Book  was  written  in  African  Latin,  and 
agrees  closely  with  the  Testimonia  of  Cyprian. 

(iii)  Where  Lactantius  diverges  from  Cyprian,  as  in  the  addition 
of  uncanonical  matter,  it  often  happens  that  the  divergent  and 
additional  matter  will  be  found  in  Justin  Martyr. 


io  INTRODUCTION 

(iv)  It  is  a  reasonable  inference  from  the  foregoing  that  the 
common  origin  of  Testimonia  of  Lactantius  and  Cyprian  is  earlier 
than  the  time  of  Justin  Martyr. 

Under  the  first  head,  which  can  be  easily  verified  by  a  careful 
student,  a  detailed  proof  will  be  found  in  the  recently  published 
volume  entitled  Testimonies}  We  note  here  the  following  points : 
the  chapter  in  which  Lactantius  discourses  of  the  Virgin  Birth  is 
headed  editorially  as  follows: 

1  De  Iesu  ortu  ex  Virgine,  de  eius  Vita,  Morte,  et  Resur- 
rcctione  ;  atque  de  iis  rebus  testimonia  Prophetarum.' 

The  chapter  opens  as  follows : 

'  Descendens  itaquede  caelo  sanctus  ille  Spiritus  Dei  sanctam 
Virginem,  cuius  utero  se  insinuaret,  elegit.  At  ilia  divino 
Spirito  hausto  repleta  concepit,  et  sine  ullo  attactu  viri  repente 
virginalis  uterus  intumuit.  Quod  si  animalia  quaedam  vento 
et  aura  concipere  solere  omnibus  notum  est,  cur  quisquam 
mirum  putet,  cum  Spiritu  Dei,  cui  facile  est  quicquid  velit, 
gravatam  esse  Virginem  dicimus?  Quod  sane  incredibile 
posset  videri,  nisi  hoc  futurum  ante  multa  saecala  Prophetae 
eeeinissent.' 

It  is  clear  from  the  foregoing  that  Lactantius  is  going  to  use 
Testimonies  from  the  Prophets  in  proof  of  the  Virgin  Birth.  He 
proceeds  at  once  to  the  passage  in  the  Odes,  '  Solomon  says  in  the 
nineteenth  Ode  ',  and  then  continues  as  follows  : 

'  Item  prophcta  Esaias,  cuius  verba  sunt  haec  :  Propter  hoc 
dabit  Deus  ipse  vobis  signum.  Ecce  Virgo  accipiet  in  utero 
et  pariet  filium,  et  vocabitis  nomen  eius  Hemanucl.' 

This  is  Cyprian,  Testimonies,  ii.  9.  And  that  Lactantius  is  not 
only  quoting  prophets,  but  quoting  them  adversns  Indacos,  appears 
from  what  follows  : 

'Quid  hoc  manifestius  dici  potest?  Legebant  ista  Iudaci, 
qui  eum  negaverunt.' 

1  Testimonia,  by  Rendel  Harris  and  Vachcr  Burch  (Cambridge  University 
Press). 


THE   IDENTIFICATION   OF   THE   ODES  n 

Very  well,  then :  Lactantius  quoted  his  passage  from  the  Odes 
of  Solomon  by  the  way  of  a  Testimony  Book  of  an  earlier  day  than 
his  own,  in  which  he  found  the  Odes  quoted  as  Solomon's,  Solomon 
himself  being  numbered  amongst  the  prophets.  The  introductory 
formulae  : 

'  Salomon  in  ode  nndcvicesima  ; 
Item  Esaias  ; ' 

are  easily  seen  to  be  entirely  in  the  manner  of  the  Testimony 
Book} 

That  the  Testimony  Book  of  Lactantius  was  in  Latin,  and  of 
the  Cyprianic  type  is  seen  by  the  fact  that  the  editors  use 
Lactantius's  quotations  to  edit  Cyprian  by. 

That  Lactantius  agrees  with  Justin  in  presenting  an  earlier  type 
of  quotation  than  Cyprian  may  be  seen  in  a  number  of  ways. 
Here  is  a  single  instance:  in  the  eighteenth  chapter  of  the  fourth 
book,  Lactantius  quotes  against  the  Jews  a  passage  from  Esdras  : 

1  Apud  Esdram  ita  scriptum  erat : 
Hoc  pascha  Salvator  noster  est  et  refugium  nostrum,'  etc. 

This  unknown  extract  from  Esdras  is  found  again  in  Justin's 
Dialogue  with  Trypko,  chap.  7  2  : 

Kal  «7rei>  "Ecrdpas  r<5  Aaa>' 

Tovto  to  rc&o-ya  6  o-corrjp  r]fiS>v  Kal  f]  Karacpvyr]  jj/xcof 

and  it  is  one  of  the  passages  which  Justin  says  the  Jews  have 
removed  from  the  Bible ;  an  explanation  which  probably  means 
that  he  used  it  as  an  argument  from  his  Testimony  Book  and  could 
not  verify  it  from  the  Scriptures.     The  concurrence  of  Lactantius 

1  Having  shown  the  origin  of  Lactantius's  quotation,  the  force  is  taken  out 
of  attempts  to  find  parallels  to  the  Odes  of  Solomon  elsewhere  in  Lactantius. 
The  most  striking  parallel  is  in  De  Divin.  bistit.  iv.  26  'Is,  qui  humilis 
advenerat  ut  humilibus  et  infirmis  opem  ferret  et  omnibus  spem  salutis 
ostenderet,  eo  genere  afficiendus  fuit,  quo  humiles  et  infirmi  solent,  ne  quis 
esset  omnino,  qui  eum  non  posset  imitari.'  This  makes  a  very  good  com- 
mentary on  Ode  vii.  4,  '  Like  my  nature  He  became  that  I  might  put  Him  on', 
but  is  not  to  be  taken  as  derived  from  it. 


i2  INTRODUCTION 

and  Justin  in  anti-Judaic  matter  is  significant.  It  appears,  then, 
that  as  early  as  the  first  half  of  the  second  century,  the  Odes  of 
Solomon  could  be  quoted  as  a  part  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  that 
at  this  date  they  passed  as  being  the  work  of  Solomon. 

The  next  stage  in  the  identification  of  the  Odes  is  concerned 
with  the  fact  that  five  of  them  are  quoted  in  the  curious  Gnostic 
book  which  passes  under  the  name  of  the  Pistis  Sophia,  where 
they  are  definitely  referred  to  Solomon,  are  evidently  transcribed 
from  the  author's  Biblical  text,  and  in  one  instance  the  quoted 
Ode  has  a  number  from  which  important  inferences  may  be  made. 
These  five  Odes  are  printed  in  full  in  our  previous  volume,  in  the 
Sahidic  language  in  which  they  occur,  with  the  commentaries  and 
explanations  offered  by  the  author  of  the  Pistis  Sophia,  and  we 
do  not  need  to  recapitulate  the  textual  evidence.  Neither  is  it 
necessary  to  discuss  in  detail  the  composition  of  this  strange  book, 
the  wildest  of  all  the  productions  of  Gnosticism  that  are  extant. 
It  is  sufficient  for  our  purposes  to  remember  that  the  unique  MS.  in 
which  the  Pistis  Sophia  is  found  is  credited  to  the  sixth  century, 
and  that  the  book  itself  can  hardly  be  later  in  date  than  the  end  of 
the  third  century.  At  first  sight,  then,  it  appears  to  be  the  terminus 
ad  quem  for  the  Odes  which  it  quotes  ;  but  we  must  remember 
what  has  resulted  from  our  examination  of  the  citation  in  Lactantius, 
that  the  passage  in  Lactantius  is  taken  from  a  book  of  Testimonies, 
which  arc  probably  at  least  as  early  as  the  second  century  ;  so  that 
the  honour  of  the  first  chronological  evidence  for  the  Odes  of 
Solomon  docs  not  any  longer  lie  with  the  Pistis  Sophia. 

Let  us  now  see  the  way  in  which  the  writer  of  the  Pistis 
Sophia  makes  use  of  the  Odes.  His  method  consists  in  working 
out  a  game  of  question  and  answer  between  Jesus  and  the  disciples 
(male  and  female)  who  arc  gathered  round  him  on  the  Mount  of 
Olives.  The  Saviour  takes  a  Psalm  of  David,  disguises  it  carefully 
by  the  substitution  of  Gnostic  terms  for  the  ordinary  Biblical 
language,  and  then  asks  for  the  solution  of  the  meaning  and  origin 
of  the  fantastic  Scripture  which  he  has   manufactured.     One  or 


THE    IDENTIFICATION    OF   THE    ODES  13 

other  of  the  disciples  solves  the  riddle,  and  recites  the  Psalm  which 
has  been  perverted.  We  have  in  this  way  what  has  been  described 
as  a  Gnostic  Targum  preceding  the  text  that  is  Targumized. 
Then,  after  the  solution  has  been  found,  the  whole  Psalm  is  some- 
times gone  over  sentence  by  sentence  with  its  parallel  Gnostic 
equivalent ;  this  is  what  may  be  called  for  convenience  the  Gnostic 
commentary.  Psalm  after  Psalm  of  the  Biblical  Psalter  is  treated 
in  this  way,  and  then  referred  to  its  place  in  the  Psalter  and  to 
the  Davidic  authorship,  usually  in  a  formula  like  the  following: 

'  This  is  what  your  Light-Power  (a  substitute  for  the  Divine 
Name)  prophesied  through  David  in  the  69th  Psalm.' 

Intermingled  with  these  Gnosticised  Psalms  of  David,  we  have, 
as  stated  above,  five  Odes  of  Solomon  similarly  treated  ;  and 
because  the  treatment  is  similar  we  are  entitled  to  say  that  the 
author  of  the  Pistis  Sophia  found  the  Salomonic  matter  in  his 
Old  Testament,  where  it  ranked  along  with  the  Davidic  Psalter. 
Let  us  see  how  he  introduces  them  when  they  are  identified  by  the 
disciples. 

The  first  Ode  is  introduced  as  follows  : 

'Mary  the  mother  of  Jesus  answered  and  said:  My  Lord, 
thy  Power  of  Light  prophesied  aforetime  in  these  words  through 
Solomon  in  his  nineteenth  Ode  and  said :  The  Lord  is  on  my 
head  like  a  crown,'  &c. 

Here  the  reference  to  the  19th  Ode  shows  that  we  have  the 
missing  first  Ode  of  our  collection,  taken  from  a  text  in  which 
the  Odes  were  preceded  by  the  eighteen  Psalms  of  Solomon,  and 
numbered  continuously  with  them,  only  in  the  reverse  order  of  the 
relative  position  of  Psalms  and  Odes  from  what  we  find  in  the 
Syriac  MSS. 

The  fifth  Ode  is  introduced  as  follows : 

'And  it  came  to  pass  when  Jesus  had  done  speaking  these 
words  to  His  disciples,  that  Salome  stepped  forward  and  said  : 
My  Lord,  my  [?  thy]  Power  constrains  me  to  tell  the  solution  of 


i4  INTRODUCTION 

the  words  which  Pistis  Sophia  spake.  Thy  Power  prophesied 
aforetime  through  Solomon  and  said :  I  will  give  thanks  to 
thee.  O  Lord,'  &c. 

The  sixth  Ode  is  introduced  as  follows : 

;  Peter  stepped  forward  and  said :  My  Lord,  as  to  the 
solution  of  the  words  which  thou  hast  spoken,  thy  Power  of 
Light  prophesied  aforetime  through  Solomon  in  his  Odes.' 

The  22nd  Ode  is  introduced  as  follows  : 

And  the  Prime  Mystery  (i.e.  Jesus)  answered  and  said: 
Matthew.  T  bid  thee  produce  the  solution  of  the  hymn  which 
Pis/is  Sophia  uttered.  And  Matthew  answered  and  said  :  As 
to  the  solution  of  the  hymn  which  Pistis  Sophia  uttered,  thy 
Power  of  Light  prophesied  aforetime  in  the  Ode  of  Solomon; 
He  who  brought  me  down,'  &c. 

The  25th  Ode  is  introduced  as  follows : 

'  And  the  Prime  Mystery  answered  and  said  unto  Thomas : 
I  bid  thee  produce  the  solution  of  the  hymn,  which  Pistis 
Sophia  hymned  upwards  to  me.  And  Thomas  answered  and 
said  :  My  Lord,  as  to  the  hymn  which  Pistis  Sophia  uttered, 
when  she  was  liberated  from  Chaos,  thy  Power  of  Light 
prophesied  aforetime  through  Solomon  the  Son  of  David  in 
his  Odes  :   I  was  rescued  from  my  bonds,'  &c. 

Over  and  above  these  references  to  the  Odes,  when  they  are 
discovered  by  the  acuteness  of  the  disciples,  we  have  in  the  com- 
mentaries an  occasional  reference  to  the  Salomonic  authorship ; 
e.  g.  in  referring  to  Ode  vi,  Peter  says : 

'  Listen,  my  Lord,  I  will  utter  the  word  boldly  {kv  napp-qaia) 
after  the  fashion  that  thy  power  prophesied  through  Solomon.' 

Referring  to  Ode  xxii  Matthew  says: 

'  This,  then,  my  Lord,  is  the  solution  of  the  hymn  which 
Pistis  Sophia  uttered.  Listen,  then,  I  will  recite  it  frankly. 
The  word  which  thy  Power  spake  through  Solomon'  &c. 


THE   IDENTIFICATION   OF   THE    ODES  15 

For  Ode  xxv  Thomas  is  the  speaker,  who  says : 

'  This,  then,  my  Lord,  is  the  solution  of  the  Penitence  which 
Pistis  Sophia  uttered,  when  she  was  freed  from  Chaos :  listen, 
then,  I  will  speak  boldly  (kv  irapprja-ia) :  the  word  which  thy 
Power  of  Light  spake  through  Solomon  ;  I  was  rescued  from 
my  bonds/  &c. 

It  will  be  seen  that  it  is  only  in  the  first  Ode  that  we  have  the 
number  of  the  hymn  given  ;  fortunately  for  us  it  was  so  given,  as  it 
enabled  us  to  restore  the  Ode  to  its  right  place.  The  author  of 
the  Pistis  Sophia  had  been  misled  by  the  similarity  in  one  of  its 
sentences  to  the  fifth  Ode,  and  had  attached  them  to  the  explanation 
of  that  Ode. 

We  have  now  shown  that  the  author  of  the  Pistis  Sophia  had 
the  Odes  in  his  Biblical  text,  preceded,  in  all  probability,  by  the 
Psalms  of  Solomon,  and  like  them,  ascribed  to  Solomon.  He  uses 
them  alternately  with  the  Davidic  Psalms  as  being  of  equal,  or 
approximately  equal  authority.  This  is  not,  however,  all  that  we 
discover  from  the  use  of  the  Canonical  Psalms  in  the  Pistis  Sophia. 
About  ten  years  before  the  discovery  of  the  Odes  Dr.  Budge  pub- 
lished the  Sahidic  Psalter  in  a  complete  form  from  a  sixth-century 
papyrus  MS.  When  "we  compare  the  text  of  the  Psalms  in  the 
Pistis  Sophia  with  that  of  this  newly  published  Sahidic  Psalter 
we  find  that  they  are  the  same  text  with  microscopic  variations.1 
Either  the  Pistis  Sophia  was  written  in  Sahidic,  and  naturally 
employed  the  Sahidic  Psalter,  or  the  translator  who  turned  the 
Pistis  Sophia  into  Sahidic  reverted  to  the  Sahidic  Psalter  when 
he  came  to  translate  the  Psalms  which  he  found  in  his  text.  And 
as  we  have  shown  that  the  treatment  of  the  Salomonic  Odes  and 
the  Davidic  Psalms  in  the  Pistis  Sophia  is  strictly  parallel,  we  are 
entitled  to  infer  with  strong  probability  that  the  Odes  of  Solomon 
have  also   been  taken   from  the   Sahidic  Bible.     That  is  to  say. 

1  Rahlfs  has  pointed  out  that  this  is  not  true  of  the  Psalms  xxx  (xxxi), 
xxxiv  (xxxv),  li  (Hi),  and  cviii  (cix),  which  show  signs  of  independent  translation  ; 
v.  infra. 


16  INTRODUCTION 

before  the  end  of  the  third  century,  there  was  a  Sahidic  Bible, 
as  well  as  a  Greek  Bible,  containing  both  the  Davidic  Psalter  and 
the  Psalms  and  Odes  of  Solomon.  The  antiquity  which  this  con- 
sideration assigns  to  the  Odes  in  their  first  form  must  be  very 
great. 

Incidentally  we  have  shown  that  the  Sahidic  Bible  must  be  also 
earlier  than  the  end  of  the  third  century.  This  is  a  distinct  gain  to 
our  knowledge  of  the  versions.  When  Professor  Burkitt  wrote  his 
article  on  the  Texts  and  Versions  of  the  Bible  for  the  Encyclopaedia 
Biblica,  he  could  only  say  that  '  the  Sahidic  version  is  probably 
of  considerable  antiquity ',  and  that  it  can  be  traced  back  to  the 
early  part  of  the  fourth  century.  The  suggestion  which  he  made 
that  the  orthodox  Psalter  had  been  used  by  the  writer  of  the  Pistis 
Sophia  to  make  his  unorthodox  matter  more  respectable  is  negatived 
by  a  careful  reading  of  the  book,  in  which  the  canonical  Psalms 
are  seen  to  be  a  necessary  part  of  the  argument  throughout. 


CHAPTER    II 

Quotations  of  Odes  in  the  Early  Fathers. 

We  may  now  pass  on  to  the  consideration  of  the  traces  of  the 
Odes  in  the  writings  of  the  Fathers  of  the  Church.  We  have 
already  shown  that  the  quotation  made  by  Lactantius  comes 
through  the  medium  of  a  collection  of  Tcstimonia  very  similar 
to  the  Testimonies  of  Cyprian,  and  earlier  in  date  than  the  latter. 
It  need  hardly  be  said  that  these  Testimonies  are  not  of  Latin 
origin  :  the)'  must  be  translations  from  either  the  Greek  or  some 
Oriental  language.  Thus  we  have  no  Latin  evidence,  as  yet,  for 
the  Odes.  When  we  turn  to  the  Greek  Fathers  the  poverty  of 
evidence  is  almost  as  conspicuous.  The  only  passage,  as  far  as 
we  know,  in  Greek  Patristic  literature  that  has  yet  been  claimed 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS      17 

as  a  transference  from  the  Odes  is  the  introductory  sentences  of 
the  catechetical  lectures  of  Cyril  of  Jerusalem,  addressed  to  candi- 
dates for  baptism,  to  which  Dr.  Bernard  has  drawn  attention.  It 
runs  as  follows : 

'  Already  is  there  on  you  the  savour  of  blessedness,  O  ye 
who  are  soon  to  be  enlightened ;  already  are  you  gathering 
spiritual  flowers,  to  weave  heavenly  crowns  withal ;  already 
hath  the  fragrance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  refreshed  you  ;  already 
are  you  at  the  entrance  hall  of  the  King's  house  :  may  you  be 
brought  into  it  by  the  King !  For  now  the  blossoms  of  the 
trees  have  budded  ;  may  but  the  fruit  likewise  be  perfected.' l 

It  must  be  recognized  that  there  is  some  parallelism  between 
this  passage  and  the  first  Ode  of  our  collection,  in  which  we  have 
an  unfading  crown  of  Truth  which  blossoms  upon  the  head  of  the 
singer,  and  brings  forth  fruits  that  are  full  and  perfect. 

One  might,  perhaps,  add  a  further  parallel  for  the  '  fragrance  of 
the  Holy  Ghost '  from  Ode  xi.  15 : 

'  My  nostrils  had  the  pleasure 
Of  the  pleasant  odour  of  the  Lord.' 

Dr.  Bernard  suggests  that  the  first  Ode  had  actually  been  sung 
before  the  delivery  of  the  address  to  the  Catechumens,  and  that 
Cyril's  language  was  suggested  to  him  by  the  song. 

We  shall  return  to  the  question  of  the  supposed  dependence  of 
Cyril  upon  the  Odes  in  a  later  chapter. 

Meanwhile  it  is  sufficient  to  state  that  we  have  not  hitherto 
found  any  other  passage  in  the  Greek  Fathers  which  has  been 
claimed  as  evidence  of  a  direct  dependence  upon  the  Odes  of 
Solomon:  we  shall  now  turn  farther  east  in  search  of  parallels, 
after  which  we  will  return  to  the  evidence  of  Greek  Patristic 
literature. 

When  we  pass  from  the  Greek  and  Latin  Churches  and  examine 
the   Syriac  literature,  we  come  across  indisputable  traces  of  the 

1  Translated  by  J.  H.  Newman  in  Library  of  the  Fathers. 
11  C 


18  INTRODUCTION 

Odes,  both  in  the  form  of  direct  quotations  and  indirect  allusions. 
Nothing  definite  can  be  found,  as  far  as  we  know,  in  the  pages 
of  Aphrahat ;  but  when  we  come  to  the  works  attributed  to  Ephrem 
Syrus  we  find  ourselves  in  an  atmosphere  where  the  Odes  are 
certainly  at  home.  We  use  the  expression  '  works  attributed  to 
Ephrem '  because  we  are  obliged  to  recognize  that  a  good  many 
Syriac  compositions  bear  his  name  without  his  authority,  and  thus 
acquire  an  artificial  eminence.  We  may  have  to  revise  the  mark 
of  authorship  in  some  cases ;  at  present  it  stands  for  what  it  is 
worth.  We  are  looking,  in  the  first  instance,  for  traces  of  the  Odes 
in  Syriac,  and  we  find  such  traces  in  works  attributed  to  Ephrem. 

For  example,  here  is  a  certain  quotation  from  the  Odes.     In 
a  series  of  discourses  on  Paradise  Ephrem  tells  us  : 

1  For  nothing  there  is  idle  {or  useless).' — Ed.  Rom.  iii.  584. 

which  is  almost  exactly  the  language  of  Ode  xi.  23 : 

'  There  is  abundant  room  in  thy  Paradise, 
And  nothing  is  useless  therein  ; 
But  everything  is  filled  with  fruit.' 

The  Syriac  of  both  is  : 

•  o«  s*j>-^?  [W*fiA»]  y>+xs  fcs-/   i*^ll — Ephrem. 
.^*^»  e*ao  [JLxsu?«A»]  fcs^o — Ode  Sol. 

In  the  same  series  of  hymns  we  find  that  Ephrem  has  made 
explanation  for  us  of  an  obscure  passage  in  the  same  Ode: 

'  They  have  turned  away  the  bitterness  of  the  trees, 
When  they  were  planted  in  thy  land.' — Ode  xi.  21. 

To  which  apparently  the  following  of  Ephrem  corresponds  : 

•  The  Devil  caused  the  tares  to  grow 
that  he  might  choke  the  fair  plants  ; 
But  the  Blessed  One  in  His  glorious  Paradise 
sweetens  their  bitterness. — Ed.  Rom.  iii.  588. 

An  almost  exact  quotation  from  and  imitation  of  the  13th  Ode 
('Behold,  the  Lord  is  our  mirror')  occurs  in  Ephrem,  who,  by  the 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS      19 

slightest  change  of  U~*>  (the  Lord)  into  U-io  (water),  with  subse- 
quent modification  of  the  pronouns,  tells  us  that  'the  water  (sc. 
of  baptism)  is  a  mirror ' ;  the  passage  is  as  follows  : 

'  The  water !  its  nature  is  like  a  mirror 
To  him  that  scrutinizes  therein  ; 
Provoke  thy  soul,  O  elect  one, 

And  become  like  to  that  in  which  thy  own  image  was  depicted. 
Take  from  it  a  demonstration  ; 
Fix  thine  eyes  on  baptism, 
Clothe  thyself  with  the  beauty  that  is  hidden  in  it.' 

Eph.,  Hymn  in  Fest.  Epiph.  i.  93. 

The  parallels  are  obvious : 

'  The  Lord  is  our  mirror ; 
Open  your  eyes  and  see  them  in  him : 


Love  His  holiness  and  clothe  yourselves  therewith.' 

It  seems  probable  that  Ephrem  has  changed  the  13th  Ode  in  the 
interest  of  the  ritual  of  baptism,  and  turned  the  most  beautiful  of  all 
the  songs  in  the  collection  into  a  very  second-rate  product. 

The  same  use  of  the  '  mirror '  Ode  may  be  detected  in  a  passage 
in  the  Hymns  on  the  Clinrch  and  on  Virginity  ascribed  to 
Ephrem : x 

*.  o»a.^=>  o».(o   coj.,0    :  )ts*mo   U*.v   oxo 
-.  ,oo»X    .  cue*    oi\.o    :  .ootio^Loo    oJL»? 

*.   ©»=>     O^A     ^CC^io.      *.  6*2>    COJ..SO     .00*^0033 

*.  u;30Ad   o>lculro    urot?    >  >^s^    uoiasa^ 

i.  e.  '  The  pure  mirror  :  which  is  set  before  the  Gentiles  :  they 
have  acquired  the  hidden  eye  :  they  have  drawn  near  and 
gazed  into  it :  and  because  they  have  seen  their  own  hateful- 
ness,  they  have  reproached  themselves :    their  blemishes  they 

1  Ephr.  (ed.  Lamy),  iv.  602. 
C  2 


20  INTRODUCTION 

have  wiped  away  by  it :  their  beauties  have  become  fair  by  it. 
Blessed  is  he  who  reproves  his  own  hatefulness  by  'the  sight 
of n  thy  beauty :  and  on  whom  thou  hast  imprinted  thy 
likeness.' 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  section  of  the  Hymn  of  Ephrem 
is  based  on  the  13th  Ode  of  Solomon  (there  is  also  an  accessory 
parallel  to  Ode  xv.  3,  '  Eyes  I  have  acquired ',  &c).  It  becomes 
a  matter  of  interest  to  inquire  whether  the  Ode  read  in  its  first 
clause  '  The  Lord  is  our  mirror '  or  '  The  water  is  our  mirror '. 
If  we  examine  the  composition  of  the  poem  from  which  our  extract 
is  taken,  we  sec  that  it  is  a  series  of  adorations  addressed  to  Christ 
under  various  titles.     For  example,  He  is  : 

'  The  Treasurer  of  the  Father  ', 

'  The  High  Priest ', 

1  The  Dew  and  the  Hyssop ', 

'  The  treasure  of  the  poor,  and  fountain  of  the  thirsty  ', 

1  The  rock  upon  which  the  Gentile  Church  is  built ', 

'  The  Door  of  Truth  ', 

'  The  refining  furnace  ', 

'  The  yoke  that  makes  the  bondman  free  , 

1  The  pure  mirror  ', 

'  The  Vine ', 

'  The  Bread  ', 

'  The  shipmaster  who  brings  his  ship  to  the  haven  '. 

These  titles  of  Christ  show  that  it  is  Himself  who  is  intended 
by  the  '  pure  mirror ',  and  that  in  Ephrem's  book  of  Odes  the 
13th  Ode  began  like  ours.  It  is  probable  that  the  'pure  mirror' 
is  an  alternative  form  of  the  ta-onrpov  a/o/At'&oroi'  of  the  Wisdom  of 
Solomon,  in  which  case  it  certainly  did  not  stand,  in  the  first 
instance,  for  the  water  of  baptism.  That  '  the  Lord  is  our  mirror ' 
appears  also  from  the  reference  to  'thy  beauty',  'thy  likeness'; 
cf.  the  language  of  the  Ode,  '  Love  His  holiness  and  clothe  your- 
selves with  it  '. 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS  21 

The  reader  will  hardly  fail  to  note  that  in  the  successive  stanzas 
of  the  hymn  we  have  been  considering,  there  are  suggestions  of 
further  parallels  with  the  Odes  of  Solomon. 

For  instance,  we  shall  find  that  Christ  is  called  the  'purifying 
dew ' ;  this  goes  back  to  the  Old  Testament  (Deut.  xxii.  2,  and 
elsewhere),  and  is  a  common  figure  in  the  Odes,  '  Bedew  us  with 
thy  dew  *,  '  The  dew  of  the  Lord  ',  &c.  The  '  gracious  one  who 
chose  the  Gentiles  and  tolerates  their  blemishes,  because  he  receives 
the  penitent ',  is  the  same  Christ  who  in  the  Odes  is  Himself 
'  unpolluted  by  His  love  for  the  Gentiles,  because  they  confessed 
Him  in  high  places'.     (See  Odes  iii.  10  ;  xxxv.  1  ;  x.  5.) 

The  Christ  who  is  '  the  rock  upon  which  the  Gentile  Church 
is  built ',  is  the  one  referred  to  in  Ode  xxii.  12,  as  the  '  Rock  which 
is  the  foundation  of  everything,  upon  which  thou  didst  build  thy 
kingdom '. 

The  '  yoke  that  makes  bondmen  free  '  is  illustrated  by  Ode 
xvii.  11,  Ode  xlii.  7,  8,  20.  'All  my  bondmen',  'my  yoke  over 
those  that  know  me ',  '  they  are  free  men,  they  are  mine ',  and  note 
the  parallelism  between,  '  by  thy  aid  he  has  led  captive  his  cap- 
tivity ',  and  Ode  x.  3, '  to  lead  captive  a  good  captivity  for  freedom  ' 
(cf.  Ps.  Ixviii.  18). 

Last  of  all,  there  is  the  figure  of  Christ  as  the  Shipmaster  who 
brings  his  glorious  ship  out  of  the  turbid  sea  to  the  haven  of  life 
and  the  haven  of  peace.  The  original  of  this  is,  of  course, 
Psalm  cvii.  30,  '  So  he  bringeth  them  to  their  desired  haven  ',  '  they 
are  glad  because  they  are  quiet ' ;    but  the  proximate  parallel  is 

Ode  xxxviii  :    '  the  Truth   led  me  and  brought  me to  the 

Haven  of  Salvation — the  ascent  of  immortal  life  '. 

It  is  Ephrem,  then,  who  is  responsible  for  reading  'water' 
instead  of  '  Lord  '  in  the  opening  of  the  Ode.  It  is  quite  impossible 
to  approve  his  correction,  however  attractive  it  may  have  seemed 
to  a  primitive  exegete.  Dr.  Abbott  was  certainly  right  when  he 
said  that  'to  emend  "the  Lord  is  our  mirror"  into  "the  water 
is  our  mirror "  would  be,  in  my  judgement,  to  degrade  a  simple, 


32  INTRODUCTION 

deep,  noble  and  truly  poetic  conception  into  a  (comparatively 
speaking)  artificial,  thin,  and  elaborate  conceit '.' 

Mr.  Aytoun  reminds  us  that  Ephrem's  language  has  affected 
Moses  Bar  Kepha  in  his  tract  on  the  Mysteries  of  Baptism,  '  When 
thou  lookest  on  the  water  thou  scest  in  it  another  in  thine  own 
likeness — like  thee.  Here  thou  wilt  perceive  that  thou  goest  down 
to  baptism  one  person,  and  comest  up  another  instead,  the  new 
instead  of  the  old  '.  The  same  transference  of  ideas  can  be  traced 
in  other  Syriac  writers. 

To  return  to  Ephrem  and  his  acquaintance  with  the  Odes,  which 
is  the  question  upon  which  we  are  engaged. 

In  the  very  obscure  24th  Ode,  which  appears  to  be  a  com- 
bination of  the  Baptism  of  our  Lord  with  the  story  of  the  Flood 
and  the  descent  into  Hades,  we  are  told  that : 

1  The  abysses  were  seeking  for  the  Lord,  as  women  in  travail ; 
And  He  was  not  given  to  them  for  food, 
Because  He  did  not  belong  to  them.' 

If  this  is  rightly  understood  of  the  descent  into  Hades,  we  have 
striking  parallels  to  the  starving  abyss  in  the  Carmina  Nisibcua 
of  Ephrem,  e.  g. : 

'  I,  Sheol,  was  fed  upon  the  dead, 
Yes  !    I  feasted  upon  corpses. 
Elijah  slew  the  prophets  of  Baal, 

And  gave  me  those  who  on  the  bread  of  Jezebel  had  waxed  fat. 
The  righteous  had  constrained  me  to  devour, 
But  Jesus  compelled  me  to  disgorge  all  I  had  eaten.' 

Carm.  Nisib.  39,  iS. 

1  Gluttonous  death  lamented  and  said,  I  have  learned  fasting 

which  I  used  not  to  know One  man   has  closed  my 

mouth,  mine,  who  have  closed  the  mouths  of  many.' — Ibid.  35,  <S. 

The  suggestion  is  natural  that  the  hungry  Hades  in  Ode  xxiv 
is  the  Abyss  which  cries  in  vain  for  food  to  the  triumphant  Lord 
who  liberates  the  imprisoned  souls.     In  that  case  we  should  have 

1  Light  on  the  Gosfiet,  p.  416. 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS   33 

a  parallel  between  Ephrem  and  the  Odes,  which  is  not  far  from 
a  dependence  of  the  former  upon  the  latter. 

For  another  instance  of  the  way  in  which  Ephrem  modifies  the 
Ode  from  which  he  borrows,  we  may  take  the  opening  of  the  ninth 
Epiphany  Hymn  (i.  89),  from  which  we  took  the  reference  furnished 
by  '  the  water  ' : 

'  O  John  !   who  savvest  the  Spirit 
Which  dwelt  on  the  head  of  the  Son  ; 
That  She  (the  Spirit)  might  show  that  the  head  of  heaven 
Had  descended  and  been  baptised, 

And  (from  the  water)  had  gone  up  to  be  the  head  of  earth ; 
You  have  therefore  become  children  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Christ  has  become  your  head  ; 
And  you  are  become  his  members.' 

Dr.  Wensinck  noted  that  the  last  two  lines  were  parallel  to 
Ode  iii.  2, '  His  members  are  with  Him',  and  Ode  xvii.  15,  'because 
they  were  members  to  me,  and  I  was  their  head ' ;  but  he  did  not 
seem  to  notice  that  the  opening  sentences  were  based  on  Ode  xxiv  : 

'  The  Dove  flew  over  the  head  of  the  Messiah 
Because  He  was  her  head.' 

A  couplet  which  was  quite  primitive  in  its  unorthodox  doctrine 
of  the  subordination  of  the  Spirit  to  the  Son.  The  play  upon  the 
word  '  head '  which  occurs  in  Ephrem  is  due  to  the  fact  that  he 
is  trying  to  make  the  Ode  which  he  borrows  orthodox.  He  explains 
carefully  that  Christ  is  the  head  of  heaven  {not  of  the  Spirit),  and 
that  he  becomes  the  head  of  earth  also,  for  are  not  believers  His 
members  ?  We  may  take  it  that  Ephrem  was  acquainted  with  the 
24th  Ode,  which  he  borrowed  and  modified. 

The  point  which  we  have  established  is  Ephrem's  acquaintance 
with  the  Odes  and  his  dependence  upon  them.  This  means  that  he 
had  the  Odes  in  a  Syriac  dress,  for  he  did  not  know  Greek,  nor 
Greek  literature,  except  as  translated.  Thus  the  Odes  must  have 
been  extant  in  Syriac  before  the  latter  part  of  the  fourth  century. 

The  Syriac  Odes  known  to  Ephrem  must  have  been  the  same 
Odes  as  have  come  down  to  ourselves. 


24  INTRODUCTION 

A  curious  case  of  the  dependence  of  Ephrem  on  the  Odes  may 
be  noted  in  Ode  xxxiv.  i,  where  Ephrem  says : 

'  The  way  is  easy  for  the  simple '  (Eph.,  R.  E.  ii.  486)  ; 
which  is  an  obvious  adaptation  of 

'  No  way  is  hard  where  there  is  a  simple  heart.' 
In  Ode  xxxviii.  4  the  expression 

1  Because  it  was  and  is  the  Truth  ' 
appears  to  have  been  reflected  on 
'  Because  He  was  Truth  which  He  (also)  is  '  (Ephr.,  R.E.  ii.  388). 

The  next  step  in  the  inquiry  as  to  the  Patristic  attestation  of 
the  Odes  is  the  discovery  that  Ephrem  refers  to  the  Manichaeans, 
or  to  Bardaisan  the  teacher  of  Mani  (as  he  calls  him),  a  belief  that 
the  sun  and  moon  receive  mutually  light  one  from  the  other.  Now 
this  belief  is  involved  in  the  language  of  Ode  xvi.  17,  where  the 
meaning  was  not  detected  by  the  first  editors  of  the  Odes.  Literally 
the  passage  runs : 

;  And  by  their  reception  one  from  the  other,  they  (sc.  the 
sun  and  the  night)  fill  up  {or  speak)  the  beauty  of  God ' 
(Ode  xvi.  17) ; 

with  which  we  compare  : 1 

'  Let  us  say  what  they  say, 
But  let  us  not  assert  what  they  assert. 
They  say  that  it  is  the  sun  who  receives  this  light  from 

the  moon : 
Beautiful  (^4-)  are  these  receivers, 
Who  receive  one  from  the  other,' 

which  agrees  closely  with  the  Ode  : 

the  subject  being,  as  we  suppose,  the  sun  and  moon  in  both  cases.2 

1  Ephrem,  Second  Discourse  to  Hypatius,  ed.  Mitchell,  p.  20. 
*  See  the  note  attached  to  the  Ode  in  question. 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS   25 

The  last  sentence  about  the  beauty  of  the  receivers  is  interpreted 
in  an  ironical  sense  by  Mitchell,  who  translates : 1 

'  Right  worthy  [an  ironical  exclamation]  are  these  receiving 
vessels  which  receive  from  one  another.' 

It  is  not  necessary  to  take  the  irony  so  far  back  in  the  text,  and 
the  translation  of  ^»)u  by  '  right  worthy '  obscures  the  fact  that  the 
word  is  involved  in  the  Ode,  according  to  which  '  by  their  recep- 
tions one  from  the  other  they  fill  up  (or  speak)  the  beauty  of  God  '. 
Hence  we  translate  'Beautiful  are  these  receivers',  and  carry  the 
expression  back  to  Bardaisan,  who  is  thus  convicted  again  of  an 
acquaintance  with  the  Ode  in  question.  The  opening  of  the  Ode 
has  also  something  of  Bardaisan  about  it  in  its  references  to  '  the 
work  of  the  steersman  being  the  guidance  of  the  ship': 

for  we  have  a  similar  expression  attributed  to  Bardaisan  in 
De  Fato,  c.  1 1  :  2 

'  We  are  not  called   upon  to  guide  the  ships,  which  only 
sailors  know  how  to  guide.' 

It  is  not  an  unreasonable  supposition  that  Ephrem  is  here  quoting 
Bardaisan  in  the  very  language  of  our  Odes ;  and  it  follows  from 
this  either  that  the  Odes  are  Bardesanian  in  origin,  or  that 
Bardaisan  himself  used  a  Syriac  text  of  the  Odes  coinciding  closely 
with  our  own.  In  either  case  the  antiquity  of  the  Syriac  Odes 
would  be  made  out  without  contradiction.  We,  therefore,  proceed 
to  inquire  whether  there  is  any  trace  in  the  known  teaching  of 
Bardaisan  of  such  a  coincidence  with  the  teaching  of  the  Odes 
generally  as  we  have  just  noted. 

In  order  to  make  the  inquiry  without  prejudice  we  have  to 
remind  ourselves  that  the  net  result  of  recent  investigation  into 

1  Introd.,  p.  xxxviii. 

2  Pair.  Syr.  ii.  col.  552. 


26  INTRODUCTION 

the  character  and  teaching  of  Bardaisan,  such  an  inquiry,  for 
instance,  as  is  made  in  the  very  adequate  discussion  which  Abbe 
Nau  has  prefixed  to  his  study  of  Bardaisan  in  the  Syriac  Patrology, 
kads  directly  to  the  conclusion  that  the  character  of  Bardaisan 
has  been  systematically  blackened  by  Ephrem,  who  connects  him 
with  the  worst  aberrations  of  the  Manichaeans,  and  thus  makes 
a  typical  Gnostic  out  of  a  man  who  was,  in  all  probability,  as  good 
a  Christian  as  himself.  In  his  early  days  Bardaisan  was  a  follower 
of  the  Babylonian  astrology,  and  he  himself  admitted  in  his  later 
days  that  he  had  been  thus  misled  ;  it  was,  probably,  his  knowledge 
of  astrology  which,  in  the  first  instance,  cast  a  shadow  over  his 
great  name.  Although  the  fragments  of  the  Bardesanian  tradition 
which  have  come  down  to  us  are  scanty,  enough  remains  to  indicate 
important  correspondences  with  the  teaching  and  language  of  the 
Odes.  For  example,  it  has  been  often  observed  that  the  creed 
of  the  Odist  was  defective  in  the  article  of  the  Resurrection.  The 
teaching  of  Bardaisan  had  the  same  lacuna. 

It  appears  that  Bardaisan  and  his  school  held  dishonouring 
views  of  the  Human  Body  as  the  seat  of  evil,  and  that  they 
interpreted  the  Body  as  the  Coat  of  Skin  which  the  Soul  has  to 
shed.  It  is  clear  that  they  had  a  very  strongly  stated  doctrine 
of  the  Coat  of  Skin,  and  Ephrem  makes  emphatic  protest  against 
it.  The  heretics  whom  he  denounces  talked  of  the  '  intoxicating 
foulness  of  the  body',  and  that  it  was  'a  hateful  harp  which 
prevented  the  melody  of  Truth  from  being  played  upon  its 
strings '.' 

Ephrem  protests  nobly  against  this  depreciation  of  the  Human 
Body,  and  maintains  that  '  the  Body  is  akin  to  all  the  beauties 
of  the  Soul,  and  a  partner  with  it  in  all  good  things.  By  means  of 
the  Body  the  Soul  preaches  truth  in  all  the  world,  and  the  Body 
is  a  pure  harp  for  the  Soul '. 

Ephrem  will  not  allow  that  the  Soul  has  put  on  the  Coat  of 
Skin  over  itself.     He  expresses  himself  ironically  :   'How  pleasing  it 

1  See  Ephrem,  Fifth  Discourse  to  Hypatius  (ed.  Mitchell,  pp.  cii  ff.). 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS  27 

must  have  been  to  the  subtle  nature  of  the  Soul  to  put  on  the  gross 
coat  of  the  vile  Body !  For  the  Body  is  vile  according  to  their 
account '.  '  But ',  says  Ephrem,  '  it  is  not  vile,  because  the  Soul 
praises  Him  who  clothed  it  with  the  rational  covering  of  Intelligent 
Senses.' x  Ephrem  makes  a  similar  reply  to  the  Apostates  who 
hold  the  doctrine  that  the  Body  is  a  vile  '  Coat  of  Skin  '  to  the 
Soul,  by  affirming  that  the  Body  is  not  necessarily  impure,  nor 
the  Soul  necessarily  pure. 

'  For  consider  the  pure  and  righteous  Body,  how  it  is  not 
such  as  the  Apostates  state  when  they  say  "  that  the  Body 
is  a  covering  which  is  from  the  evil  Nature",  nor  is  the  Soul, 
as  they  say,  from  a  pure  root.  For  the  eyes  of  the  glorious 
body  clothe  themselves  with  chastity,  its  ears  with  purity, 
its  limbs  with  glory,  its  senses  with  holiness;  in  its  mouth  is 
praise,  and  on  its  tongue  is  thanksgiving,  and  on  its  lips 
is  blessing,'  &c.2 

The  protest  which  Ephrem  makes  against  the  doctrine  of  the  '  Coat 
of  Skin '  is  a  noble  one.  It  is  not  necessary  to  assume  that  the 
doctrine,  in  the  fornt  in  which  Ephrem  denounces  it,  is  the  actual 
doctrine  of  the  Odes.  There  has  been  an  accentuation  put  upon 
the  Odes,  or  upon  some  expressions  in  them,  in  a  Gnostic  direction. 
It  is  quite  clear  from  these  references  that  the  C6at  of  Skin 
and  the  Harp  of  the  Spirit,  which  we  find  so  often  referred  to 
in  the  Odes,  were  a  part  of  the  theological  furniture  of  Bardaisan 
and  his  followers,  and  that  Ephrem  resents  the  interpretation  which 
they  have  put  upon  the  language  of  the  Odist ;  for  our  present 
purpose  the  coincidences  in  language  which  are  involved  in  the 
teaching  of  the  Bardaisan  school  and  the  Odes  are  a  further  proof, 
if  proof  were  needed,  that  the  Odes  were  known  in  Edessa,  and 
that  they  were  in  theological  use  in  the  system  of  Bardaisan  and 
his  congeners.  The  Coat  of  Skin  had,  according  to  their  teaching, 
replaced   the   original   Coat  of  Light ;    that   was  the  story  of  the 

1  See  Ephrem,  Fifth  Discourse  to  Hypatius  (ed.  Mitcheil,  p.  cvi). 

2  Ibid.,  p.  lxxi. 


2<S  INTRODUCTION 

descent  of  the  Soul  into  the  gross  material  body.  The  Way  of 
Life  consists  in  finding  again  the  original  Robe  of  Light.  We  have 
some  account  of  this  in  the  Hymn  of  the  Soul  in  the  Acts  of 
Thomas,  where  the  Soul  coming  from  its  state  of  pre-existence 
goes  down  into  Egypt  and  '  forgets  the  imperial  palace  whence 
it  came  \  and  the  imperial  robe  in  which  it  had  been  arrayed. 
It  is  significant  that  Ephrem  in  attacking  Bardaisan  finds  fault 
with  this  very  Hymn  of  the  Soul.     He  says  (I.e.,  p.  cvii)  : 

'  If  the  Soul  came  from  a  place,  as  they  say,  who  know  not 
what  they  say,  how  and  why  is  it  not  able  to  return  to  its 
natural  place?  For  if  it  was  sent  forth  when  a  child,  it  was 
here  that  it  received  understanding,'  &c. 

The  allusion  here  is  to  the  opening  verses  of  the  Hymn  of  the 
Soul,'1  which  may  be  taken  on  Ephrem's  showing  as  Bardesanian, 
as  had  been  conjectured  on  other  grounds.  We  are,  then,  entitled 
to  say  that  the  doctrines  of  the  Coat  of  Skin  and  the  Robe  of 
Light,  which  we  find  in  the  Odes,  were  known  to  Bardaisan.  Thus 
the  Odes  must  have  been  known  in  Edessa  before  the  end  of  the 
second  century. 

A  further  parallelism  between  the  ideas  of  Bardaisan  and  the 
Odist  will  be  found  in  the  38th  Ode.  In  this  Ode  Ephrem  dis- 
courses at  length  on  Error  as  a  form  of  intoxication,  which  Evil 
produces  in  those  who  go  astray.  Thus  he  says  {Fifth  Discourse 
to  Hypatius,  p.  cxv),  that 

'  Those  things  which  intoxicate  us  also  take  away  our 
memory,  so  that  in  one  respect  the  drunken  ones  who  go 
astray  are  not  blamed,  for  they  do  not  know  that  they  are 
assuredly  going  astray.' 

We  have  only  to  compare  with  this  Ode  xxxviii.  12,  13 : 

•  They  invite  many  to  the  banquet, 
And  give  them  to  drink  of  their  intoxicating  wine; 
So  that  they  vomit  up  their  wisdom  and  intelligence, 
And  the  rDeceivers^  deprive  them  of  understanding.' 

1  'When  I  was  a  little  child  and  dwelling  in  my  Kingdom  in  my  Father's 
House',  &c. 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS      29 

Dom  Connolly  has  suggested  with  some  hesitation  that  there  is 
a  quotation  from  the  Odes  in  an  extract  from  Moses  Bar  Kepha  in 
a  British  Museum  MS.     The  passages  to  be  compared  are  these: 

'  The  likeness  of  that  which  is  below  is  that  which  is  above ; ' 

Ode  Sol.  xxxiv  4. 

'.  fc**.!^.?    ^^©»    (-om!^-/  %.-^?    JIqjso??    i-*-^  t+-*2&l 

'  For  they  say :  The  likeness  of  what  is  above  are  those 
things  that  are  below.'  — Moses  Bar  Kepha  {Exposition  of  the 
Jacobite  Liturgy),  in  Brit.  Mus.  Add.  21210,  fol.  51  b. 

Bar  Kepha  is  explaining  that  the  deacons  with  their  fans  represent 
the  cherubim  and  seraphim,  which  is  good  enough  allegory  for  the 
ninth  century.  Dom  Connolly  says  that  it  is  obvious  that  there  is 
some  close  connexion  between  the  two  passages  quoted  above ;  but 
hesitates  to  claim  dependence  of  Bar  Kepha  upon  the  Odes,  on 
account  of  the  ambiguity  of  the  expression  '  they  say  ',  with  which 
Bar  Kepha  introduces  the  matter.  We  do  not  think  he  need  have 
hesitated.  It  is  almost  certain  that  Bar  Kepha  is  acquainted  with 
the  Odes  in  this  passage  and  elsewhere. 

We  have  stated  in  a  previous  passage  that  there  had  not  been 
recognized  up  to  the  present  time  any  quotations  in  the  Odes  in 
the  writings  of  the  Greek  Fathers,  unless  we  were  to  make  an 
exception  in  favour  of  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  and  the  prologue  to 
his  catechetical  lectures.  We  are  now  going  to  show  reason  for 
believing  that  Eusebius  of  Caesarea  was  acquainted  with  the  Odes. 

In  the  tenth  Book  of  his  Demonstratio  Evangelica  (c.  8), 
Eusebius  establishes  the  Messianic  character  of  the  22nd  Psalm, 
as  shown  by  the  agreement  between  its  language  and  the 
Passion  story  in  the  Gospels.  In  the  course  of  his  argument  he 
comes  to  the  verse  in  which  the  Psalmist  describes  himself  as 
surrounded  by  dogs  and  hemmed  in  by  a  congregation  of  evildoers. 
In  the  text  of  the  LXX  it  runs  thus  : 

€KVK\axrdv  fie  Kvves  ttoWol, 

crvvayooyrj  Troprjpevofiei'cou  TrepLea-\ou  fie. 


30  INTRODUCTION 

The  question  naturally  arises  whether  this  text  does  not  underlie 
the  passage  in  the  2<Sth  Ode  (v.  13),  where  the  speaker  says  that 

'  They  came  round  me  like  mad  dogs, 
Who  ignorantly  attack  their  masters.' 

Let  us  see  whether  this  is  more  than  an  accidental  coincidence. 

Eusebius  explains  that  the  dogs  in  the  Psalm  are  the  assembly 
of  the  rulers  of  the  Jews  who  sought  for  the  blood  of  Christ. 
Isaiah  had  also  called  them  dogs,  stupid  dogs,  who  did  not  know 
how  to  bark  (Isa.  lvi.  10).  If  they  had  been  good  dogs  they  would 
have  known  how  to  bark  intelligently  at  the  guardians  of  the 
spiritual  flock  of  the  house  of  Israel,  and  how  to  fawn  upon  and 
to  recognize  their  master  {k-niyivdio-KovTas  rov  eavrcoi'  SecnroTTjv)  and 
chief  shepherd  ;  and  they  would  have  watchfully  guarded  the  flock 
entrusted  to  them,  and,  if  they  had  barked  at  all,  it  would  have 
been  at  those  who  had  evil  designs  upon  the  flock  :  instead  of  that, 
after  the  fashion  of  dogs  really  stupid  and  mad  (kvea>v  o>?  d\r)6cos 
ical  fjL€fiT]v6T(oi')  they  set  up  a  howling,  and  drove  wild  the  shepherd's 
sheep.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  his  comments  on  the  22nd 
Psalm  Eusebius  has  made  use  of  the  28th  Ode  of  Solomon  ;  for 
here  we  have  not  only  the  encircling  dogs,  but  also  the  statement 
that  they  are  mad  and  do  not  recognize  their  own  master. 
Eusebius,  therefore,  knew  the  Odes,  and  it  is  also  abundantly  clear 
that  the  language  of  the  Odes  is  borrowed  from  the  22nd  Psalm, 
and  that  the  speaker  of  the  verses  which  we  have  been  discussing 
must  be  Christ  Himself. 

And  if  we  are  satisfied  that  the  Odist  found  his  mad  dogs  in  the 
22nd  Psalm,  we  shall  be  justified  in  reading  in  verse  17  of  the  Ode  that 
'  Vainly  did  they  cast  lots  against  me  ' ; 

for  this  is  Psalm  xxii.  18,  '  upon  my  vesture  did  they  cast  lots'. 

The  personation  of  Christ  by  the  Odist  probably  begins  with 
the  eighth  verse  : 

'  The)'  who  saw  me  marvelled  at  me, 
Because  I  was  persecuted,'  &c. 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS      31 

In  that  case,  too,  the  statement  that 

'  My  birth  was  not  like  theirs ' 
is  to  be  interpreted  of  the  generation  of  Christ. 

In  the  editio  princeps  it  was  remarked  that  '  perhaps  the  writer 
was  speaking  in  these  verses  as  if  in  the  person  of  Christ '.  The 
observation  appears  to  be  justified. 

The  same  passage  of  the  Psalms  which  we  have  expounded 
in  Eusebius  recurs  in  Theodoret,  Bishop  of  Cyrrhus,  and  with  the 
very  same  explanation.  Theodoret  says  that  our  Lord  was  sur- 
rounded by  dogs  and  bulls,  according  to  the  Psalms :  the  bulls  are 
the  Jews  who  are,  or  should  be,  under  the  yoke  of  the  law :  they 
hand  over  our  Lord  to  the  unclean  Gentiles,  who  pass  under  the 
name  of  dogs.  After  the  Passion  many  of  the  dogs  passed  over 
into  the  rank  of  sons,  and  conversely :  so  that  now  the  unbelieving 
Jews  received  the  appellation  of  dogs  because,  after  the  fashion 
of  dogs,  they  had  gone  mad  against  the  Master : 

ttjv  kvvohv  Trpoo-qyopiav  kSi^avro,  are  Srj 
kvv5>v  Siktjv  Kara  rod  SecnrOTOv  XvcrarjcravTts. 

The  concurrence  of  Eusebius  and  Theodoret  in  quoting  the  22nd 
Psalm  with  the  singular  number  for  Seo-iroTr)?  shows  that  we  should 
correct  the  Syriac  text  of  the  Ode  from  yoo^j^D  to  ^oojijo,  and 
read  that  the  dogs  '  came  unwittingly  against  their  Master '. 
Labourt  and  Batiffol  have,  in  fact,  translated  it  so ;  '  comme  des 
chiens  enrages,  ceux  qui  dans  leur  inconscience  marchent  contre 
leur  Seigneur '.     Flemming  also  corrected  the  plural  to  a  singular. 

In  the  Prophetic  Eclogues  (ii.  13)  Eusebius  treats  the  passage  in 
the  Psalm  which  speaks  of  the  dogs  and  bulls  as  encircling  our 
Lord,  in  an  anti-Judaic  manner ;  first,  by  asking  definitely  those 
who  vaunt  themselves  of  circumcision,  who  are  the  synagogue  of 
evil  doers  here  referred  to  ?  and  next  by  answering  his  own  question 
and  saying : 

•  Certain  evil  and  beast-like  powers  wrought  out  the  plot 
against  Him,  on  whose  account  He  said  that  "  Many  bulls 
encircled  me  about :    fat  oxen   hemmed    me  in "  ;    and  con- 


32  INTRODUCTION 

cerning  the  synagogue  of  circumcision  that  made  onslaught 
against  them,  he  said,  "  Many  dogs  encircled  me,  a  synagogue 
of  evil  doers  hemmed  me  in,"'  &c. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  place  which  the  Psalm  occupied  in 
anti-Judaic  theology.  We  note,  in  passing,  the  anti-Judaic  accent 
in  the  Ode. 

Having  convicted  Eusebius  of  the  use  of  the  Odes  in  the  passage 
about  the  mad  dogs,  we  may  examine  into  one  or  two  further 
coincidences  of  thought  and  language. 

In  the  sixth  book  of  the  Demonstratio  Evangelica  (vi.  9,  p.  267) 
Eusebius  is  arguing,  as  he  does  in  a  number  of  places,  that  the 
•  new  song '  of  the  Psalms  of  David  and  elsewhere  is  a  prediction  of 
the  '  new  covenant '.  In  the  144th  Psalm,  for  instance,  we  have 
(1)  the  inquiry, '  What  is  man  that  thou  art  mindful  of  him  ?  '  (2)  the 
appeal  to  God  to  descend  from  Heaven.  '  Bow  the  heavens  and 
descend,  touch  the  mountains  and  they  will  smoke  ' ;  (3)  the  resolve 
of  the  Psalmist,  '  I  will  sing  a  new  song  unto  thee,  O  God '. 

Here,  says  Eusebius,  the  Psalmist,  '  who  marvels  at  the  know- 
ledge of  God  the  Word  toward  men,  is  in  deep  amaze  over  His 
kindness,  by  which  He  took  a  lower  place  than  Deity,  and  minisJicd 
Himself  of  His  native  greatness,  and  made  the  hitman  race  worthy 
of  His  own  knoivlcdge : ' 

Ti]v  yap  eh  avOpomovs  yva>aiv  rov  Qeov  Aoyov  6avp.d£a>v, 
VTrepeKTrXrjrreraL  rr\s  <pi\avd pampas,  81'  rjs  rijs  Oeorrjros  v7ro/3a.9 
Kal  rov  avp.(j>vov<i  fieyeOovs  iavrbu  o~iu.Kpvva$,  -qgioxre  rfjs  ISia? 
yvaxreoos  rb  avQp&Trtiov  yivos. 

Now  if  we  compare  with  this  the  seventh  Ode  of  Solomon  we  shall 
find  the  following  sequence  : 

'  He  hath  caused  me  to  knoiv  Himself  without  grudging 
in  I  lis  simplicity:  because  His  kindness  has  minished  His 
greatness.' — Ode  Sol.  vii.  3. 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  language  of  Eusebius  depends 
upon  the  Ode.  It  helps  us  to  see  that  'humbled'  for  U^f/ 
'  minished  '  was  an  inadequate  translation. 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS      33 

The  same  argument  in  a  narrower  compass  will  be  found  in  the 
Prophetic  Eclogues  (ii.  14),  where  Eusebius  tells  that: 

'  In  great  amazement  the  Word  says :  "  Lord,  what  is  man 
that  thou  art  mindful  of  him,  or  the  son  of  man  that  thou 
regardest  him  ? "  For  to  this  very  end  the  Word  of  God 
bowed  the  so-called  heavens  and  descended,  in  order  that 
He  might  be  known  to  the  race  of  men  to  have  become 
incarnate,  though  He  was  previously  unknown  to  them.' 

When  we  compare  this  sentence  with  the  preceding,  and  with 
the  language  of  the  seventh  Ode  we  can  have  no  doubt  that  all  these 
passages  are  connected  inter  se  by  the  language  of  the  Psalm,  and 
that  Eusebius's  comments  on  the  Psalm  involve  the  language  of 
the  Ode. 

Our  next  example  is  from  the  tenth  book  of  the  Demonstratio 
(D.  E.  x.  8,  p.  499),  where  Eusebius  discourses  in  detail  on  the 
prophecies  of  the  Lord's  suffering  and  death  which  are  contained  in 
the  22nd  Psalm.  When  he  comes  to  the  verses  in  which  Christ 
speaks  to  the  Father  as  the  one  who  drew  me  forth  from  the  womb, 
and  was  my  hope  upon  my  mother's  breasts,  he  remarks  that  the 
Lord  recalled  those  early  days  of  Divine  care  for  a  consolation 
in  His  last  agonies,  and  he  represents  the  Messiah  as  saying : 

'  Just  as  thou  wast  my  help  when  I  assumed  a  human  body, 
when  from  the  womb  of  her  that  bare  me,  thou  thyself,  my 
God  and  Father,  as  if  playing  the  midwife 's  part,  didst  draw 
forth  from  the  womb  that  flesh  which  had  been  prepared  for 
me  of  the  Holy  Ghost,'  &c. 

in  which  we  see  that  God  the  Father  is  described  obstetrically, 
in  harmony  with  the  language  of  the  Psalm,  '  Thou  art  he  that 
didst  draw  me  forth  from  the  womb '.  But  this  is  precisely  what  is 
said  in  the  19th  Ode: 

'  She  had  not  required  a  midwife  ; 
For  He  (sc.  the  Father)  was  midwife  to  her.' 

Thus  there  is  no  doubt  that  Eusebius  has  the  19th  Ode  in  mind: 
that   is   shown   by  the   use    of  the  word  /j.aiovfX€vos   (acting  the 
n  D 


34  INTRODUCTION 

midwife)  as  well  as  by  the  coincidence  in  thought :  but  both 
Eusebius  and  the  Odist  are  ultimately  drawing  on  Psalm  xxii. 

The  identification  is  an  important  one,  as  the  passage  in  the 
19th  Ode  was  thought  by  Mingana  to  be  decisive  as  to  the  Syriac 
origin  of  the  Odes,  on  account  of  the  underlying  play  on  the  senses 
of  the  word  Ik— . :  but  of  this  more  elsewhere. 

The  19th  Ode  has  now  been  shown  conclusively  to  involve  the 
Virgin  Birth,  and  a  Divine  accoucheur,  and  a  painless  delivery. 
So  that  if  the  Odes  are  from  one  hand  the  writer  must  have  held 
the  fully  developed  doctrine  of  the  miraculous  birth. 

In  the  Prophetic  Eclogues  (ii.  13)  Eusebius  discusses  the  22nd 
Psalm  and  its  reference  to  our  Lord.  He  says  that  it  is  matter 
of  general  consent  among  believers  that  the  opening  words  refer  to 
Christ,  for  they  are  the  words  from  the  Cross :  then  he  says,  in 
a  striking  and  anti-Judaic  manner: 

'  Before  we  begin  to  take  over  the  prophecy  of  the  Psalm 
as  relating  to  Him,  we  will  first  inquire  of  those  who  vaunt 
themselves  over  circumcision.  Who  is  the  speaker  in  the 
Psalm  ?  for  it  can  hardly  be  an  ordinary  person  who,  inter  alia, 
says  the  words,  "  Thou  art  He  that  didst  draw  me  from  my 
mother's  womb,"  &c.  It  was  to  Christ,  Christ  alone,  that  it 
was  appropriate  to  use  such  words  to  the  Father.' 

Here  Eusebius  fastens  upon  the  birth-care  of  God  as  something 
outside  ordinary  life  and  faith,  in  a  way  that  shows  him  to  have  in 
the  Prophetic  Eclogues  the  same  idea  of  the  miraculous  birth  as 
in  the  Dcnwnstratio. 

It  is  interesting,  in  this  point  of  view,  to  notice  that  the  very 
next  page  of  the  chapter  of  the  tenth  book  of  the  Dcinonstratio 
has  significant  language  regarding  the  supernatural  birth  of  Christ, 
which  can  be  paralleled  in  another  of  the  Odes,  from  which  it  is 
probably  derived.  Eusebius  (D.  E.  ix.  8,  p.  500),  continuing  his 
comments  on  the  verse  of  the  22nd  Psalm,  says : 

' "  Thou  didst  cause  me  to  hope  when  I  was  upon  my 
mother's  breasts ",  makes  our  Lord  say  on  the  Cross  that 
"  it  is  not  now  for  the  first  time  that  I  begin  to  hope  in  Thee, 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS  35 

but  when  I  drew  my  infant  nourishment  from  my  mother's 
breasts,  I  was  thought  to  be,  like  human  babes,  an  imperfect 
and  irrational  being ;  yet  I  was  not  so,  for  even  though  my 
body  was  like  other  men's,  yet  it  did  not  resemble  the  general 
in  regard  to  power  or  essenec,"  &c.' 

'Evoni(6[xr]v  b/J.oi(o?  rots  rS>v  dv6 pdmc&v  ftpifacriv  aT€\r]S 
elvai  kcu  d\oyo$'  fxrj  a>y  yap  toiovtos,  el  kou  (ja>\ia  fiot  o/xolov 
avOp&TTOis  rjv,  dXXd  ov  Kara  ttju  8vva[iiv  ovSe  tt)v  ovaiav  rots 
ttoXXoTs  &v  e/ifeprj?  ktL 

This  is  closely  parallel  to  Ode  xxviii,  v.  16,  '  I  did  not  perish,  for 
I  was  not  their  brother,  nor  was  my  birth  like  theirs '. 

In  the  very  same  section  Eusebius  discourses  of  the  descent  of 
the  Messiah  into  Hades,  and  his  language  is  either  borrowed  from 
the  Odes,  or  helps  us  to  understand  the  meaning  of  the  language 
of  the  Odes  in  obscure  passages.  For  example  (D.  E.  x.  8,  p.  501) 
he  tells  how  Christ  descended  into  Hades,  breaking  the  brazen 
doors  and  smashing  the  iron  bars,  and  setting  at  liberty  those  who 
had  aforetime  been  the  bondsmen  of  Hades.  With  this  last 
expression  we  may  compare  the  closing  words  of  the  42nd  Ode : 
'  they  are  free  men  and  they  are  mine '. 

In  the  same  42nd  Ode  there  is  a  curious  expression,  where  the 
Lord,  descending  into  Hades,  is  said  to  have  been  gall  and  bitter- 
ness to  it.  This  is  borrowed  from  the  passage  in  Isaiah,  where  the 
fall  of  Lucifer  is  described  :  in  the  language  of  the  LXX  : 

'  Hades  from  beneath  was  embittered  on  meeting  thee.' 
'O  aSrjs  KaTCoOzv  kinKpdvQr]  crvvavrr](Tas  croi. — Isa.  xiv.  9. 

The  objection  might  be  made  that  the  description  of  the  fallen 
Lucifer  is  not  a  suitable  parallel  for  the  descending  Christ :  but 
this  objection  is  met  for  us  by  Eusebius  who  speaks  (D.  E.  x.  8, 
P-  5°3)  °f  the  angry  demons  crowding  round  Jesus  like  birds  of 
prey,  just  as  they  did  round  Lucifer  in  the  passage  from  Isaiah. 

If  we  must  not  say  that  Eusebius  is  here  reminiscent  of  the 
42nd  Ode,  we  may  say  that  his  language  helps  us  to  find  the  passage 
in  the  Old  Testament  that  has  influenced  the  Odist. 

D  2 


36  INTRODUCTION 

As  the  Peshitta  version  of  Isaiah  here  follows  the  Greek,  and  not 
the  Hebrew,  we  cannot  draw  any  conclusions  as  to  the  original 
language  of  the  Odes.  The  recognition  of  the  dependence  of 
Eusebius  on  the  Odes  is  an  important  strategic  point  gained  in  their 
interpretation.  Inter  alia  we  see  that  the  Odes  like  the  Dcmon- 
stratio  Evangelica  arc  occupied  with  the  interpretation  of  the 
Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  especially  with  the  Psalms. 
Among  the  Psalms  it  is  evident  that  the  22nd  Psalm  had  been 
an  especial  object  of  study  :  Eusebius  devotes  nearly  a  whole  book 
to  its  Messianic  prophecies  ;  and  the  Odist  has  also  studied  it 
carefully,  since  he  took  from  it  the  reference  to  the  '  mad  dogs ',  to 
the  'casting  of  lots',  and  to  the  miraculous  accouchement  of  the 
Virgin.  This  Psalm,  then,  must  have  had  a  larger  place  among 
the  primitive  anti-Judaic  Testimonies  than  we  should,  perhaps, 
have  suspected  ;  an  examination  of  Cyprian's  Testimonies  shows 
four  extracts  from  the  Psalm,  but  not  the  reference  to  the  mad 
dogs,  nor  to  the  miraculous  birth.  Gregory  of  Nyssa  has  the 
'mad  dog'  passage,  and  some  of  the  Cyprianic  matter  in  a  form 
that  is  archaic  and  anti-Judaic.  Enough  has  been  said  to  emphasize 
the  connexion  between  Eusebius  and  the  Odes,  and  between  both 
of  them  and  the  primitive  anti-Judaic  Testimonies. 

The  discovery  of  the  Eusebian  use  of  the  seventh  Ode  enables 
us  to  take  a  further  step  in  another  direction. 

In  the  Acts  of  Thomas,  in  the  story  of  the  Wild  Ass  that  talked 
to  the  Apostle,  we  have  a  kind  of  doxology  to  Jesus  into  which 
Judas  Thomas  breaks  out,  in  which  occurs  the  following  expression  : 

A6£a  rfj  lieyaXcoavvrj  aov 
rfj  Si'  T]fia.9  <jynKpvvQs.ia. 

Acta  TJiomae,  ed.  Bonnet,  p.  195. 

the  parallelism  of  the  language  to  that  of  Eusebius  invites  attention: 
but  as  the  Greek  of  the  Acts  is  not  the  original,  we  turn  to  the 
Syriac  and  find  the  words  that  have  been  translated : 

Acta  TJiomac,  ed.  Wright,  p.  $-»»■ 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS      37 

i.  e.   '  Glory   to    thy    greatness    which    for    our    sakes    was 
minished.' 

which  agrees  closely  with  the  language  of  the  Ode,  and  is  based 
upon  it,  just  as  the  language  of  Eusebius  is  derived  from  the  Ode 
on  the  Greek  side. 

We  are  able  in  this  way  to  add  another  witness  to  the  Syrian 
attestation,  and  it  is  very  early  testimony  indeed,  for  every  one 
is  agreed  to  place  the  Acts  of  Thomas  among  the  earlest  remains 
of  Syriac  literature.1 

As  we  have,  in  the  course  of  our  inquiry  into  Greek  Patristic 
quotations  from  the  Odes,  stumbled  upon  a  parallel  in  the  Acts  of 
Thomas,  it  may  be  thought  worth  while  to  add  a  few  further 
remarks  on  the  existence  of  other  traces  of  the  use  of  the  Odes  by 
the  author  of  the  Acta.  It  is  probable  that  these  Acts  belong  to 
the  cycle  of  Bardesanian  literature,  and  in  particular  that  the  Hymn 
of  the  Soul  which  is  embedded  in  the  Acts  is  itself  Bardesanian  and 
earlier  in  date  than  the  first  quarter  of  the  third  century.  Thus 
the  evidence,  if  we  find  any  further  coincidences,  takes  rank  very 
nearly  with  the  references  in  Bardaisan  which  we  had  already 
recovered  ;  and  the  evidence  will  be  especially  valuable  if  it  should 
come  from  incorporated  hymns,  which  may  be  much  earlier  in  date 
than  the  main  body  of  the  book.    For  example,  when  Judas  Thomas 

1  The  quotation  was  first  recognized  by  Stolten  in  his  Gnostische  Parallelen 
zu  den  Oden  Salomos,  p.  36.  Stolten,  working  from  Bonnet's  Greek  text, 
thought  he  had  found  a  further  parallel  in  a  passage  in  the  First  Act  of  Thomas, 
where  Jesus  is  addressed  as 

'O  (reavTov  dreXiaas  eons  e'/xoO  Ka\  t?]s  (fJiiji  <ryLiKp(Wr]TOS,  "iva  e'/ixe  17/  fieya^dxrvvji 
Trapdo-TTjvas  ivuxrrji  aenvra. — Acta  Thotnae,  ed.  Bonnet,  p.  121. 
But  here  the  parallel  is  not  so  close  as  in  the  former  case.     The  Syriac  is : 

'  Who  hast  let  thyself  down  even  to  my  littleness,  that  we  might  attain  to 
His  greatness.' — Acta  Thomae,  ed.  Wright,  p.  *^-°. 
This  is,  however,  no  nearer  to  the  Odes  than  the  Greek,  and  like  nine  out  often 
of  Stolten's  parallels  may  safely  be  set  aside  as  irrelevant. 


38  INTRODUCTION 

comes  to  the  wedding  of  the  King's  daughter,  he  sings  an  epitha- 
lamium  of  his  own,  in  praise  of  the  Church  as  the  Bride  of  Christ, 
and  says  of  her  that 

'  On  her  head  dwelleth  ]  the  King, 
Who  feedeth  his  dwellers  that  are  beneath  ; 
Truth  is  placed  on  her  head.' 

The  conjunction  of  these  clauses  is  in  exact  parallelism  with 

'  The  Lord  is  on  my  head  like  a  crown  : 

The  crown  of  Truth  was  woven  for  me.' — Ode  Sol.  i.  2. 

and  makes  it  clear  that  the  Acta  arc  quoting  the  Odes.  The 
identification  is  important,  as  it  confirms  what  we  suspected  from 
other  considerations,  that  the  first  Ode  of  Solomon  is  of  the  nature 
of  an  epithalamium.  The  crown,  moreover,  is  emphasized  as  being 
Truth,  just  as  it  is  said  to  be  in  the  ninth  Ode  of  Solomon  : 

1  An  everlasting  crown  is  Truth, 
Blessed  are  they  that  put  it  on  their  head.'- — Ode  Sol.  ix.  8. 

There  is  still  a  question  to  be  solved  as  to  the  ultimate  meaning 
of  such  a  statement  as  '  the  Lord  is  on  my  head  like  a  crown '. 
The  best  parallel  that  has  yet  been  suggested  is  the  description  of 

1  The  Greek  translator  missed  the  meaning  of  )^»-  in 

and,  supposing  the  root  to  be  ♦*>  rendered  it 

tv  tjj  KopvcPff  iSpvmi  6  (iaariXeui. 
He  made  a  similar  mistake  on  p.  v^f1*-,  where  he  rendered 

'Come,  dwell  on  this  unguent  as  thou  didst  dwell  on  the  tree' 

by  fviSpvcrdoo  TWfXfit'o)  tuvtu)  uxjTvtp  iftpuvdr) 

tv  rep  (Tvyy(ve'i  (ur«  £iA<j)  '?  Tint  avTOv  dvvnfiis. 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS      39 

the  high-priestly  dress  in  Sap.  Sol.  xviii.  24,  where  the  irkrakov 
is  termed 

fi€ya\<oavvr]  aov  kirl  StaSrjfiaTOS  K€(f)a\fj9  avrov, 

where  jxeyaXaxxvvq  is  the  Incommunicable  Name.  The  language 
would  be  appropriate  to  St.  John  at  all  events :  for  the  early- 
Church  had  a  tradition  that  he  used  to  wear  the  itItoKov,  as  if  he 
were  a  high  priest.1 

The  first  Ode,  then,  is  involved  in  the  first  of  the  Hymns  in 
the  Acts  of  Thomas.  Now  let  us  see  whether  we  can  find  any  traces 
of  the  42nd  Ode. 

The  editio  secunda  had  already  suggested  that  a  parallel  to 
Ode  xlii.  18, 

1  It  was  not  able  to  endure  my  face ', 

might  be  found  in  the  Acts  of  Thomas  in  the  words  : 

Ob  ttjv  Seai/  ovk  riveyxav  oi  rov  Qavdrov  dp^ouTes. 

(ed.  Bonnet,  p.  265) ; 

where  the  Syriac  has  the  singular  '  ruler  of  death  ' : 

.Oi.^A£a^aX   JIclso?   J^*^*,   *+$.*,(   JJo 

(ed.  Wright,  p.  aa») ; 

but  does  not  say  what  it  was  that  '  the  ruler  of  Death  was  unable  to 
bear ' ;  probably  the  words,  '  my  face ',  have  dropped  from  the 
text.2  It  is  possible  that  an  object  to  the  verb  is  missing:  Wright 
adds  a  general  object  '  it '  in  brackets.  Notice  that  with  the 
exception  of  the  missing  object,  the  Syriac  of  the  Ode  is  very 
close  to  the  Acta: 

Certainly  the  one  text  is  dependent  on  the  other. 

So  we  prove  the  book  of  Odes,  from  its  first  Ode  to  its  forty- 

1  Batiffol  also  compares  Proverbs  iv.  9  : 

'  [Wisdom]  shall  put  on  thy  head  a  crown  of  grace.' 

2  Vision  is  implied  in  the  previous  clause  : 

'  The  dead  saw  thee  and  became  alive.' 
'  It'  is  therefore  what  the  dead  saw. 


4o  INTRODUCTION 

second,  to  be  available  for  the  author  of  the  Acta  Thomac  unless 
it  can  be  shown  that  there  is  interpolation  in  the  series  of  the  Odes. 

Further  traces  of  the  use  of  the  42nd  Ode  may  be  seen  in  the 
prayer  of  Judas  Thomas  in  the  bride-chamber  in  the  first  Act. 

We  may  compare : 

'  Thou  didst  descend  to  Sheol  and  go  to  its  uttermost  end  ' ; 

Acta  Thomac,  p.  ajs. 

with 

'  I  descended  with  him  to  the  extreme  of  its  depth/ — Ode  xlii.  12. 

And: 

'  Thou  didst  open  its  gates  and  bring  up  its  prisoners', 

Acta  T/iomae,  ibid, 
with 

1  Bring  us  out  from  the  bonds  of  darkness,  and  open  to  us  the 
gate  by  which  we  may  come  out  to  thee.' — Ode  xlii.  16, 17. 


CHAPTER    III 
Quotations  of  Odes  in  the  Early  Fathers  (continued). 

We  come  now  to  a  very  obscure  passage  in  the  Odes,  where  by 
a  slight  emendation  the  text  can  be  reduced  to  intelligibility,  and, 
perhaps,  dependence  upon  the  Odist  can  be  established  on  the  part 
of  one  of  the  earliest  Christian  Fathers. 

In  the  38th  Ode  we  have  a  story  of  the  triumph  of  the  Odist 
over  the  wiles  of  heresy,  perhaps  as  represented  in  the  persons 
of  a  male  and  female  heretic.  From  the  allurements  of  heresy 
and  the  witchcrafts  of  error  the  writer  is  preserved  by  the  Truth 
which  goes  with  him,  and  which  exposes  to  him  the  sophistries 
and  dangers  of  the  aberrant  teaching.  The  Ode  says  obscurely, 
according  to  the  rendering  of  the  editio princcps  : 

'  (The  Truth)  made  clear  to  me  all  the  poisons  of  error  and 
the  plagues  which  announce  the  fear  of  death.' 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS      41 

For  this  the  second  edition  substituted  : 

1  And  the  plagues  of  death  which  they  think  to  be 
sweetness.' 

Here  a  slight  change  has  been  made  in  the  order  of  the  words,1 
and  an  attempt  was  also  made,  following  the  suggestion  of  Ungnad 
and  Stark,  to  restore  JLcu^-j  ('sweetness')  of  the  MS.  for  )ia^*-*> 
('fear').  This  correction  is  confirmed  by  the  Nitrian  MS.  The 
sense,  however,  is  still  obscure  ;  for  what  meaning  can  be  attached 
to  the  '  sweetness  of  death ',  and  how  could  the  '  plagues  of  death 
be  thought  to  be  sweetness ',  without  a  strong  margin  being  allowed 
to  the  imagination  as  interpreter  of  obscure  readings  ? 

Our  suggestion  now  is  that  we  follow  the  reading  of  the  MSS., 
with  a  possible  displacement  of  the  word  '  death ',  and  see  what 
can  be  done  to  reduce  to  intelligibility  the  sentence : 

'  All  the  poisons  (or  medicaments)  of  error,  and  the  plagues 
of  death,  which  they  think  (or  which  are  supposed)  to  be 
sweetness.' 

A  little  lower  in  the  Ode  we  are  told  that  the  teachers  of  error 
operate  upon  their  victims  with  intoxicating  wine  ;  and  the  sug- 
gestion arises  that  the  deadly  poison  has  been  introduced  into  the 
wine,  and  that  the  wine  thus  drugged  has  been  sweetened  with  honey. 
The  victims  think  they  are  drinking  oiVo/ieAi :  and  a  reference  to 
the  Syriac  Lexicon  of  Brockelmann  will  show  that  the  Syriac  word 
for  'wine  sweetened  with  honey'  is  Ju^a*.,  which  is  very  near  in 
form  and  meaning  to  the  'sweetness'  of  the  MS. 

The  very  word  JIq*\««  in  our  MSS.  can,  in  fact,  be  taken  to 
mean  '  sweet  drink '.  Ephrem,  in  attacking  Bardaisan  and  his 
heresies,  uses  the  same  figure  and  the  same  expression  as  the  Odes. 
He  says  that  Bardaisan,  in  composing  his  Psalter  in  imitation  of 
David,  was  'administering  to  the  simple  bitters  in  ]ia*X»'.     Here 

1  The  Syriac  tolerates  the  detachment  of  the  words  which  we  throw  into 
connexion.  'Plagues  of  death'  are  the  same  thing,  of  course,  as  'deadly 
plagues '. 


42  INTRODUCTION 

)lo.\..  is  not  merely  'sweetness',  but  something  with  which  the 
poison  is  taken,  i.  e.  a  sweet  drink.  It  would  naturally  be  equated 
with  the  Greek  oivontXi : 

Ephr.  A5.  E.  ii.  553  F- 
We  thus  are  able  to  read  the  sentence  in  the  Ode  thus : 

'  All  the  drugs  of  Error  and  the  plagues  of  death  which  they 
think  to  be  honey-wine.' 

Now  let  us  turn  to  the  Ignatian  Epistles :  in  his  letter  to  the 
TraUians  (chap.  6)  Ignatius  warns  the  Church  against  those  heretics 
who  are  mingling  poison  with  Christ,  and  who  give,  as  it  were, 
some  deadly  drug  along  with  honey-wine  (olvofieXiTi),  which  the 
unwary  receives  with  delight  (and  along  with  his  evil  delight, 
receives  death  *).  Here,  then,  we  have  the  very  same  sequence  of 
ideas  as  in  the  Odes,  erroneous  teaching  mingled  with  truth,  like 
poisonous,  deadly  drugs  in  honey-wine. 

So  we  suggest  that  the  Syriac  of  the  Odes  has  been  trying  to 
translate  olvo/xeXi  (or  conversely),  and  has  given  a  rendering  (or  a 
vocable)  very  similar  to  that  in  the  Gcoponica  to  which  Brockelmann 
refers 

If  this  be  the  case  we  shall  be  almost  obliged  to  admit  that  the 
Ignatian  Epistles  Jiavc  incorporated  a  quotation  or  the  equivalent  of 
a  quotation  from  the  Odes  of  Solomon. 

If  this  can  be  maintained  we  ought  to  be  able  to  take  certain 
further  steps  :  in  the  Epistle  of  Ignatius  to  the  Romans  (chap.  7) 
the  prospective  martyr  speaks  of  the  decline  of  his  natural  passions, 
and  of  his  attachment  to  the  Cross,  and  says  that  within  him  the 
living  water  is  talking  and  saying  '  Come  to  the  Father '.  The 
water  is  oracular,  like  that  of  the  fountain  of  Daphne,  with  which 
the  writer  was  familiar.  For  the  vScop  (cov  kol  XaXovv  Lightfoot 
argues  that  we  ought  to  read  vScop  £<ov  kcu  aXXofieiov,  and  so  to 

1  Greek  text  somewhat  obscure  at  the  end. 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS      43 

make  connexion  with  the  Gospel  of  John  (iv.  14).  The  reader 
is  referred  to  the  note  in  the  editio  princeps  (pp.  47,  48),  in  which  it 
was  maintained  that  Lightfoot's  view  was  untenable,  and  it  was 
concluded  that  '  our  seventh  Ode  showed  the  fitness  of  the  Ignatian 
expression,  but  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  assume  any  connection, 
either  of  place  or  authorship,  with  the  Ignatian  letters'.  The 
coincidence  of  language  was  established,  but  not  pressed.  In  view, 
however,  of  the  possible  use  of  the  38th  Ode  by  Ignatius,  the 
coincidence  between  the  nth  Ode  (verse  6)  and  Ignatius  ad  Rom. 
(chap.  7)  may  be  more  than  accidental. 

The  coincidences  between  the  Ignatian  Epistles  and  the  Odes 
are  deserving  of  further  attention.  Assuming  that  we  are  correct 
in  finding  in  the  Odes  the  Ignatian  '  oenomel '  into  which  drugs  are 
put,  and  assuming  that  the  reference  to  the  '  talking  water '  is  a 
genuine  parallel,  we  have  to  ask  what  is  the  meaning  of  these 
coincidences.  If  the  oracular  water  is  that  of  the  sacred  spring  at 
Daphne,  as  has  been  suggested  by  writers  on  the  Ignatian  Epistles, 
the  use  of  the  figure  for  spiritual  inspiration  might  be  Ignatius's 
own.  In  that  case,  what  of  the  Odes  ?  Do  they  copy  Ignatius's 
language?  That  seems  very  unlikely.  If  the  'oenomel'  is  a 
correct  parallel,  it  is  surely  original  with  the  Odist,  for  it  is  far 
more  likely  that  Ignatius,  writing  letters  rapidly  on  his  western 
journey,  should  quote  the  Hymn-book  of  the  time,  than  that  the 
early  Hymn-book  should  have  picked  up  an  obscure  passage  in 
a  letter  which  had  hardly  got  into  circulation  at  a  very  early  date. 

What  shall  we  say?  Is  it  possible  that  the  Odist  is  himself 
Ignatius  ?  It  is  well  known  that  there  is  a  tradition  in  the  Church 
that  Ignatius  taught  the  Antiochenes  their  hymns,  that  is,  that  he 
composed  them,  words  and  music.     The  passage  is  as  follows : 

'  We  must  also  tell  whence  the  custom  of  the  Church  of 
singing  antiphonal  hymns  had  its  origin.  Ignatius,  the  third 
bishop  after  Peter  of  the  Syrian  Antioch,  who  also  had 
personal  intercourse  with  the  Apostles  themselves,  saw  a 
vision  of  angels  praising  the  Trinity  in  Antiphonal  hymns,  and 


44  INTRODUCTION 

delivered  the  fashion  of  the  vision  to  the  church  in  Antioch  : 
from  whence  also  the  same  tradition  was  transmitted  to  other 
churches.' — Socrates,  Hist.  Eccl.  vi.  <S. 

This  is  the  earliest  evidence,  dating  from  the  middle  of  the  fifth 
century,  for  the  tradition  of  Ignatius  and  his  vision  of  the  angelic 
choirs.  Lightfoot  points  out  that  it  is  repeated  by  later  writers, 
chiefly  Syrian,  such  as  Solomon  of  Bassora,  Gregory  Bar  Hebraeus, 
Nicephorus  Callistus,  and  Arar  of  Tirhan,  and  says  that  '  a  tradi- 
tion which  appears  so  late  (as  the  time  of  Socrates  the  historian) 
does  not  deserve  consideration,  as  containing  any  element  of 
historical  fact ' ;  and  that  '  antiphonal  singing  did  not  need  to  be 
suggested  by  a  heavenly  vision '.  Well,  suppose  we  let  the  vision 
go.  The  tradition,  if  it  has  an  historical  nucleus  at  all,  can  hardly 
be  reduced  to  less  than  the  existence  of  an  Antiochene  antiphonal 
hymn-book  and  some  possible  connexion  of  Ignatius  with  the 
same. 

Let  us  see  if  we  can  find  any  further  coincidences  of  language. 
In  Ode  VI  we  have  the  following  expression : 

'  Blessed   arc  those   ministers  (8i<xkovoi)  who  are  entrusted 
with  that  water  of  His.' 

Here  there  is  no  need  to  take  the  term  '  ministers'  in  an  ecclesias- 
tical sense,  as  limited  to  a  third  order.  In  Ignatius  we  find  the 
following  passage: 

TCOV  SlCLKOVUiV  TCtiV    ifiOl    yXvKVTaTCOV    TTZTTl(TTZVlkkv(OV  8l(lK0ViaV 

'Irjcrov  XpicrTov. — Ad  Magn.  6. 

Here  we  get  the  same  idea  of  ministers  entrusted  with  ministry, 
but  it  is  of  the  formal  diaconate  that  the  writer  is  speaking ;  he  has 
already  referred  to  bishops  and  presbyters. 

In  writing  to  the  Philadelphians,  Ignatius  asks  them  to  select  a 
special  minister,  to  carry  a  message  to  Antioch  : 

\zipoTOvr\aai  Siclkovov /.laxapio?  kv  XpiaTcp    Irjaov  o? 

Ka.7a£ico$ri(T€Tai  rfjs  TOiavTrjs  SiaKoi'ia?. — Ad  Phil.  lO. 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS.  45 

Here  the  deacon  elected  is  a  kind  of  superfluous  officer,  chosen  for 
a  particular  service.  He  is  described  as  [xaKoipios,  as  in  the  Odes, 
and  he  is  happy  in  being  counted  worthy  of  his  ministry,  which 
is  very  near  to  the  TreTTia-Tev/iivos  of  the  former  passage  of  the  Odes. 
Taking  the  two  passages  together  it  looks  as  if  Ignatius  had  the 
language  of  the  Ode  in  his  mind  when  he  was  writing. 

In  Ode  VII,  21  we  are  told  that  '  ignorance  hath  been  dissipated 
because  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  hath  arrived  '.  This  curious 
statement  about  the  '  dissipation  or  destruction  of  ignorance '  has 
a  parallel  in  the  epistle  of  Ignatius  to  the  Ephesians  : 

'  Ignorance  was  dissipated,  the  ancient  kingdom  was 
destroyed,  when  God  was  manifested  as  man  for  the  renewal 
of  eternal  life.' — Ad  Eph.  19. 

There  is  a  certain  degree  of  parallelism  here  ;  but  if  there  is  any 
connexion  the  priority  is  with  the  rhythmic  sequence  of  the  Ode. 
In  Ode  XVII,  10,  11  we  have  Christ  speaking: 

'  Nothing  appeared  closed  to  me  : 
Because  I  zvas  the  door  of  everything  : 
And  I  went  towards  all  my  bondsmen  to  loose  them.'' 

In  the  Epistle  to  the  Philadelphians,  Ignatius  says  that 

'  Christ  Jesus  shall  loose  from  you  every  bond1  [Ad  Phil.  8), 

and  this  is  followed  by  the  statement  that 

'  He  is  the  door  of  the  father,  by  which  enter  Abraham  and 
Isaac  and  Jacob  and  the  prophets  and  the  apostles  and  the 
Church.'— Ad  Phil.  9. 

that  is,  Jesus  Christ  is  the  door  of  everybody,  which  is  an  explanation 
of  the  ''door  of  everything'  in  the  Ode.  Somewhat  in  the  same 
way,  Ignatius  has  modified  '  all  my  bondsmen  ',  to  '  all  your  bonds  '. 

It  certainly  is  suspicious  that  we  find  these  parallelisms :  they 
invite  the  belief  that  Ignatius  knew  the  Odes  closely. 

Reviewing  the  group  of  passages,  whose  degree  of  parallelism 
we  have  to  estimate,  we  may,  perhaps,  find  sufficient  reason  for 
believing  (i)  that  Ignatius  knew  the  Odes;    (ii)  that  he  was  not 


46  INTRODUCTION 

himself  the  Odist :  as  indeed  his  style  bears  no  resemblance  to  the 
lofty  strains  of  the  Odes.  Where  the  two  writers  come  nearest 
together  geographically  is  in  the  reference  to  the  '  talking  water ', 
if  that  really  means  the  water  of  Daphne.  Is  it  possible  that  it  is 
an  Antiochene  book  of  sacred  songs  that  we  have  been  discussing  ? 
They  are  certainly  Antiphonal  if  they  are  not  Ignatian  :  that  part 
of  the  tradition  of  Socrates  may  be  accepted. 

Having  traced  certain  agreements  in  thought  and  expression 
between  Ignatius  and  the  Odist  we  have  been  reminded  that,  quite 
in  the  early  days  of  the  criticism  of  the  Odes,  Professor  de  Zwaan 
constructed  in  the  American  Journal  of  Theology  a  spiritual  parallel 
between  the  two  writers.1  He  argued  for  'a  certain  similarity', 
not  so  much  between  the  Ignatian  letters  and  the  early  Christian 
hymns  which  Dr.  Harris  had  recovered,  as  between  '  Ignatius  and 
the  Odist ',  and  concluded  that  '  literary  dependence  is  out  of  the 
question,  but  spiritual  kinship  is  so  clear  in  this  case,  notwith- 
standing the  evident  difference  in  character  and  pursuits,  that  one 
may  feel  sure  of  its  testimony '. 

Professor  de  Zwaan  actually  draws  attention  to  the  parallel 
between  the  language  of  Ignatius,  Ad  Eph.  19,  'Lack  of  knowledge 
was  destroyed'  (so  translating  ayvoia),  and  the  teaching  of  the 
Odist,  who  lays  '  much  more  stress  on  truth  and  error  than  on 
the  Cross'.  But  apparently  he  did  not  quote  the  actual  words 
of  the  Odist  (Ode  vii)  with  regard  to  the  '  destruction  of  ignorance'. 
He  very  justly  makes  a  parallel  between  the  19th  Ode  and  the 
language  of  Ignatius  in  reference  to  the  Virgin  Birth,  and  presumes 
that  '  Ignatius  would  not  have  heard  without  edification  the  passage 
which  to  some  scholars  seems  incongruous  with  the  elevated  tone  of 
the  Odes'.  With  this  judgement  we  arc  in  agreement,  for  Ignatius 
when  he  ventures  into  poetical  figure  can  be  almost  as  unbridled  in 
the  use  of  the  imagination  as  anything  we  find  in  the  Odes,  and, 
moreover,  he  is  undoubtedly  in  evidence  for  the  Miraculous 
Conception  and  Birth. 

1  Amer.Joum.  Theol.  for  191 1,  pp.  617-25. 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS     47 

In  discussing  the  tradition  of  Socrates  with  regard  to  the  choral 
or  antiphonal  singing  in  the  Church  at  Antioch,  it  is  natural  to 
refer  to  the  passage  in  which  Ignatius,  in  his  letters,  suggests 
choral  singing  to  the  Churches  to  whom  he  has  written:  it  may 
be  assumed  that  such  forms  of  singing  were  familiar  in  Greek 
Churches,  at  all  events.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  Ignatius 
sets  the  chorus,  which  he  forms,  with  its  face  towards  the  bishop, 
having  previously  strung  the  presbytery  on  the  bishop,  considered 
as  the  framework  of  a  lyre.  'All  of  you  form  yourselves  into  a 
chorus ',  says  he  :  'in  your  harmonious  love,  Jesus  Christ  is  sung.' 

In  the  Odes  of  Solomon,  upon  whose  choral  character  Tondelli 
and  others  have  rightly  laid  such  stress,  we  find  the  chorus  for  the 
most  part  involved  in  the  doxology  with  which  so  many  of  the 
Odes  conclude :  but  there  is  one  Ode  in  which  the  Odist  does  not 
sing  in  his  own  person,  but  assumes  an  accompanying  chorus  and 
invites  it.  The  language  is  so  similar  to  that  of  Ignatius  that  we 
may  resort  to  the  interpretation  by  parallel.  The  41st  Ode,  then, 
begins  as  follows : 

'  Let  all  of  us  who  are  the  Lord's  bairns,  praise  Him  : 
And  let  us  appropriate  the  truth  of  His  faith  : 
And  His  children  shall  be  acknowledged  by  Him : 
Therefore  let  us  sing  in  His  love. 

Let  us,  therefore,  all  of  us  unite  together  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord.' 

The  Ignatian  parallels,  the  one  referred  to  above,  and  a  cor- 
responding one  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  are  as  follows  : 

1  In  your  concord  and  harmonious  love  Jesus  Christ  is  sung. 
And  do  ye,  each  and  all  (kcct'  dvSpa),  form  yourselves  into 
a  chorus,  that,  being  harmonious  in  concord,  and  taking  the 
key-note  of  God,  ye  may  in  oneness  sing  with  one  voice  through 
Jesus  Christ  unto  the  Father,  that  He  may  both  hear  you  and 
acknowledge  you  by  your  good  deeds  to  be  the  members  of  His 
Son  (i.  e.  his  children).' — Ad  Eph.  4. 

'  Forming  yourselves  into  a  chorus,  in  love  sing  to  the  Father 
in  Jesus  Christ.' — Ad  Rom.  2. 


48  INTRODUCTION 

The  language  of  Ignatius  again  suggests  familiarity  with  the 
Odes,  and  confirms  our  belief  in  their  choral  character ;  it  helps 
us  to  understand  what  is  meant  by  the  Syriac  sentence  which 
literally  says,  '  His  children  shall  be  known  with  Him ',  and  which 
evidently  means,  '  Shall  be  acknowledged  by  Him '  (iTnyvcoaOrj- 
aovrai)  in  accordance  with  Syriac  idiom. 

In  the  cditio  princcps,  as  stated  above,  there  were  feelers  thrown 
out  without  any  decisive  result  for  coincidences  with  the  Ignatian 
Epistles.  One  passage  to  which  reference  was  made  was  in  the 
41st  Ode,  to  which  we  have  just  been  alluding,  where  the  Odist 
tells  us  that 

'The  Christ  is  really  One'  (xli.  15), 

and  the  parallel  which  was  quoted  was  from  the  letter  to  the 
Magnesians.  in  the  words, 

ety  kcrTiv  'Irjaovs  XpLcrros. — Ad  Magii.  J. 

The  parallel  is  really  stronger  than  the  quoted  words.  For  it 
continues  with  the  statement  that  there  is  '  one  temple,  even  God  ; 
and  one  altar,  even  Jesus  Christ,  who  came  from  One  Father,  and 
is  with  One  and  departed  unto  One '.  This  passage  may  be  taken 
as  a  comment  upon  the  sentence  in  the  Ode,  which  it  actually 
reproduces  (without  the  adverb  '  truly ') ;  Lightfoot  has  wrongly 
emended  09  for  el?. 

Let  us  see  whether  Ignatius  agrees  with  the  Odist  in  the 
treatment  of  the  heretics  of  his  time.  He  has  already  compared 
them  to  persons  who  put  drugs  in  sweet  drinks.  We  found,  also, 
that  the  Odes  describe  such  persons  as  '  mad  dogs  who  ignorantly 
attack  their  Master ',  the  language  being  derived,  like  so  much 
else,  from  an  allegorical  interpretation  of  the  22nd  Psalm.  Ignatius 
also  has  described  the  heretics  as  '  mad  dogs '  (icvves  Afcrowrer) 
who  bite  stealthily  (XaOpoSrJKrai),  and  whose  bite  is  practically 
incurable  (Ad  Eph.  7).  These  are  evidently  the  same  dogs  as  we 
know  in  the  Odes.  Apparently  Ignatius  has  misunderstood  the 
words  of  the  Odist  as  to  the  dogs  biting  {kv  ayvoia),  which  was 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS     49 

meant  to  express  the  ignorance  of  dogs  failing  to  recognize  their 
own  particular  master ;  Ignatius  takes  it  to  mean  that  the  dogs 
bite  when  one  is  not  aware  of  what  is  coming  ;  the  ignorance  is 
in  the  bitten,  not  in  the  biter. 

We  see,  then,  that  Ignatius  regards  the  heretics  and  unbelievers 
as  (i)  poisoners;  (ii)  mad  dogs,  just  as  the  Odist  does.  In  the  first 
instance  the  '  mad  dog '  was  the  Jew,  and  the  mention  of  him  came 
in  from  an  anti-Judaic  testimony  against  the  Jews  as  a  '  synagogue 
of  evil-doers ' ;  by  Ignatius's  time  the  application  appears  to  be 
general. 

A  particular  heresy  which  both  writers  combat  is  that  which 
denied  the  unity  of  Christ's  nature,  perhaps  a  form  of  Docetism. 
Ignatius,  as  we  have  seen,  may  be  using  the  very  formula  of  the 
Odes  ('  Christ  Jesus  is  one  person  '). 

We  now  come  to  a  curious  coincidence  both  in  thought  and  in 
language  between  the  Odes  and  the  Epistle  of  Barnabas.  In 
Ode  xxxi.  10-13  tne  Odist  is  speaking  in  the  person  of  Christ, 
and  affirms : 

1  /  endured  and  held  my  peace, 

That  I  might  redeem  my  people  and  inherit  it: 

And  that  I  might  7iot  make  void  my  promises  to  the  patriarchs, 

To  whom  I  promised  the  salvation  of  their  seed.' 

With  this  we  may  compare  Barnabas,  c.  5  : 

'  He  himself  endured that  He  might  destroy  death  and  show 
forth  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  (for  that  He  must  needs  be 
manifest  in  the  flesh) ;  that  at  the  same  time  He  might  redeem 
the  promise  made  to  the  fathers  and  prepare  the  new  people 
for  Himself,'  &c. 

The  closest  Biblical  parallel  is  Romans  xv.  8,  where  Christ  is  said 
to  be  God's  minister : 

ei?  to  fiefiaiaxrai.  ra?  e-rrayyeXias  toou  -rraTepcov. 
11  E 


50  INTRODUCTION 

Wc  may  compare  Ircnacus,  iv.  15  (cd.  Mass.  236) : 

'  Abraham,  et  semen  eius  quod  est  Ecclesia,  per  Christum 
Iesum,  cui  et  adoptio  redditur  et  haereditas  quae  Abrahae 
protnissa  est.' 

The  same  arguments  may  be  found  in  Justin,  Dial.  119,  120. 
It  is  possible  that  the  coincidences  are  due  to  dependence  upon 
a  primitive  collection  of  Testimonies.  The  coincidence,  however, 
between  the  Odist's  language  and  that  of  Barnabas  is  very  close. 

The  suggestion  in  the  foregoing  passages  that  we  have  recovered 
a  genuine  parallel  to  the  Odes  in  the  Epistle  of  Barnabas  encourages 
us  to  look  more  closely  into  the  texture  of  this  Epistle  :  for  the 
Epistle  of  Barnabas  is  one  of  the  least-valued  books  of  the  sub- 
apostolic  literature  and  one  of  the  most  valuable.  Its  anti-Judaic 
character,  combined  with  its  constant  dependence  upon  primitive 
anti-Judaic  Testimonial  makes  it  one  of  the  best  exponents  that  we 
can  find  of  primitive  Christian  belief  and  teaching.  It  quotes  the 
Teaching  of  the  Apostles  en  bloc,  and  not  only  en  bloc  but  in 
separate  passages.1  The  observation  is  an  important  one,  as 
showing  how  Barnabas  operates  with  his  sources  and  is  influenced 
by  them.  If,  then,  Barnabas  uses  written  sources  and  uses  them 
freely,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Did  ache  and  the  Testimony  Book,  it  is  at 
least  an  open  question  whether  he  does  not,  in  a  similar  manner, 
show  reminiscence  of  the  Odes.  Let  us  see  what  the  Epistle 
suggests  in  the  way  of  parallels,  over  and  above  the  reference  to 
the  31st  Ode  which  we  have  already  quoted. 

In  i.  2  Barnabas  speaks  of  having  observed  that  upon  his 
hearers  there  had  been  poured  forth  the  Spirit  from  the  wealth 
of  the  fountain  of  the  Lord: 

d\r)6cos  /3Ae7ro)  eV  vfilv  ZKKeyyiJ.ivov  dub  tov  nXovaiov  rfjs 
7TT]yfjs  Kvpiov  Tvvtdfia  e0'  u/xay. 

In  Ode  xi.  6  we  have : 

'  Speaking  waters  touched  my  lips 
From  the  fountain  of  the  Lord  plenteously! 

1  Cf.  Barn.  iv.  9. 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS     51 

The    same    expression    '  the    fountain   of    the    Lord '    occurs    in 
Ode  xxx.  2: 

'  Come  all  ye  thirsty  and  take  a  draught, 
And  rest  by  the  fountain  of  the  Lord.' 

In   i.  4   Barnabas   apologises   for  his   loquacity   in   the  Christian 
meetings,  and  says  that 

'  Although  I  talked  much  among  you  I  know  well  that  the 
Lord  travelled  zvith  me  in  the  way  of  righteousness! 

kv  vfilv  \a\rjcra?  noWa  kniaTajxaL  otl  tfiol  crvvdoSivaev  kv  68co 
SiKaioavvrjs  Kvpios. 

In  Ode  xxxviii  we  have  constant  references  to  the  companionship 
of  the  Truth  with  the  Odist  in  his  journey  ;  e.  g. : 

'  The  Truth  went  with  me  ' : 

'  I  walked  with  him  ' : 

'  The  Truth  proceeds  in  the  right  path '  : 

'  I  congratulated  myself  because  the  Truth  went  with  me.' 

Again  in  Ode  xli.  n  : 

*  His  Word  is  with  us  in  all  our  way.' 

Again,  in  Ode  xvii.  5  : 

'  The  thought  of  the  Truth  led  me  on, 
And  I  walked  after  it  and  did  not  wander.' 

In  Barnabas  iv.  12  we  may  note  the  expression  used  of  the  good 
man,  that 

1  His  righteousness  shall  go  before  him.' 

(i.e.  to  judgement). 

r)  SiKaioavvT]  avrov  7rpoT}yr}o~€Tai  avrov. 

With  this  we  may  compare  Ode  viii.  21,  22 : 

'  At  my  own  right  hand  I  set  my  elect : 
And  my  righteousness goeth  before  them.' 
E  2 


52  INTRODUCTION 

Both  of  these  passages  go  back  ultimately  into  Isaiah  lviii.  8  : 

'  Thy  righteousness  shall  go  before  thee. 
The  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  thy  rearward.' 

<al  TTpOTTopzvatTai  efj.7rpoa0€i'  <rov  r)  SiKaiocrvvrj  aov,  K<xi  i) 
86£a  rod  Oeov  7rep£<rreAe?  ere. 

Special  attention  should  be  paid  to  this  section  of  Isaiah, 
because  it  is  certainly  a  part  of  the  primitive  Testimony  Book :  the 
section  in  which  it  occurs  is  actually  quoted  in  Barnabas  iii,  in 
order  to  establish  the  doctrine  of  the  new  fast  ('  Why  do  ye  fast, 
saith  the  Lord  ? ') ;  and  it  appears  to  have  influenced  one  other 
passage  in  the  Odes,  viz.  Ode  xx.  9  : 

'  His  glory  shall  go  before  thee, 
And  thou  shalt  receive  of  His  kindness  and  His  grace.' 

Either,  then.  Barnabas  has  been  influenced  by  the  Odes  or  by 
Isaiah ;  more  probably  the  latter,  as  he  is  shown  to  have  quoted 
the  section  of  Isaiah  to  which  we  have  been  referring,  and  coincides 
in  his  language  at  one  point  with  that  section  more  closely  than 
the  Odist  does. 

In  Barnabas  xii.  5,  where  the  brazen  serpent  is  said  to  be  a  type 
of  Jesus,  we  are  told  that : 

'  Moses  again  made  a  symbol  of  Jesus  to  show  that  He  must 
suffer,  and  that  He  Himself  whom  they  shall  think  to  have 
perished  shall  make  alive  again  by  a  sign  (of  his  cross)  though 
Israel  falls  (or,  shall  typically  make  alive  again',  &c). 

IldXiu  Mcoucrrjs  ttouI  tvttov  rod  'Irjcrov,  on  SeT  avrb^  nadelv 
Kal  avTos  {(ooyoinjcrei  ov  So^ovo-iv  aTToXoiXtKevoa  eV  a^fieico, 
ttitttovtos  Tov  'IcrparjX. 

With  this  description  of  the  Christ  whom  they  shall  think  to  have 
perished,  we  may  compare  : 

Ode  xxviii.  9  : 

'  They  supposed  that  I  was  swallowed  up : 
For  /seemed  to  them  as  one  of  the  lost.' 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS     S3 
Ode  xxv.  5 : 

'  I  was  despised  and  rejected  in  the  eyes  of  many ; 
And  /  ivas  in  their  eyes  like  /end' ; 

where  the  reading  'as  lead'  has  been  conjectured  by  us  to  be 
a  misunderstanding  of  the  word  '  lost ',  '  perished  '. 

In  Barnabas  v.  7  we  have  already  drawn  attention  to  the  state- 
ment that  '  the  Lord  endured,  in  order  that  He  might  give  back  the 
promise  to  the  fathers'  ;  and  we  have  compared  Ode  xxxi.  10-13, 
'  I  endured  .  .  .  that  I  might  redeem  my  people  and  inherit  it,  and 
that  I  might  not  make  void  the  promise  to  the  patriarchs '.  We  may 
now  further  compare  Barnabas  xiv.  4 : 

'The  Lord  Himself  gave  (the  Covenant)  to  us,  for  a  people 
of  His  inheritance,  having  endured  for  our  sakes.' 

els  Xabu  K\7]poi>o/jLia$,  81'  fifxas  imofxeivas. 

Here  Barnabas  appears  again  to  have  been  influenced  by  the 
language  of  the  Odes,  and  our  first  supposition  is  confirmed. 

Reviewing  the  passages  to  which  we  have  drawn  attention,  we 
think  there  is  some  reason  for  believing  that  Barnabas  is  under  the 
influence  of  the  Odes,  though  it  would  clearly  be  unwise  to  assume 
that  the  parallels  which  we  have  brought  forward  are  all  of  equal 
validity,  and  one  or  two  of  them  may  have  to  be  rejected.  It  is 
much  to  be  wished  that  some  competent  scholar  would  give  us 
a  really  good  edition  of  this  important  sub-apostolic  document. 

As  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  Ignatius  of  Antioch  knew  the 
Odes,  and  that  the  language  of  his  letters  is  much  under  their 
influence,  it  is  interesting  to  notice  that  a  later  bishop  of  the  same 
city  shows  similar  traces  of  dependence  upon  the  Odist.  Theophilus 
is  a  very  learned  person,  and  occupies  an  important  position  in  the 
evolution  of  theology  ;  it  is  interesting  to  see  that  when  he  treats  of 
the  errors  of  the  Greek  poets  and  philosophers,  whom  he  knows 
well,  he  uses  the  same  figure  almost  exactly  as  we  detected  in 


54  INTRODUCTION 

Ignatius  and  the  Odes.  He  says  that,  even  if  any  truth  was  spoken 
by  the  Greeks,  it  was 

1  Truth  mixed  with  error.  A  strong  poison  mixed  with  honey 
and  wine  or  any  other  liquid,  renders  the  whole  injurious  and 
useless.' — Thcoph.  Ad  Auiol.  ii.  12. 

KaOdnep  ydp  (pdpfiaKov  ri  8r]Xi]TfjpL0i'  crvyKpaOh'  p.tXiTi  rj 
otvcp,  tj  eTepa>  tlvl,  to  irav  ttolu  fiXafiepbv  kglI  a^p-qarov. 

We  can  take  the  case  of  the  supposed  parallel  to  the  Odes  in 
Theophilus  one  stage  further. 

Theophilus  speaks  of  the  mingling  of  Truth  and  Error  as  com- 
parable to  the  infusion  of  some  deadly  drug  into  honey  or  wine  or 
something  similar : 

crvyKpaOtv  fxeXiTi  r)  o'lvco  rj  irepco  tlvl. — Ad  Autolycum,  ii.  3. 

Here  we  notice  that  it  is  peculiar  to  use  erepo)  for  the  third  place 
in  a  series  of  specifications,  where  we  should  have  expected  dXXco. 
Our  first  impulse  is  to  set  it  down  as  a  case  of  want  of  precision, 
such  as  characterizes  the  common  Greek  of  the  Hellenistic  period. 
Examination  of  the  style  of  Theophilus  does  not  show  any  such 
lack  of  precision,  but  on  the  contrary  a  careful  observance  of  Greek 
usage.  Here,  for  example,  is  a  case  where  he  introduces  two 
alternatives  followed  by  a  third  : 

tovs  Trap  AlyvnTLOLS  Trpo^rjTas  r)  XaXSaiovs  tovs  re  aXXovs 
(rvyypacpei?. — Ad  Atitolycum,  ii.  32. x 

It  will  be  noticed  that  Theophilus  uses  dXXovs,  and  not  erepoi/y, 
as  of  course  he  should  do.  Wc  infer,  then,  that  if  he  uses  iTep<o 
tlvl  in  the  passage  previously  cited,  he  did  not  have  two  preceding 
terms,  but  only  one.  The  natural  inference  is  that  hzXltl  r)  o'lvco 
stands  for  a  single  word,  which  has  been  replaced,  perhaps  because 
it  was  not  understood  :  accordingly  we  restore  oiVo/xeAtrt  to  the 
text  of  Theophilus,  in  harmony  with  Ignatius  and  the  Odist.  We 
need   not  be  surprised  at  the  change  which  has  occurred  (if  our 

1    Cf.  ii.  4  ?WOI  .  .  .  eVf/joi  .  .  .  tlWm. 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS     55 

argument  be  just)  in  the  text  of  Theophilus,  for  the  same  kind 
of  change  was  made  by  the  translator,  who  turned  the  Ignatian 
Epistles  into  Syriac :  he  rendered  o*V6/*eAf  by  Ua?o  Ji^cw. 

In  another  passage  Theophilus  corrects  the  Odes  in  an  opinion, 
which  we  observed  Bardaisan  to  hold,  viz.  that  the  sun  and  moon 
received  light  alternately  from  one  another,  the  moon  receiving 
light  in  the  first  half  of  the  month,  and  giving  it  back  during  the 
period  of  waning.  The  Antioch  astronomy  was  evidently  ahead  of 
the  Edessan  of  the  same  date,  the  latter  half  of  the  second  century. 
So  Theophilus  says : 

'  The  sun  always  remains  fall,  without  becoming  less,  as  God 

always  remains  perfect but  the  moon  as  a  type  of 

man  wanes  month  by  month.' — Theoph.  Ad  Autol.  i.  15. 

Theophilus  evidently  did  not  believe  with  the  Odist  that  the 
two  Light  Vessels  poured,  backward  and  forward,  into  one  another. 
We  suggest  that  he  has  corrected  his  Church  Hymnal. 

Cyril  of  Jerusalem  has  drawn  upon  the  language  of  Ode  xlii  in 
which  our  Lord's  descent  into  Hades  is  described.  The  Odist 
says  : 

'  Those  who  had  died  ran  towards  me, 
And  they  cried  and  said,  Son  of  God,'  &c. — Ode  xlii.  15. 

Cyril  expands  the  statement  by  specifying  the  persons  to  whom 
reference  is  made : 

'  The  holy  prophets  ran  unto  Him,  and  Moses  the  Law- 
giver, and  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  David  also,  and  Samuel 
and  Elijah  and  John  the  Baptist.' — Cat.  xiv.  19. 

That  is  what  one  might  call  an  enlarged  edition  of  the  Ode. 

It  is  probable  that  Cyril  may  also  furnish  us  with  the  key  to  the 
obscure  sentence  in  the  same  Ode,  where  Hades  lets  go  the  head 
and  the  feet  (of  the  Lord)  (xlii.  13).  It  was  suggested  in  the 
cditio  princcps  that  the  Head  was  Christ  and  the  Feet  the  Saints. 
We  notice,  however,  that  Cyril  has  another  explanation  of  '  head 


56  INTRODUCTION 

and  feet'  of  Christ.  He  refers  the  words  to  the  two  natures  in 
Christ,  and  illustrates  from  the  eating  of  the  Paschal  Lamb : 

1  We  who  are  accounted  worthy  to  partake  of  the  spiritual 
Lamb,  partake  of  the  head  with  the  feet:  of  the  head,  which 
means  His  Godhead  ;  of  the  feet,  that  is  His  manhood.' 

Catech.  xii.  I. 

Is  there  any  early  explanation  of  Exod.  xii.  9  that  runs  on  that  line 
of  thought  ? 

Cyril  of  Jerusalem  also  treats  the  22nd  Psalm  as  containing 
a  prophecy  of  the  Miraculous  Birth,  though  he  does  not,  like 
Eusebius.  speak  of  God  the  Father  in  midwife  language,  and  so 
make  connexion  with  the  Odes.     According  to  Cyril : 

'  Thou  art  He,  says  the  Psalmist,  that  dretu  me  out  of 
the  womb.  Mark  carefully  the  word,  drew  me  out  of  the  womb, 
which  means  that  He  was  born  without  man,  being  drawn 
from  the  womb  and  the  flesh  of  the  Virgin :  for  it  is  different 
in  the  case  of  them  that  are  born  of  the  marriage  law.' 

Cyril,  CatecJi.  xii.  25. 

It  seems,  from  the  artificial  meaning  which  Cyril  attaches  to  the 
word  'drew  out',  that  he  is  avoiding  the  interpretation  put  on 
the  word  by  Eusebius  and  the  Odist.  There  is  no  doubt  that 
he  regards  the  Psalm  as  predicting  the  Virgin  Birth. 

A  coincidence  between  the  Odes  and  Irenaeus  was  pointed  out 
in  the  editio  princcps,  without  presenting  an  absolute  claim  for  the 
recognition  of  a  quotation.  Now  that  we  have  the  antiquity  of 
the  Odes  well  established  there  seems  no  reason  for  hesitation  as  to 
Irenaeus's  acquaintance  with  them.  The  passage  referred  to  was 
as  follows:  Irenaeus  is  explaining  that  the  less  God  needs  man, 
the  more  man  needs  God  and  His  felUnvship : 

1  In  quantum  enim  Deus  nullius  indiget,  in  tantum  homo 
indiget  Dei  communionis.' 

Ircn.  adv.  Haer.  iv.  25  (Mass.  243). 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS  57 

Here  we  have  the  thought  of  fellowship  with  God  as  the  expression 
of  man's  need,  just  as  in  Ode  iv  : 

1  Thou  hast  given  us  thy  fellowship : 
It  was  not  that  thou  wast  in  need  of  us : 

but  that  we  tvere  in  need  of  thee! — Ode  iv.  9. 

The  same  thought  recurs  a  little  lower  in  the  form  : 

'Ipse  quidem  nullius  indigens'.  his  vero  qui  indigent  ems, 
suam  praebens  communionem? 

And  again,  in  the  following  book,  Irenaeus  returns  to  the  theme : 

'  Nihil  enim  illi  ante  dedimus,  neque  desiderat  aliquid  a 
nobis,  quasi  indigens :  nos  autem  indigemus  eius  quae  est  ad 
eum  communionis  (xpygo/jieOa  rijs  eh  avrbv  Koiveovias).' 

Iren.  adv.  Haer.  v.  2,  p.  293. 

It  was  remarked  that,  in  these  passages,  '  the  evidence  is  rather 
in  the  direction  of  recognizing  a  quotation  on  the  part  of  Irenaeus 
from  the  Odes '.  The  hesitation  was  proper  to  the  first  exposition, 
but  may  now  be  discarded,  and  Irenaeus  numbered  amongst  those 
who  are  familiar  with  the  Odes.1 

Before  leaving  this  part  of  the  subject,  we  may  point  out  some 
remarkable  coincidences  with  the  Apology  of  Aristides,  c.  i.  In 
Ode  vi.  5  we  have  the  statement  that 

'  Nothing  should  be  His  adversary, 
Nothing  should  stand  up  against  Him.' 

In  the  Apology  of  Aristides  we  have  the  following  statement : 

'  Adversary  He  has  none : 
For  there  is  none  that  is  more  powerful  than  He : 
Anger  and  wrath  He  possesses  not ; 
For  there  is  nothing  that  is  able  to  stand  against  Him' 

1  It  is  not  a  little  curious  that  Ephrem  twice  attacks  as  heretical  the  opinion 
that  God  was  in  no  need  of  man :  for  instance, 

'  The  heretics  endeavour  to  say  of  Him  that  He  is  in  no  need  at  all,  but 
that  He  furnished  us  with  opportunity  to  be  saved  by  all  means.' 

R.E.  ii.  522  :  cf.  also  R.E.  iii.  12. 

Was  he,  perhaps,  attacking  the  Bardesanians  for  their  use  of  the  Odes  ? 


58  INTRODUCTION 

That  is  how  the  passage  runs,  rhythmically  enough  in  the  Syriac 
translation.  The  Greek  is  a  mere  staccato  abbreviation  at  this 
point :  God  is 

dvco-epos  TrdfTcoi'  tcou  ttglOoov 

opyfjs  T€  Kal  \r}6rj$  Kal 
dyvoia?  Kal  rcov  Xonrcoi'. 

Now  the  concurrence  noted  above  may  be  accidental,  and  the 
statements  may  be  the  trite  phrases  of  Theistic  teaching ;  but  their 
coincidence  deserves  study.  For  this  is  not  the  only  coincidence 
which  the  Odes  show  with  the  opening  chapter  of  Aristides's 
Apology.  Here  we  have  also  the  statement  (a  conventional  one, 
it  must  again  be  admitted)  that 

1  He  stands  in  need  of  nought, 
But  everything  stands  in  need  of  Him.' ' 

which  is  in  Ode  iv.  9  in  the  form : 

'  It  was  not  that  thou  wast  in  need  of  us ; 
But  that  we  are  in  need  of  thee.' 

The  passage  about  the  impossibility  of  an  adversary  to  God  is 
followed  in  the  Syriac  Aristides  by  the  words : 

'  Error  and  forgetfulness  are  not  in  His  nature ; 
For  He  is  altogether  wisdom  and  understanding.' 

(The  Greek  abbreviation  quoted  above  suggests  that  'ignorance' 
should  be  added  after  '  forgetfulness'.) 
But  this  is  very  like  Ode  xviii.  8-1 1  : 

'  Thou  art  my  God : 

Error  thou  knowest  not, 
For  neither  knows  it  thee. 
And  ignorance ' 


1  The  very  same  statement  in  Tatian,  Oratio,  chap.  4  :    '  He  who  is  in  want 
of  nothing  is  not  to  be  misrepresented  by  us  as  though  he  were  in  need.' 


QUOTATIONS  OF  ODES  IN  EARLY  FATHERS  59 

If  the  parallelism  had  been  in  a  different  region  from  that  of 
philosophical  and  theological  commonplaces  we  should  have  said 
at  once  that  one  of  these  writers  was  quoting  the  other.  As  it  is 
the  parallelisms  of  the  sentences  and  the  close  coincidences  in 
language  seem  to  involve  some  connexion  between  Aristides  and 
the  Odes. 

We  come  now  to  a  remarkable  statement,  due  apparently  to 
Anastasius  the  Presbyter  in  the  fifth  century,  which  seems  to  refer 
the  authorship  of  the  Odes  to  Montanus  in  the  second  century 
or  to  some  earlier  date. 

In  the  seventh  volume  of  Mai's  Scriptontm  Veterum  Nova  Collectio 
there  occur  a  number  of  unedited  fragments  from  a  Patristic  Catena 
on  the  Incarnation.  These  are  accompanied  by  a  series  of  extracts 
from  detestable  heretics,  who  give  their  testimonies  on  the  same 
theme,  such  as  Ebion  (!)  Paul  of  Samosata,  Nestorius,  Theodore  of 
Mopsuestia,  &c.    Amongst  these  we  find  as  follows  (p.  69)  :  Movravov 

€K  TCOV  (o86i>W  M.ICLV    6    XpKTTOS  €)(€£   T1]l>   <f>V(TlV   KCtl  TT}V    kvkpyZlCLV    Kal 

irpo  777?  cmp/co?  Kal  /xera  rijs  crapKos,  iva  /n/  Sidcp'opos  yiprjTai 
di>6fioia  Kal  diatyopa  TvparToav. 

We  have  here  a  statement  that  Montanus  composed  Odes  (such 
at  least  is  the  natural  inference  on  first  reading  the  passage),  and 
that  the  doctrine  of  the  unity  of  the  nature  of  Christ  was  taught 
in  them  ;  according  to  the  quotation  from  these  Odes,  this  unity 
existed  both  before  and  after  the  Incarnation.  The  Ode  quoted 
would  thus  be  capable  of  an  anti-docetic  interpretation,  and  would 
not  allow  that  the  Christ  had  descended  upon  Jesus.  The  emphasis 
in  the  quotation  is  on  the  word  [iiav  with  which  it  opens. 

Now  when  we  turn  to  our  Odes  of  Solomon,  we  find  as  follows : 
'  The  Christ  is  truly  one ;  and  he  was  known  [i.  e.  as  such]  before 
the  foundations  of  the  world,  that  he  might  save  souls  for  ever  by 
the  truth  of  his  name.' — Ode  Sol.  xli.  15,  16.  Here  we  have  some- 
thing very  like  the  quotation  brought  forward  by  Mai  and  attributed 
to  Montanus.  The  anti-docetic  statement  as  to  the  unity  of  the 
Messiah,  i.  e.  of  Christ  in  the  flesh,  is  accompanied  by  a  statement 


60  INTRODUCTION 

as  to  his  pre-cxistencc,  not  only  before  the  Incarnation  but  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world. 

Is  it  possible  that  there  is  any  connexion  between  the  quotation 
of  Mai  and  the  passage  in  the  Odes?  Assuming  that  the  extract  is 
rightly  referred  to  Montanus,  can  he  be  regarded  as  the  author  of 
the  Odes?  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Odes  had  already  been 
claimed  as  Montanus's  by  Mr.  F.  C.  Conybeare,  and  it  may  be 
admitted  that  the  tradition  as  to  Montanus's  teaching  finds  excellent 
illustration  in  the  Odes.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  impossible  to 
regard  the  extract  which  Mai  gives  from  his  Vatican  manuscript  as 
poetical  in  form.  It  is  clearly,  undeniably  prose.  Consequently  it 
can  only  be  connected  with  the  Odes  as  commentary  is  connected 
with  text.  The  Odes  must  underlie  the  passage  referred  to 
Montanus,  if  the  connexion  be  conceded.  Upon  this  supposition 
the  Odes  must  be  as  early  as  175  A.  D.,  if  Montanus  is  glossing  his 
own  composition,  or  much  earlier,  if  he  is  quoting  a  recognized 
Church  book  of  sacred  songs.  The  latter  appears  to  be  the  correct 
conclusion,  but  we  may  allow  for  a  margin  of  doubt,  and  for  the 
possibility  of  some  other  explanation. 

Dr.  Bernard  has  made  a  great  deal  more  than  was  warranted  of 
a  reference  in  the  Syriac  Tcstamcntum  Domini}  where  a  rubric  for 
the  morning  office  directs  that  there  should  be  sung  'four  hymns  of 
praise,  one  by  Moses,  and  of  Solomon  and  of  the  other  prophets '. 

The  rubric  certainly  docs  not  mean  '  one  hymn  out  of  a  collection 
ascribed  to  Solomon '.  It  is,  probably,  nothing  more  than  an 
injunction  to  sing  the  72nd  Psalm,  whose  heading  is  'A  Psalm 
of  Solomon  '.2< 

The  parallel  with  Moses  is  explained  in  like  manner  by  a 
reference  to  the  90th  Psalm  ;  it  is  doubtful  if  there  is  any  reference 
at  all  to  the  so-called  canticles  which  appear  at  the  end  of  the 
Psalter  in  some  copies  of  the  LXX. 

1  I.  26. 

2  The  Targum  says  it  was  spoken  prophetically  by  Solomon. 


ORIGIN  AND  TIME  OF  COMPOSITION  OF  ODES     61 


CHAPTER   IV 

The  Origin  and  Time  of  the  Composition 
of  the  Odes. 

We  now  pass  on  to  discuss  the  '  when  and  the  where '  of  the 
Odes,  on  the  assumption  that  they  constitute  a  literary  unity,  and 
that  the  problem  is  not  to  be  complicated,  in  the  first  instance 
at  all  events,  by  a  multitude  of  suggested  interpolations.  That  is, 
we  set  on  one  side  for  the  present,  and  perhaps  finally,  such 
theories  as  that  of  Harnack,  who  finds  the  Odes  to  be  a  Jewish 
document,  patched  with  Christian  interpolations ;  we  also  set  on 
one  side,  pro  tempore,  and  again  perhaps  finally,  the  theory  of  the 
first  edition  that  Odes  xix  and  xlii  betrayed  a  later  hand  and 
a  more  highly  evolved  doctrine  than  the  rest  of  the  book.  We  put 
in  a  plea,  on  behalf  of  the  author,  against  his  first  editors  and 
commentators,  that  a  little  more  time  should  be  spent  on  under- 
standing his  text  before  the  hypothesis  of  interpolation  is  resorted 
to.  For  example,  even  if  we  conceded  something  in  favour  of 
a  belief  in  strata  of  late  theological  thought  in  certain  Odes,  we 
must  at  once  check  ourselves  from  drawing  hasty  critical  conse- 
quences, by  the  observation  that  it  is  these  very  Odes  that  may 
turn  out  to  have  the  earliest  literary  attestation.  The  19th  Ode, 
for  example,  grotesque  as  it  may  seem  to  us  in  its  allegory,  and 
full-fledged  in  its  details  of  the  Virgin  Birth,  is  precisely  the  Ode 
which  Lactantius  quotes ;  and  we  have  shown  that  he  took  it  from 
an  early  collection  of  Testimonies,  an  observation  which  at  once 
carries  us  back  to  a  time  when  the  Odes  were  a  part  of  the  Old 
Testament,  and  to  the  second  century,  if  not  to  the  first. 

The  accuracy  of  the  observation  is  confirmed  by  our  discovery 
that  the  very  same  Ode  is  quoted  by  Eusebius  and  by  Theodoret. 
It  must  be  allowed  that  the  19th  Ode  has  acquired  chronological 
dignity. 


62  INTRODUCTION 

Not  very  different  is  the  case  of  the  42nd  Ode,  which  has  such 
a  strongly  developed  Descensus  ad  Inferos  involved  in  it.  Here 
again  we  have  a  quotation  recognized,  this  time  by  Cyril  of 
Jerusalem,  which  takes  us  back  to  the  year  A.D.  34(8.  Citations 
such  as  these  should  make  us  hesitate  before  we  resort  to  the 
theory  of  interpolation,  and  the  argument  from  the  Unity  of  Style 
looks  in  the  same  direction.  It  seems,  therefore,  best  to  set 
Harnack  and  those  who  follow  his  method  of  criticism  on  one  side, 
and  try  to  solve  the  problem  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  Odes 
are  a  literary  unity,  with  a  definite  time  and  place  of  pro- 
duction. 

We  reopen  the  investigation  with  a  sense  of  a  large  increase  in 
the  data  for  the  solution  of  the  problem,  since  the  first  expositions 
of  the  subject  were  made.  Some  of  the  fresh  data  supply  argu- 
ments for  the  time  of  composition  of  the  Odes,  others  give 
suggestions  both  for  time  and  place.  For  example,  when  we 
explain  the  meaning  of  Lactantius's  quotation  from  the  19th  Ode, 
and  trace  it  to  an  early  collection  of  Testimonies  against  the  Jews, 
we  lose  the  note  of  place,  supplied  by  Nicomedia,  and  we  may 
add,  the  note  of  language  :  we  have  no  longer  any  evidence  for 
Latin  Odes,  but  we  have  evidence  for  the  existence  of  the  Odes, 
either  in  Greek  or  some  Semitic  language,  at  a  much  earlier  date 
than  Lactantius.  In  the  same  way,  when  we  are  dealing  with  the 
occurrence  of  the  Odes  in  the  Pistis  Sophia,  we  keep  apparently 
the  note  of  place,  but  the  note  of  time  is  made  for  a  much  earlier 
period  than  the  end  of  the  third  century,  when  the  Pistis  Sophia 
was  produced  ;  for  if  the  Sahidic  Odes  were  taken  from  the  Sahidic 
Psalter  and  were  bound  up  with  the  Psalter,  we  are  again  carried 
backwards  in  time:  we  have  first  to  allow  for  the  fact  that  the 
Sahidic  Bible  is  necessarily  earlier  than  the  Pistis  Sophia  (an 
important  point  for  Biblical  critics),  but  also  we  have  to  remember 
that  the  Sahidic  Old  Testament  is  disclosed  to  us  as  a  translation 
from  the  Septuagint,  with  which,  for  the  purposes  of  our  inquiry, 
the  Odes  must  be  connected.     The  Egyptian  note  of  place  does 


ORIGIN  AND  TIME  OF  COMPOSITION  OF  ODES     63 

not  altogether  disappear,  but  it  becomes  secondary  and  relatively 
unimportant. 

When  we  come  to  actual  Patristic  quotations,  or  to  references 
which  are  the  equivalent  of  citations,  we  find  as  the  result  of 
careful  investigation  two  lines  of  tradition  opening  out  before  us, 
one  which  may  be  called  Mesopotamian,  and  the  other  which  may 
be  called  Palestinian,  or  at  all  events,  West  Syrian. 

The  first  line  is  marked  by  definite  fixed  points.  It  may  be 
taken  as  proved  that  the  Odes  in  their  present  Syriac  form  were 
well  known  to  Ephrem.  Definite  quotations  have  been  established, 
and  general  allusions  abound.  Later  Syriac  writers  can  be  put  in 
evidence :  Moses  bar  Kepha,  for  instance,  interprets  the  Odes 
baptismally,  and  it  is  possible  that  the  Eastern  rituals  may  show 
traces  of  their  influence.  For  us  the  fixed  point  of  departure  is 
Ephrem,  since  he  is  a  genuine  Syrian  knowing  no  Greek,  and  the 
evidence  is  decisive  for  the  actual  use  of  our  Syriac  text,  which  is 
thus  carried  back  into  the  fourth  century  in  Mesopotamia. 

The  next  point  for  the  same  region  and  for  Edessa  as  a  centre 
is  the  somewhat  less  certain  observation  that  Ephrem  attacks 
Bardaisan  for  an  interpretation  which  he  makes  of  the  Odes  in  the 
region  of  astronomy,  where  the  Sun  and  Moon  are  regarded  as 
supplying  light,  each  to  the  other,  the  Moon  receiving  light 
during  the  period  of  its  waxing  and  returning  it  in  the  time  of  its 
waning. 

Here  Bardaisan,  if  we  have  understood  the  matter  rightly, 
speaks  in  the  very  language  of  the  Odes,  and  makes  the  interpreta- 
tion of  the  Ode  quoted,  an  interpretation  which  was  not  unnaturally 
missed  by  the  first  editors.  It  is  probable,  as  we  have  said,  that 
we  must  translate  the  passage  in  the  16th  Ode  to  which  we  refer 
in  the  sense  that 

'Their  reception  (sc.  of  the  Sun  and  Moon)  one  from  the 
other  speaks  (or  fulfils)  the  beauty  of  God.' — Ode  xvi.  17. 

Thus  we  may,  perhaps,  get  another  fixed  point  in  the  use  of 
the  Odes  by  Bardaisan.      The  suggestion  arises   that    Bardaisan 


64  INTRODUCTION 

may,  then,  himself  be  the  author  of  the  Odes,  an  idea  already 
thrown  out  by  Newbold,  upon  other  grounds,  but  without  sufficient 
reason.1  We  do  not  think  Ncwbold's  investigations  are  to  be 
undervalued.  Me  was  quite  right  in  maintaining  that  'no  ante- 
cedent improbability  precludes  the  ascription  of  the  Odes  to 
Bardaisan ' ;  we  have  given  above  a  proof  that  he  is  also  right 
in  saying  that  some  of  the  Odes  can  be  readily  interpreted  in  the 
light  of  Bardaisan's  theories  (the  16th  Ode,  for  instance).  But 
since  Newbold  wrote  his  interesting  article  we  have  fresh  informa- 
tion concerning  Bardaisan,  in  the  recently  published  Discourses 
of  Ephrcm  to  Hypatiusy  and  these  new  Discourses  require  to  be 
carefully  studied  ;  we  have  also,  as  we  shall  see,  evidence  which 
will  take  the  Odes  to  an  earlier  period  than  that  of  Bardaisan. 

It  would  have  been  a  pleasure  to  endorse  Newbold's  suggestion 
of  the  Bardesanian  authorship  of  the  Odes,  which  came  up  also 
in  our  own  field  of  view.  Bardaisan  was,  no  doubt,  both  scholar 
and  saint,  a  Syrian  blend  of  Socrates  and  St.  John  ;  and  if  we 
could  prove  him  to  be  the  author  he  would  be  a  worthy  author,  for 
he  was  certainly  a  great  Christian,  and  perhaps  the  greatest  man 
that  Syria  ever  produced.  If  we  cannot  redeem  his  character 
from  the  aspersions  of  many  generations,  we  can  salute  him  with 
a  lowly  reverence  in  passing,  and  make  him  a  fixed  point  in  the 
inquiry  upon  which  we  are  engaged. 

Bardaisan's  period  of  literary  activity  is  the  latter  half  of  the 
second  century:  if  we  set  his  birth  in  A.D.  154  and  his  death  in 
A.D.  222,  we  conclude  that  the  Odes  (in  the  Syriac  form  in  which 
we  know  them)  were  perhaps  extant  in  Edessa  in  the  latter  part 
of  the  second  century.  There,  for  the  present,  our  first  line  of 
advance  stops :  we  cannot  get  any  earlier  Syriac  patristic  evi- 
dence :  it  stops  with  Bardaisan.  That  is  a  very  important  position 
gained. 

Our  next    line    of  investigation    runs  through    western    Syria. 

1  'Bardaisan  and  the  Odes  of  Solomon  ',  in  Journal  of  Biblical  Literature, 
vol.  xxx,  Part  II,  191 1. 


ORIGIN  AND  TIME  OF  COMPOSITION  OF  ODES     65 

We  can  begin,  if  we  please,  at  Jerusalem.  St.  Cyril's  Lectures  are 
valuable  in  many  ways  beside  the  light  they  throw  upon  the 
preparation  of  catechumens  in  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century, 
and  on  the  Jerusalem  rituals  of  that  date.  These  lectures  are 
based  upon  the  prophets  as  the  only  authority,  and  the  proof- texts 
are  in  the  main  those  which  occur  in  collections  of  Testimonies 
against  the  Jews.  He  constantly  indulges  in  side-thrusts  at  the 
Jews,  which  was  not  unnatural  considering  the  position  which  he 
occupied.  We  should  naturally  expect  that  a  writer  or  an  orator, 
who  practises  so  skilfully  the  art  of  quotation,  will  make  familiar 
use  of  a  book  like  the  Odes,  which  may  very  likely  have  been  still 
in  use  in  Jerusalem,  and  was  itself,  as  we  believe,  deeply  tinged 
with  anti-Judaism  and  closely  linked  with  the  early  Church  method 
of  teaching  by  Testimonies. 

Dr.  Bernard  has  suggested  that  in  the  prefatory  lecture  to  the 
catechumens  Cyril  has  actually  used  the  first  Ode,  and  the  parallel 
is  certainly  a  very  striking  one.  We  have  shown  that  Cyril  also 
quotes  from  the  42nd  Ode,  thus  establishing  his  acquaintance  with 
the  book  from  first  to  last  in  the  form  in  which  we  possess  it. 
There  is  more  light  to  be  thrown  on  the  Odes  by  Cyril,  and 
perhaps  more  actual  quotations  may  be  found  ;  but  even  where  we 
cannot  always  find  the  evidence  of  direct  citation  we  can  see  Cyril 
dealing  with  similar  problems  to  the  Odist,  and  sometimes  correcting 
the  explanations  of  the  latter.  For  example,  while  Cyril  approves 
of  the  reference  to  Christ  in  Psalm  xxii.  10  ('  thou  art  he  that  didst 
draw  me  out  of  my  mother's  womb  '),  he  will  not  introduce  God 
the  Father  as  operating  after  the  manner  of  a  midwife,  but  explains 
that  it  refers  to  the  drawing  of  flesh  from  the  substance  of  the 
Virgin.  When  again  he  is  interpreting  the  term  Mouogenes  as 
applied  to  Christ,  he  almost  always  interprets  it  to  mean  that 
Christ  had  no  brother :  this  is  what  the  Odist  makes  Christ 
Himself  say  ('  I  was  not  their  brother,  nor  my  birth  like  theirs', 
Ode  xxviii.  16);  so  that  both  writers  are  dealing  with  the  same 
problem,  but  we  must  not  say  that  Cyril  is  quoting  the  Ode:  he  is 


66  INTRODUCTION 

probably  making  a  popular  theological  statement  such  as  was  also 
familiar  to  the  Odist. 

Now  let  us  move  to  Caesarea  and  to  a  slightly  earlier  date. 
We  have  shown  the  importance  of  Kusebius  in  the  explanation  of  the 
Odes  by  pointing  out  a  number  of  positive  quotations  of  the  first 
importance.  As  in  the  case  of  Cyril,  these  references  are  sometimes 
Old  Testament  references  as  well  as  references  to  the  Odes.  Kusebius 
agrees  with  Cyril  in  the  use  of  conventional  Testimonia  adversus 
Tudaeos.  He  uses  the  22nd  Psalm  when  at  the  same  time  he  is  quoting 
the  Odes.  The  one  is  the  bridge  to  the  other.  These  Eusebian 
extracts  are  not  only  valuable  in  themselves  :  they  serve  to  bring 
the  Odes  with  themselves  into  a  theological  system,  into  a  propa- 
ganda of  an  anti-Judaic  character.  In  this  point  of  view  it  is 
peculiarly  important  to  find  so  much  stress  laid  upon  the  22nd 
Psalm.  The  use  made  of  this  Psalm  by  the  Odist,  Kusebius,  Cyril 
of  Jerusalem,  and  others,  shows  that  it  was  an  armoury  of  weapons 
for  controversy  with  the  Jews,  some  of  which  were  found  ready 
to  hand,  as  in  the  quotation  of  the  opening  words  of  the  Psalm 
by  the  Crucified,  and  some  of  which  appear  to  have  been  manu- 
factured artificially,  like  the  interpretation  of  the  '  extraction  of 
the  Messiah  from  the  womb  of  the  Virgin  '. 

It  will  be  agreed  that  Eusebius  must  have  been  familiar  with 
the  Odes  and  have  shared  some  points  of  view  with  the  Odist. 
He,  for  instance,  does  not  try  to  get  rid  of  the  description  of  God 
the  Father  as  fi.aiovfj.ei>o9,  in  the  way  that  Cyril  appears  to  do. 
Much  of  what  we  learnt  from  Eusebius  was  arrived  at  by  the  study 
of  that  much  neglected  book  the  Demonstratio  Evangeliea,  a  work 
which  is  based  from  first  to  last  on  excerpts  of  the  Septuagint, 
with  occasional  side-lights  from  the  Hebrew  or  the  Hcxaplaric 
versions.  The  Demonstratio  is,  in  fact,  a  Testimony  Book  with 
a  Commentary,  just  in  the  same  way  as  Cyril's  work  is  Lectures 
on  Testimonies  :  only,  where  Cyril  calls  them  'Testimonies.  Kusebius 
habitually  reverts  to  an  even  earlier  title  and  calls  them 
Login. 


ORIGIN  AND  TIME  OF  COMPOSITION  OF  ODES     67 

The  importance  of  these  observations  lies  in  the  fact  that 
Eusebius  was  working  on  Greek  texts  when  writing  his  Demon- 
stration and  we  may  infer  that  he  knew  the  Odes  also  in  Greek. 
Not  that  he  was  incapable  of  Syriac  scholarship,  as  we  know  from 
his  actual  use  of  Edessan  records  in  his  History  ;  but  there  does 
not  seem  to  be  any  reason  to  invoke  Syriac  at  this  point.  If, 
however,  any  one  should  object  to  the  statement,  made  absolutely, 
that  Eusebius  used  the  Odes  in  Greek,  the  question  can  remain 
open.  The  Greek  text  was  certainly  current  when  Eusebius 
wrote.  The  question  of  the  relative  priority  of  Greek  and  Syriac 
is  not  a  fourth-century  problem  :  it  belongs  a  good  deal  higher  up. 
In  connexion  with  Eusebius's  use  of  the  Odes  in  the  interpretation 
of  the  22nd  Psalm,  we  pointed  out  a  similar  use  in  the  case  of 
Theodoret.  He,  too,  interprets  the  mad  dogs  that  do  not  know 
their  master.  He,  too,  is  a  Syriac  scholar  in  a  bilingual  Church 
and  community.  We  think  it  is  possible  that  he  may  be  dependent 
upon  Eusebius ;  if  not,  he  is  working  on  the  same  tradition,  and 
may  be  reckoned  as  acquainted  with  the  Odes. 

Theodoret's  position  is  a  peculiar  one,  as  he  forms  a  link 
between  Antioch  and  Edessa.  It  will  be  remembered  that  he  was 
a  leading  agent  in  the  extrusion  of  the  Diatessaron  from  the 
churches  in  the  diocese  of  Cyrrhus.  This  probably  means  the 
Syriac-speaking  churches ;  but  he  himself  is  an  Antiochene,  born 
in  Antioch  in  the  closing  years  of  the  fourth  century,  and  brought 
up  in  a  monastery  not  far  from  Antioch.  It  is,  therefore,  natural 
for  us  to  turn  in  the  next  instance  to  Antioch  itself,  where  we  have 
been  fortunate  enough  to  detect  the  use  of  the  Odes  by  no  less 
a  person  than  Ignatius  the  Martyr.  If  the  parallels  which  we 
brought  forward  are  valid,  then  it  is  hardly  possible  to  refer  the 
Odes  to  any  other  time  than  the  first  century,  or  to  any  other 
district  than  Antioch.  The  question  of  the  original  language  of 
the  Odes  may  be  left  open  for  a  little  longer:  Ignatius  himself, 
though  we  know  him  by  Greek  writings  and  Greek  traditions,  is  in 
many  ways  more  like  a  Syrian  than  a  Greek ;    and  even  if  he 

F    2 


68  INTRODUCTION 

should  be  a  true  Greek  the  church  over  which  he  ruled  was  Syrian 
as  well  as  Greek. 

In  support  of  an  Antiochene  origin  for  the  Odes  we  have  urged 
above  that  another  bishop  of  Antioch.  somewhat  later  than 
Ignatius,  shows  traces  of  an  acquaintance  with  the  Odes.  This 
time  it  is  not  a  choice  between  Syriac  and  Greek,  for  Theophilus, 
who  writes  the  treatise  to  Autolycus,  in  the  year  A.n.  i6<S.  is 
educated  as  a  Greek  (though  perhaps  of  Mesopotamia!!  origin), 
familiar  with  the  Greek  poets  and  philosophers,  and  altogether 
diverse  in  character  from  Ignatius.  Vet  we  find  him  making  what 
seems  to  be  the  same  comparison  that  Ignatius  does,  of  the  heretics 
who  mingle  error  with  truth,  to  those  who  put  poisonous  drugs  in 
honey- wine  ;  and  we  also  find  him  using  language  concerning  the 
Sun  and  Moon  which  seems  to  deliberately  contradict  the  Odist, 
who  believes  the  two  great  lights  to  be  vessels,  which  are  filled 
alternately  one  from  the  other.  Here  again  the  antiquity  of  the 
Odes  appears  to  be  established,  as  well  as  the  area  in  .which  they 
are  most  at  home. 

Only  one  further  sub-Apostolic  writer  has  been  claimed  by  us 
as  a  possible  witness  to  the  Odes.  In  the  so-called  Epistle  of 
Barnabas  we  have  a  writing  commonly  referred  to  the  last  decade 
of  the  first  century,  or  the  first  decade  of  the  second  century,  and 
generally  supposed  to  bear  marks  of  an  Egyptian  ancestry.  The 
evidence  which  we  bring  forward  from  Barnabas  will  be  thought 
less  convincing  than  what  we  have  adduced  from  other  writers. 
It  is  not  altogether  negligible,  even  if  it  is  not  so  striking  as  that 
furnished  by  Ephrem,  Euscbius  or  Ignatius.  It  may  for  the  present 
be  covered  by  valeat  quantum. 

Our  second  line  of  advance  has  now  brought  us  very  nearly  into 
conjunction  with  the  first:  for  not  only  is  Edessa  religiously  and 
politically  adjacent  to  Antioch,  but  Bardaisan  spans  the  space 
between  them,  as  being  at  once  a  Greek  scholar  and  a  philosopher 
and  a  man  of  travel,  familiar  with  cities  and  with  men.  There  is 
no  difficulty  in  joining  up  the  communities  to  which  we  assign  the 


CHRIST   AND    SOLOMON  69 

earliest  traces  of  the  Odes ;  and  if  we  are  wrong  in  assigning  them 
as  written  at  Antioch  in  the  first  century,  we  are  not  far  wrong 
either  in  place  or  in  time. 


CHAPTER   V 
Christ  and  Solomon. 

A  FEW  words  may  be  thought  necessary  on  the  question  whether 
the  name  of  Solomon  attached  to  the  Odes  is  more  than  the  nom  de 
plume  of  the  author,  or  an  artificial  title  assimilating  the  new 
Christian  Psalter  to  the  ancient  Psalter  of  David,  or  to  the  already 
existing  Pharisee  Psalms  which  go  under  the  name  of  the  Psalter  of 
Solomon.  Clearly  there  is  no  necessity  to  involve  Solomon  in  the 
structure  of  the  Odes  because  his  name  is  on  the  cover.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  is  possible  that  there  may  be  a  Salomonic  influence 
in  their  composition.  For  instance,  the  fact  of  the  Odes  being 
bound  up  with  the  Old  Testament  in  certain  Greek  bibles,  as  we 
have  shown  to  be  probable,  would  mean  that  they  had  been 
grouped  with  other  writings  more  or  less  definitely  accredited  to 
Solomon.  If,  then,  we  should  find  that  there  were  traces  of  a 
strong  influence  on  the  Odes  from  the  Sapiential  books,  we  might 
be  led  to  suspect  that  they  had  been  composed  with  the  view 
of  continuing  the  Salomonic  tradition,  in  which  case  it  is  no  longer 
a  matter  of  a  mere  bookmaker's  or  bookseller's  title.  And  it  is 
certain  that  our  Odes  are  frequently  coloured  from  Sapiential 
books ;  the  margins  and  notes  of  this  edition  will  show  abundant 
evidence  on  this  head.  May  we  go  further  than  this,  and  is  it 
possible  that  the  history  as  well  as  the  supposed  writings  of 
Solomon  have  been  drawn  upon  for  incident  or  allusion  ?  Let  us 
take  a  case  which  is  parallel  to  our  inquiry.  The  Wisdom  of 
Solomon  affects  to  be  the  work  of  the  Wise  Man  of  Israel,  and 
it  imitates   very  effectively  the  noblest  passages   in   the  book   of 


;o  INTRODUCTION 

Proverbs,  frequently  borrowing  whole  sentences  by  way  of  justifying 

its  title.  But  it  does  more  than  this :  to  keep  up  the  illusion  of 
the  title,  it  brings  Solomon  himself  on  the  scene  and  makes  him 
tell  the  story  of  his  own  birth  and  education.  Three  whole 
chapters  (vii-ix)  tell  how  the  royal  babe  grew  up,  became  enamoured 
of  Wisdom  (whom  the  Most  High  also  loved),  and  prayed  that  she 
might  be  his  bride ;  the  prayer  is  given  in  detail  in  the  ninth 
chapter,  and  is  a  very  noble  aspiration.  It  is  therefore  open  to  us 
to  raise  the  question  whether  Solomon  may  not  be  involved  also  in 
the  Odes,  either  by  historical  allusion  or  by  quotation  from  his 
supposed  language  and  experience.  With  this  hangs  another  sup- 
position ;  we  know  that  Christ  in  certain  circles  in  the  Church 
occupied  a  quasi-Salomonic  position  ;  on  the  one  hand  He  was 
identified  with  the  Wisdom  of  the  Sapiential  books,  on  the  other 
He  was  identified  with  Solomon,  as  being  '  great  David's  greater 
Son  '  ;  and  one  of  the  Psalms  in  which  the  future  glories  of  Solomon 
are  described  was,  in  the  earliest  days  of  the  Christian  faith, 
pressed  into  the  service  of  theology.1 

It  seems  that  we  ought  at  least  to  contemplate  the  possibility 
of  some  such  influence  in  the  Odes  as  we  have  described,  say.  in  the 
Wisdom  of  Solomon.  For  example,  in  the  prayer  just  alluded  to 
we  have  the  requc.-t : 

•  Reject  me  not  from  among  thy  servants  (ttcllScov ) ; 
For  I  am  thy  servant  (SoOXos)  and  the  son  of  thy  handmaid.' 

It  is  curious  that  in  the  Odes  we  get  a  similar  refrain  :   the  29th 

Ode  ends  as  follows  : 

1  I  gave  praise  to  the  Most  High, 
Because  He  exalted  His  servant 
And  the  son  of  His  handmaid.' 

Apparently  Christ  is  here  referred  to.  The  language  may  be  con- 
ventional ;  or  again,  it  may  be  Salomonic. 

1  See  lJs.  lxxi  (lxxii),  'Give  the  King  thy  judgements',  &c,  and  the  comments 
of  the  earliest  Fathers  upon  it. 


CHRIST   AND    SOLOMON  71 

The  importance  of  the  inquiry  lies  in  the  possibility  that  it 
offers  of  elucidation  of  obscure  references  in  the  Odes.  It  is  not 
surprising  that  the  crown  with  which  the  Odist  is  adorned  in  the 
first  Ode  has  been  regarded  by  some  persons  as  the  nuptial  crown 
of  King  Solomon  in  the  Canticles :  '  the  crown  with  which  his 
mother  crowned  him  in  the  day  of  his  espousals ',  and  certainly  the 
first  Ode  is  of  the  nature  of  a  spiritual  epithalamium. 

Equally  suggestive  is  the  possibility  that  the  references  to  the 

Temple  on   the  part   of  the  Odist  may  find  their  explanation  in 

the  story  of  the  building  of  Solomon's  temple.     In  the  fourth  Ode 

it  has  been  conjectured  that  the  words 

'  Thou  hast  given  thy  heart,  O  Lord,  to  thy  believers '  (Ode  iv.  3), 

might  be  illustrated  by  the  promise  of  the  Lord  to  Solomon  that 

'My  eyes  and  my  heart  shall  be  there  continually' 

(2  Chron.  vii.  17), 

so  that  the  Odist  may  have  had  Solomon's  Temple  in  his  mind 
when  he  began  the  Ode  with  the  affirmation  that 

'  No  man,  O  my  God,  changeth  thy  holy  place.' 

For  we  find  in  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  in  the  prayer  which  we 
quoted  above,  the  same  assertion  of  the  eternity  and  immovability 
of  the  Divine  dwelling-place  : 

'  Thou  didst  bid  me  build  a  temple  in  thy  holy  mountain : 
And  an  altar  in  the  place  of  thy  tabernacling, 
An  imitation  of  the  holy  Tabernacle 
Which  thou  didst  prepare  from  the  beginning.' 

Sap.  Sol.  ix.  (S. 

These  words  may  furnish  us  with  the  very  key  that  we  need  to  the 
understanding  of  the  perplexing  fourth  Ode. 

The  writer  sees  two  temples,  one  the  Salomonic  building,  which 
can  be  changed  and  moved ;  the  other  and  elder,  the  spiritual 
sanctuary  of  which  the  Jewish  temple  is,  at  best,  the  transient 
mimicry.     Other  suggestions  may  be  made  in  the  same  directions. 


72  INTRODUCTION 

They  must  of  necessity  be  tentative  in  our  present  state  of  know- 
ledge and  of  criticism.  It  seems,  however,  to  be  proper  to  allude  to 
the  possibility  of  further  Salomonic  elucidations,  even  if  they  have, 
at  first,  to  be  covered  by  a  cautious  valeat  quantum. 

The  case  for  a  Salomonic  element  in  the  Odes  will  be  much 
strengthened,  if  our  interpretation  of  the  37th  Ode  should  acquire 
probability.  In  this  Ode  we.  have  suggested  that  the  Odist 
personates  Solomon  himself  in  his  prayer  at  the  Dedication  festival, 
and  in  his  subsequent  reception  of  a  gracious  message  from  God. 
Even  if  we  suppose  the  language  to  describe  the  Odist's  own 
experience  of  answered  prayer,  it  is  couched  in  the  language 
of  Solomon,  so  that  the  Odist  had  the  King  of  Israel  in  his  mind 
when  he  wrote :  that  is.  the  reference  of  the  Odes  to  Solomon 
belongs  to  the  original  collection,  and  not  to  the  hand  of  any  later 
bookseller  or  editor. 

We  may  also  refer  to  the  suggestion  made  by  several  who  have 
written  on  the  Odes,  that  it  is  Solomon,  under  his  other  name 
of  Jedidiah,  or  Beloved  of  the  Lord,  who  is  responsible  for  the 
appearance  of  the  'Beloved'  in  the  third  Ode.  Abbott  draws 
attention  to  the  language  employed  in  2  Samuel  xii.  24: 

'  There  is  in  the  second  book  of  Samuel  a  record  connecting 
"  love  "  with  the  anticipations  formed  by  some  about  the  infant 
king:  and  he  (i.e.  David)  called  his  name  Solomon.  And  the 
Lord  loved  him,  and  sent  by  the  hand  of  Nathan  the  prophet, 
and  he  called  his  name  Jcdidmh.' 


CHAPTER    VI 
The  Ch histology  01  the  Odes. 

Since  the  Odes  were  first  published  a  good  deal  of  light  has 
fallen,  from  one  quarter  or  another,  on  the  dogmatic  position  of  the 
writer,  and  especially  upon  his  Christology.  It  has,  for  instance, 
become  increasingly  clear  that  Christ  is  often  made  to  be  the  chief 


THE    CHRISTOLOGY    OF   THE   ODES  73 

speaker  in  the  Odes,  so  that  the  structure  of  an  Ode  can  be  resolved 
into  (i)  a  prologue  on  the  part  of  the  Odist ;  (ii)  an  oracular  state- 
ment made  ex  ore  Christi;  and  (iii)  a  doxology,  which  is  meant  for 
the  congregation  to  participate  in,  when  the  Ode  is  recited  or  sung. 
We  have  tried  to  indicate  the  transitions  between  the  parts  of  such 
Odes  by  the  insertion  of  the  words  Cliristus  loquitur  or  Doxo- 
logia ;  and  it  will  probably  be  found  that  the  understanding  of  the 
Ode  is  much  assisted  by  the  division  thus  made,  though  it  may 
be  admitted  that  there  will  be  a  margin  of  uncertainty  as  to  the 
points  where  the  dividing  chasms  have  to  be  placed.  By  making 
Christ  speak  for  Himself  the  Odist  secures  a  position  of  literary 
advantage  for  the  enunciation  of  dogmatic  truth.  It  is  almost 
equivalent  to  the  '  thus  saith  the  Lord '  of  the  ancient  prophet, 
or  the  words  of  Paul  when  he  affirms  that  '  this  we  say  unto  you  by 
the  word  of  the  Lord '.  Indeed,  the  Odist  sometimes  casts  his 
thought  of  personal  inspiration  into  this  very  mould,  as,  for  instance, 
when  he  asks  (Ode  xxvi),  '  Who  can  so  rest  (or,  Oh  !  that  one  could 
so  rest)  on  the  Most  High,  that  with  (God's)  mouth  he  may  speak?', 
language  which  recalls  Jeremiah  xv.  ly,  'Thou  shalt  be  as  my 
mouth '.  The  singer  is,  in  fact,  a  prophet  as  well  as  a  poet,  and 
uses  prophetic  formulae  and  prophetic  emphasis. 

We  might  take  as  an  illustration  of  the  illumination  which 
is  thus  cast  upon  the  Odes  a  specimen  Ode  like  the  28th,  of  which 
the  editio  princeps  was  not  able  to  say  more  than  that  '  in  some 
respects  the  Psalm  appears  to  be  Messianic  in  a  Christian  sense,  for 
the  writer  concludes  his  exulting  strain  over  enemies  who  had  come 
round  him  like  mad  dogs,  and  had  left  him  for  dead,  with  the 
remark  that  it  was  not  possible  for  them  to  blot  out  the  memory  of 
one  who  existed  before  them,  and  who  was  of  a  different  birth 
from  theirs ' ;  and  it  was  added  that  '  Perhaps  the  writer  is  speaking 
in  these  verses,  as  if  in  the  Person  of  Christ '. 

The  hesitation  was  quite  proper  to  a  first  inquiry,  but  it  may  be 
finally  laid  aside.  The  passage  about  '  mad  dogs  that  ignorantly 
attack  their  master'  has  been  definitely  recognized  in  Eusebius  and 


74  INTRODUCTION 

in  Theodoret  as  an  expansion  and  interpretation  of  the  22nd  Psalm, 
and  further  investigation  shows  other  traces  of  the  same  Psalm, 
interpreted  Messianically. 

The  statement  that  'I  was  not  their  brother,  nor  my  birth  like 
theirs ',  has  been  shown  to  cover  the  doctrine  that  the  Son  of  God 
is  Monogenes  or  Only- begotten,  without  a  brother,  and  that  His 
birth  was  miraculous.  The  evidence  of  Cyril  of  Jerusalem,  to  which 
we  have  referred  above,  will  be  found  to  be  decisive  on  the  first 
of  the  points  involved.  Thus  Christ  is  certainly  the  speaker,  and 
says  definitely  in  the  Ode  : 

•  I  am  the  Only-Begotten  Son, 
I  am  miraculously  born,' 

just  as  He  is  the  speaker  in  the  22nd  Psalm,  according  to  the  view 
of  primitive  Christians. 

Yet  it  is  not  easy  to  mark  the  exact  point  where  the  Ode 
modulates,  so  that  the  Odist's  '  I '  becomes  the  '  I '  of  the  Messiah. 
Probably  the  change  of  key  is  at  the  words : 

'  They  who  saw  me  marvelled  at  me.' 

We  should  then  have  an  exactly  parallel  situation  to  that  in  the 
41st  Ode  where  the  Odist  stops  his  own  recitative  with  the  words  : 

•  Let  us  exult  with  the  joy  of  the  Lord.' 

and  the  Lord  begins  with  : 

•  All  they  that  see  me  will  be  astonished  at  me,' 

and  continues  certainly  as  far  as  the  stanza  : 

'  The  (Father  of  Truth)  possessed  me  from  the  beginning  : 
His  wealth  begat  me,  and  the  thought  of  His  heart.' 

Even  where  we  have  to  allow  a  margin  of  residual  uncertainty  for 
the  translation  from  speaker  to  speaker,  it  is  a  great  advantage  to 
have  dogmatic  statements  made  as  if  by  Christ  Himself  at  first 
hand. 


THE    CHRISTOLOGY    OF   THE     ODES  ?$ 

The  last  instance  to  which  we  referred  leads  to  another  very 
important  discovery,  which  has  gradually  drawn  the  attention  of  the 
students  of  the  Odes.  In  the  words  just  referred  to  Christ  is 
speaking  not  only  in  His  own  person,  but  in  the  person  of  Wisdom, 
for  the  language  is  borrowed  from  the  eighth  chapter  of  Proverbs  : 

'  The  Lord  possessed  me  in  the  beginning  of  His  way.' 

Prov.  viii.  2,2. 

Thus  Christ  is  made  to  say  that  '  He  is  the  Wisdom  of  God',  and 
this  is  only  one  of  a  series  of  passages  in  which  the  Christology  of 
the  Odist  is  based  upon  the  Sapiential  books.  It  is  hardly  necessary 
to  remind  the  dogmatic  theologian  of  the  importance  which  the 
eighth  chapter  of  Proverbs  plays  in  the  history  and  evolution  of 
the  Nicene  Symbol,  but  it  is  necessary,  both  for  the  understanding 
of  the  Odes  and  of  the  primitive  Christology,  to  point  out  that 
other  Sapiential  books  are  treated  in  the  same  way  as  we  have 
seen  the  Odist  treat  Proverbs,  and  that  the  seventh  chapter  of 
the  Wisdom  of  Solomon  in  particular  is  a  rich  and  fertile  soil 
for  the  growth  of  Christian  formulae.  Here,  for  example,  we  find 
Wisdom  defined  as  Monogenes,  as  an  airavyao-fia  or  Effulgence 
of  God,  as  an  dnoppoLa  or  Efflux  of  His  glory,  as  an  oltjils  or 
Emanation  of  His  power,  and  as  an  'iao-nTpov  or  Mirror  of  His 
activity.  Monogenes  needs  no  explanation ;  it  is  fundamental  to 
the  Christian  Symbol ;  the  Effulgence  also  is  well-known,  since 
it  passed  from  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon  to  the  Wisdom  of  the 
writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  We  shall  show  in  another 
place  the  importance  of  the  doctrine  of  Efflux,  both  for  the  under- 
standing of  the  Odes  and  of  the  Pistis  Sophia,  as  well  as  for  its 
Nicene  relations.  It  is  curious  that  the  Odist  treats  it  as  the  Efflux 
of  an  irresistible  stream  of  Water,  while  the  Pistis  Sophia  makes  it  an 
outburst  of  Light.  Origen  in  his  commentary  on  Romans  leans  to 
the  interpretation  of  the  Pistis  Sophia,  and  so  does  Athenagoras. 

The  Lord  as  the  Mirror  is  the  key  to  the  very  beautiful 
13th  Ode  in  our  collection. 


76  INTRODUCTION 

The  knowledge  that  Wisdom-texts  arc  being  employed  by  the 
Odist  makes  it  interesting  to  inquire  whether  there  are  any  traces 
of  the  definition  of  Wisdom  (or  the  Sophia-Christ)  under  the 
connotation  of  dr/ii's. 

It  will  help  us  to  understand  the  part  which  these  terms  drp.h, 
dnoppoia,  and  dnavyao~f.ia  have  played  in  the  definition  of  Christ  as 
the  Wisdom  of  God,  if  we  transcribe  some  passages  from  the  Com- 
mentary of  Origen  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  : 

'  Cum  autem  discutitur  hoc  quod  dictum  est  de  Filio  Dei, 
quod  est  splendor  gloriae  (sc.  dnavyaafia),  necessario  videtur 
simul  disserendum  ct  illud  quod  dictum  est,  non  solum  quod 
splendor  est  lucis  aetcrnae,  sed  et  quod  huic  simile  in  Sapientia 
Salomonis  refertur,  in  qua  seipsam  Sapientia  describit  dicens  : 
Vapor  enim  est  virtutis  Dei,  et  aporrJiaea  gloriae  Omnipotcntis 
purissivia  (Sap.  vii.  25). 

Oportct  autem  scire  nos  quia  per  ineffabilia  quaedam,  et 
secreta  ac  recondita  quemdam  modum  sibi  faciens,  Scriptura 
Sancta  conatur  hominibus  indicare,  et  intellectum  suggerere 
subtilem  ;  vaporis  enim  nomen  inducens  hoc  ideo  de  rebus 
corporalibus  assumpsit,  et  vel  ex  parte  aliqua  intclligere 
possimus,  quomodo  Christus,  qui  est  Sapientia,  secundum 
similitudinem  eius  vaporis  qui  de  substantia  aliqua  corporali  pro- 
cedit,  sic  etiam  ipse  ut  quidam  vapor  exoritur  de  virtute  ipsius 
Dei :  sic  et  Sapientia  ex  co  procedens,  ex  ipsa  Dei  Substantia 
generatur.  Sic  nihilominus  et  secundum  similitudinem  cor- 
poralis  aporrhaeae,  et  dicitur  "  aporrhaca  gloriae  Omnipotentis 
pura  quaedam  et  sincera".  Quae  utraque  similitudinis  mani- 
festissime  ostendunt  communionem  substantiae  esse  P'ilio  cum 
Patre.  Aporrhaea  enim  6/xooi'<xio?  videtur,  id  est,  unius 
substantiae  cum  illo  corpore  ex  quo  est  vel  aporrhaea,  vel 
vapor.' 

These  comments  show  how  Christ  was  identified  with  Wisdom 
on  the  one  hand,  and  with  the  descriptions  of  Wisdom  on  the  other, 
and  how  the  Nicene  formula  was  anticipated.  In  the  argument  of 
Origen   dnoppoia   and    drpiis    are  a  pair  of  corporeal   illustrations 


THE    CHRISTOLOGY    OF   THE    ODP2S  77 

of  the  Homoousian  doctrine.  We  have  found  the  airoppoia  in  the 
Odes,  let  us  now  look  for  the  ar/xt's-. 

Gressmann  thinks  that  instead  of  Jl*joI  in  Ode  xii.  5  (expression), 
we  should  at  the  second  time  read  U->i  (=  aTjiis),  so  as  to  render : 

'  The  swiftness  of  the  Word  is  inexpressible, 
Like  an  oltjiis  is  its  swiftness  and  its  sharpness.' 

Some  such  restoration  seems  necessary,  and  if  it  can  be  justified, 
then  the  drfjiis  as  well  as  the  dnoppoia  is  a  part  of  the  intellectual 
furniture  of  the  Odist.  See  further  our  note  on  the  verse  in 
question. 

•  As  soon  as  we  have  detected  in  the  Odes  at  any  point  the  use 
of  the  Sapiential  terms  to  which  we  have  been  referring,  we  see  that 
the  pre-existence  of  Christ  is  affirmed  in  the  generation  of  the 
Divine  Wisdom,  to  which  Origen  would  add  that  the  consubstan- 
tiality  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  is  also  involved  :  but  the  Odist 
will  hardly  have  seen  as  far  into  possible  controversy  as  this.  He 
is  nearer  to  the  Pauline  position  that  '  Christ  is  the  Power  of  God 
and  the  Wisdom  of  God  ',  without  undue  elaboration  of  what  is 
involved  in  that  doctrine. 

Where  the  Odist  does  seem  to  be  face  to  face  with  controversial 
matter  is  in  the  41st  Ode,  where  Christ  is  described  as  the  Word 
that  was  beforetime  in  the  Father,  after  which  the  Odist  adds  : 

'  The  Christ  is  truly  One  : 
And  He  was  known  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.' 

The  words  '  The  Christ  is  truly  one ',  taken  along  with  the  other 
statements  as  to  His  pre-existence,  suggest  a  controversy  over  a 
division  in  the  Nature  of  Christ,  such  a  controversy  as  finds  reflec- 
tion in  the  first  Epistle  of  John  (1  John  iv.  3)  where  we  are 
told  that 

itav  7ruevp.a  6  Xvei  tov  'I-qcrovv  e/c  rov  Oeov  ouk  eo-riv, 

and  where  some  Docetic  fission  of  the  Nature  of  the  Son  appears 
to  be  contemplated.      It  would  be,  however,  premature  to  affirm 


;S  INTRODUCTION 

that  the  Christology  of  the  Odist  can  at  all  points  be  compressed 
within  the  limits  of  orthodox  definition,  for  at  the  early  date  to 
which  we  have  referred  the  composition  of  the  Odes  it  was  easier 
to  be  unorthodox  than  to  be  logically  exact. 

In  regard  to  the  Incarnation,  we  have  had  the  advantage  of 
a  slight  improvement  in  the  translation  of  a  passage  in  the  seventh 
Ode.  which  we  are  now  able  to  recognize  as  having  been  quoted 
by  Eusebius.  As  we  have  already  discussed  the  passage  in  the 
chapter  on  Quotations  from  the  Odes  in  the  early  Fathers,  it  is  only 
necessary  to  remind  ourselves  that  the  verses  : 

1  He  hath  caused  me  to  know  Himself, 
Without  grudging  in  His  simplicity. 
Because  His  kindness  hath  minished  His  greatness.' 

Ode  vii.  3. 

are  accurately  reflected  in  Eusebius,  who,  in  his  comment  on  the 
144th  Psalm,  speaks  of  Christ  as 

-179    deoTTjTos    VTTojSas    Kal    rov    av/jUpvovs    /xeytOovs    iavrbv 
afjLiKpvi'as. —  Euseb.  D.  E.  vi.  9,  p.  267. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  verses  in  the  Ode  are  descriptive  of 
the  Incarnation. 

Enough  has  been  said  to  show  that  the  Odist  is  a  person  of  no 
slight  theological  knowledge,  and  that  the  terms  he  employs  are, 
for  the  most  part,  theologically  correct. 

It  is  increasingly  clear  that  the  Christology  of  the  Odes  is 
based  (i)  upon  the  prophecies,  and  those  passages  which  were 
assumed  to  be  prophetical,  in  the  Old  Testament  ;  (ii)  upon  the 
descriptions  of  Wisdom  in  the  Sapiential  literature.  Under  the 
first  head,  as  we  have  seen,  the  Psalms  occupy  an  extraordinary 
place,  and  amongst  the  Psalms,  such  as  have  always  been  held 
to  be  Messianic.  The  22nd  Psalm  in  particular  has  thrown  great 
light  on  the  composition  of  the  Odes.  The  Odes  make  Christ 
speak  in  his  own  person,  and  the  language  spoken  is  a  reflection 
from  the  Psalms.     This  need  not  surprise  us,  for  the  same  thing 


THE    CHRISTOLOGY   OF   THE    ODES  79 

which  the  Odist  did  in  poetry  the  evangelical  historian  did  in  prose. 
We  do  not  yet  know  whether  those  incidents  in  the  Gospel  which 
reflect  the  language  of  the  22nd  Psalm,  for  example,  are  all  of 
them  genuine  history  ;  but  we  may  be  sure  that  in  some  cases  the 
imagination  of  the  writer  has  been  assisted  and  the  language  found 
for  him  by  the  Psalms  with  which  he  was  familiar,  or  which  he 
may  actually  have  studied  for  coincidence.  Take,  for  example, 
St.  Luke's  allusion  to  the  '  acquaintance  of  our  Lord,  who  stood 
afar  off'  at  the  time  of  the  Crucifixion:  the  incident  is  natural 
enough,  but  the  language 


*£>"> 


£i<TTr)K*.icrav  Se  ttolvtzs  01  yicocrTol  avrS>  dnb  fiaKpoOtv, 

Luke  xxiii.  49, 

is  based  on  the  Psalms  :  the  margin  of  Nestle's  New  Testament 
carries  the  references  (from  Hort)  to  Psalms  lxxxviii.  8,  xxxviii.  11, 
and  underlines  as  above,  the  precedence  being  given  to  Psalm 
lxxxviii.  9.  which  in  the  LXX  is: 

efidtcpvi'as  tovs  yvcocrTov<;  fiov  an'  tfiov' 
edti'TO  /ie  fiSeXvyfxa  eavrois' 

This  recognition  of  our  Lord's  '  acquaintance '  in  the  narration  of 
Luke  helps  us  to  the  understanding  of  a  difficult  passage  in  the 
opening  of  the  42nd  Ode,  which  runs  as  follows  (the  text  had  lost 
a  clause  in  the  Rylands  MS.  which  we  have  restored  from  the 
Nitrian  MS.) : 

'  I  became  of  no  use  to  those  who  know  me  ; 
For  I  shall  hide  myself 
From  those  who  did  not  take  hold  of  me  ; 
And  I  shall  be  with  those  who  love  me.' 

The  speaker  is  certainly  Christ,  as  was  indicated  in  the  cditio 
princeps  by  a  note  attached  to  the  opening  clause.  It  is  clear  that 
the  language  is  again  that  of  the  <S8th  Psalm;    'those  who  know 


So  INTRODUCTION 

mc '  is  tovs  yvaHrrofo  p-ov  of  the  I. XX:  the  words  'I  became  of 
no  use '  refleel 

kyivffOrjv  coy  ai'Opconos  dj3o7J6rjTos. 

in  the  >ixth  verse  of  the  same  Psalm,  the  opening  clause  of  the 
Ode  being  quam proxime  in  Greek: 

tyer?/#?/r  cl>?  d(3orj6rjTO<i  tois  yvaxTTols  pov. 

The  Greek  df3or}0T)Tos  in  the  sense  of  'helpless'  is  not  badly 
represented  by  the  Syriac  o.***—  L^.  '  no  use ',  and  it  is  possible 
that  here  also  we  may  be  able  to  convict  the  Syriac  of  being 
secondary. 

What  is  of  more  importance  at  this  point  is  that  we  have  found 
the  clue  to  the  interpretation  and  the  composition  of  the  Ode. 
The  Psalm  has  been  taken  as  prophetic  of  the  Descent  into  Hades, 
an  interpretation  which  is  invited  by  the  words 

i)  ^a>?/  pov  T(S  dSrj  tfyyicrei'. 
and  which  was  commonly  assumed  to  underlie  the  words 
kv  veKpoi?  eAeiJ^epoy 

So  in  the  Ode,  the  words  c  I  went  down  with  him  to  its  utmost 
depth  \  reflect  Psalm  Ixxxvii  (lxxxviii)  7  : 

eOei'To  fie  kv  XdxKco  KaTcordra)' 

We  also  have  the  key  to  the  opening  words  of  the  Ode.  for  the 
Psalm  tells  us  in  the  tenth  verse: 

kcu  tKtKpa£a  npbs  ai,  Kvpie,  6'A?;;'  -?)/'  i)pepai>' 
SL^ntracra  ra?  \eipds  pov 

So  the  opening  words  ol  the  (  )de  in  reference  to  the  stretching  out 
the  hands  and  approaching  the  Lord,  are  to  be  either  referred  to 
Christ  Himself,  or  they  are  anticipative  and  mimetic  of  one  of  the 
verses  in  the  Psalm,  -the  stretching  out  the  hands  being  His 
sign  ',  which  the  writer  has  identified  in  the  Psalm.1 

1  We  find  the  sun.'  quotation  in  Altercatio  Simonis  et  Theophili,  vi.  zz. 


THE   CHRISTOLOGY   OF  THE   ODES  81 

That  the  Psalm  in  question  early  supplied  Testimonies  to  the 
Death  and  Resurrection  of  Christ  appears  certain,  though  some 
leading  exegetes  like  Theodoret  (following,  no  doubt,  the  lead  of 
Theodore)  prefer  to  interpret  the  whole  Psalm  of  the  Jews  in 
captivity. 

In  the  Testimonia  of  Gregory  of  Nyssa,  we  find  under  the 
chapter  on  the  Cross  (cap.  vii) : 

Kctl  irdXiv'  eOevro  p.e  kv  X&kkco  KarcoTaro) 

(Psalm  lxxxvii  (lxxxviii)  7). 

and  in  the  chapter  on  the  Resurrection  (cap.  viii) : 

kccl  ttolXlv  kyivrjOrjv  oxxet  avOpconos  dj3orj6r]TO$,  kv  veicpoLS 
eXtvOepos  (Psalm  lxxxvii  (lxxxviii)  6. 

Cyril  of  Jerusalem  takes  the  whole  Psalm  to  be  spoken  ex  ore 
Christi,  and  refers  to  the  words  just  quoted  (see  Cat.  xiv.  8),  which 
we  have  shown  to  underlie  the  speech  of  Christ  in  Ode  xlii.  3. 
Augustine  also,  commenting  upon  the  Psalm,  says : 

1  Let  us  therefore  now  hear  the  voice  of  Christ  singing  before 
us  in  prophecy,  to  whom  His  own  choir  should  respond  either 
in  imitation  or  in  thanksgiving.' 

We  said  that  it  could  be  proved  from  the  language  of  Cyril  of 
Jerusalem,  that  the  Odist  believed  Christ  to  be  (1)  Monogenes  or 
Only-Begotten ;  (2)  Miraculously  born.  The  passage  which  we 
were  discussing  was  as  follows  : 

'  I  was  not  their  brother, 
Nor  my  birth  like  theirs.' — Ode  xxviii.  16. 

The  language  is,  at  first  sight,  somewhat  alien  to  the  Spirit  of  the 
Incarnation  :  there  is  a  touch  of  contempt  mingled  with  its  necessary 
superiority.  It  does  not  square  with  Paul's  interpretation  of  Christ 
as  the  First-born  among  many  brethren,  nor  with  the  writer  to  the 
Hebrews  in  saying  that  he  took  part  in  the  flesh  and  blood  of 
the  children.  It  would  be  easier  to  find  patristic  parallels  to  the 
"  G 


82  INTRODUCTION 

second  clause  (my  birth  not  like  theirs')  than  to  the  first  clause, 
'  I  was  not  their  brother '.  Let  us  see  if  we  can  find  the  key  to  the 
language.  It  is  clear  that  the  Odist  is  not  speaking  of  Christ  as 
the  irpoiToroKos  (the  first  stage  of  evolution  of  the  Wisdom  doctrine, 
according  to  which  Wisdom  was  God's  First-born,  and  Christ  was 
the  Wisdom  of  God) :  the  alternative  term  to  TrpcororoKo?  is  fj.oi'0- 
ytvrjs,  the  former  representing  Pauline  Christology,  the  later 
Johanninc.  It  can  be  shown  that  it  is  to  this  term  iiovoyevrjs  that 
the  explanation  belongs  of  the  words  '  I  was  not  their  brother '. 
in  the  sense  that  the  Only-Begotten  has  no  brothers. 

Suppose  we  turn,  then,  to  the  Catechetical  Lectures  of  Cyril  of 
Jerusalem  :  we  find  the  following  statements  : 

'  A  Son  Only-Begotten,  having  no  other  for  His  brother ; 
for  therefore  is  He  called  Only-Begotten,  because  He  has  no 
brother.' — Cat.  xi.  2. 

'  When  thou  hearest  of  the  First-born,  think  not  that  this  is 
according  to  men  ;  for  the  first-born  among  men  may  have 
other  brothers  also' — Cat.  xi.  4. 

'  Neither  has  He  who  begat,  a  father,  nor  He  who  is  begotten, 

a  brother The  Father  being  eternal,  eternally  and 

ineffably  begat  One  Only  Son,  who  has  no  brother.' — Cat.  xi.  13. 

'  As  there  is  One  God  the  Father  and  no  second  Father : 
and  as  there  is  One  Only-Begotten  Son  and  Word  of  God,  who 
has  no  brother.'' — Cat.  xvi.  3. 

Thus,  according  to  Cyril,  we  are  to  interpret  '  Only-Begotten ' 
in  the  sense  of  not  having  a  brother  ;  and  even  the  term  First-born 
has  to  be  used  judiciously  for  fear  the  conclusion  should  be  drawn 
that  Christ  had  brothers.  We  may,  therefore,  take  it  as  the 
meaning  of  the  Odist  that  Christ  is  the  Only-Begotten  and  is 
miraculously  born.  This  does  not  mean  that  the  Odist  is  using 
St.  John,  but  that  he  has  a  theology  parallel  to  the  Johannine. 
He  is  nearer  to  the  Gospel  of  John  than  he  is  to  the  Epistle  to  the 
Colossians.     Dependence,  however,  is  not  proved,  for  Monogenes 


THE   CHRISTOLOGY   OF   THE   ODES  83 

is  one  of  the  terms  that  is  taken  over  from  the  description  of 
Wisdom,  and  not  necessarily  borrowed  from  the  Gospel. 

The  difficulty  of  reconciling  the  two  titles  of  Christ,  povoywqs  and 
trpodroTOKoS)  must  have  been  felt  very  early :  and  it  remained  as  an 
objection  which  heretics  employed  against  the  Nicene  faith.  Basil, 
in  his  treatise  against  Eunomius,  meets  the  objection  by  saying 
that  one  can  be  first-born  without  introducing  any  brothers,  for 
was  not  Christ  called  the  first-born  son  of  the  Virgin! 

a>CTT€  ouk  avayKrj  a§e\(f)OV  TTpuroroKOV  XeyecrOaL. 

The  objector's  case  was  stated  as  follows  : 

el   npooroTOKOs    0    TI69,   ovk£tl    p.ovoyevr}S'  dXX'   SfaiXei    Kal 
d'AAoy  efvai,  ov  npcoroTOKOs  Xeyercu. — Adv.  Eunotn.  iv  (292  E). 

It  was  assumed  that  Monogenics  meant  brotherless :  but  first-born 
could  not  mean  that. 

Basil's  argument  was  a  mere  evasion,  for  the  terms  in  dispute 
were  not  used  of  the  natural  birth  of  Christ. 

Up  to  this  point  the  inquiry  into  the  doctrine  of  Christ  that 
is  held  by  the  Odist  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  Nicene  in 
a  nascent-  form.  There  is  no  doubt  as  to  the  pre-existence  of 
Christ  "(Ode  xli.  15,  &c.)  or  to  His  pre-eminence ;  He  is  the  Head 
of  the  Church  and  believers  are  His  members  (Ode  xvii.  15,  &c). 
He  is  the  Word  of  God  (Ode  xvi.  8,  19  ;  xli.  11,  14 ;  vii.  7  ;  xii.  5, 
12;  xxxii.  2)  and  the  Wisdom  of  God  (Ode  vii.  8;  xli.  9);  the 
unique  Messiah  miraculously  born  (Ode  xxviii.  »6).  Against  the 
Docetists  the  Odist  is  firm  that  the  Christ  is  One  (Ode  xli.  15), 
against  the  Jews  that  He  is  the  Lord  (Ode  xxix.  6). 

There  are,  however,  some  elements  of  a  heretical  or  incompletely 
developed  character  in  the  Odist 's  views.  In  two  places,  perhaps, 
the  Christ  is  spoken  of  as  one  of  the  Divine  Neighbours  (Ode 
xxi.  7 ;  xxxvi.  6),  an  expression  which  co-ordinates  Him  with  the 
angels  in  rank ;  in  the  36th  Ode,  the  statement  is  made  almost 
as  in  the  Koran,  where  Jesus  is  called  '  one  of  those  that  are  near 

G  2 


«4  INTRODUCTION 

to  God' ;  and  in  that  very  same  Ode  we  have  the  Odist's  description 
of  Christ  as  '  Most  Glorified  among  the  Glorious  and  Greatest 
among  the  Great  Ones'.  It  will  take  some  justifying  to  make 
these  expressions  theologically  innocuous. 

The  Odist's  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is,  as  we  have  already 
seen,  so  unorthodox  in  its  subordination  of  the  Spirit  to  the  Son, 
that  Ephrem  had  to  alter  it.  In  one  place  in  the  Ode  already 
referred  to  (Ode  xxxvi.  3)  the  Spirit  is  represented  as  the  Mother  of 
Christ!  (we  find  a  similar  statement  in  Aphrahat,  Dem.  xviii, 
col.  840). 

When  we  come  to  the  Passion  of  Christ  we  do  not  find  anything 
that  we  can  call  a  doctrine  of  the  Atonement  in  the  Pauline  sense 
of  the  word  :  he  does  not  teach  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  but  only  the 
abolition  of  ignorance,  a  very  good  doctrine  and  deserving  a  place 
in  the  creed,  but  not  exactly  the  same  as  the  other.  The  Odist  is, 
however,  well  acquainted  with  the  details  of  the  Passion,  especially 
where  such  details  arc  accompanied  by  prophetical  correspondence. 

If  the  writer  is  un-Pauline  in  the  matter  of  the  sacrificial  aspect 
of  Christ's  death,  he  is  equally  un-Pauline  in  the  article  of  His 
resurrection.  A  single  doubtful  allusion  exhausts  his  reference  to  it 
(Ode  xxxi.  11).  The  fact  is  that  he  is  like  Bardaisan  on  the 
question  of  the  Resurrection  ;  he  doesn't  hold  his  doctrine  of  the 
future  life  in  that  form :  we  may  call  him  unorthodox  or  not 
according  to  our  predilections.  The  Odist  believes  in  eternal  life 
as  attainable  and  attained  in  the  present  life ;  this  reduces  his 
doctrine  of  the  last  things  almost  to  zero ;  it  is  possible,  however, 
that  in  this  direction  we  may  find  further  reason  for  classifying  him 
as  a  Johannine  Christian,  in  view  of  the  very  limited  eschatological 
outlook  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.  If  the  Odist  is  weak  on  the  article 
of  the  Resurrection  he  makes,  on  the  other  hand,  a  speciality  of  the 
Descent  into  Hades,  as  our  notes  will  abundantly  show. 

Enough  has  been  said  to  indicate  the  place  of  the  Odist  in 
schools  of  Christian  thought. 


THE  ODES  AND  THE  BIBLICAL  TARGUM         85 

CHAPTER   VII 

The  Odes  and  the  Biblical  Targum. 

We  find  in  the  course  of  our  examination  into  the  linguistic 
phenomena  which  are  offered  by  the  Odes  that  there  are  cases, 
apparently  of  an  indubitable  character,  where  the  Odes  have  come 
under  the  influence  of  the  Targums ;  and  if  this  can  be  established 
there  are  two  directions  in  which  the  influence  may  have  come  into 
play :  first  of  all,  there  is  the  natural  and  direct  use  of  the  Targum 
by  a  person  who  has  a  knowledge  of  the  Hebrew  language,  or, 
at  least,  of  its  related  Aramaic  ;  second,  there  is  a  possible  influence 
through  the  Syriac  version  of  the  Old  Testament,  which  (like  the 
Old  Syriac  Version  of  the  New  Testament)  occasionally  shows 
traces  of  a  Targumist  hand.  Thus  the  question  of  Targumist 
influence  is  of  importance  in  the  determination  of  the  original 
language  of  the  Odes.  If,  for  instance,  there  should  be  a  probability 
that  the  original  form  of  the  Peshitta  version  of  the  Old  Testament 
showed  at  any  point  the  same  trace  of  Targum  that  we  find  in  the 
Odes,  the  natural  conclusion  would  be  that  the  Ode  in  question  has 
imitated  the  Peshitta  text,  and  is  itself  a  Syriac  product.  If,  how- 
ever, any  of  the  Odes,  using  Biblical  matter,  shows  traces  of  the 
Targum,  where  the  corresponding  passage  in  the  Peshitta  does  not 
show  it,  then  (unless  the  Peshitta  has  corrected  its  Targumisms 
away)  the  Odist  had  access  to  the  Targum  outside  the  Peshitta, 
and  may  probably  be  independent  of  the  Syriac  version.  We  shall 
see  presently  how  to  apply  these  criteria.  Meanwhile,  if  the  traces 
of  the  Targum  can  be  detected,  we  may  say  in  advance  that  it 
is  extremely  improbable  that  the  Odes  were  composed  in  Greek. 
It  would  almost  reduce  the  choice  of  origins  to  Hebrew,  Aramaic, 
or  Syriac.  We  reserve,  of  course,  the  case  of  a  bilingual  writer, 
who  should  be  at  home  both  in  Greek  and  in  Semitic.  How,  then, 
shall  we  establish   our  statement  as  to  the  existence  of  cases  of 


86  INTRODUCTION 

Targumism  in  the  Odes  ?  For  the  detailed  evidence  in  individual 
cases  we  must  refer  to  the  notes  under  the  Odes  in  question :  but 
some  general  statements  may  be  made.  The  first  suspicious  case 
upon  which  we  stumbled  was  in  the  first  Ode  of  the  collection, 
which  showed  an  inner  connexion  with  the  first  Psalm  in  the 
canonical  Psalter,  in  its  allusions  to  a  never-withering  and  always 
fruitful  crown  upon  the  head  of  the  Odist.  '  His  leaf  also  shall  not 
wither ',  '  He  brings  forth  his  fruit  in  his  season ',  being,  in  fact, 
a  tree  of  righteousness,  well-placed  by  abundant  streams  of  water. 
Then,  at  the  end  of  the  Ode,  came  the  obscure  remark,  '  Thy  fruits 
are  full  and  perfect,  full  of  thy  salvation '.  The  suggestion  arose 
whether  this  could  be  the  equivalent  of  the  sentence  in  the  first 
Psalm  that  '  whatsoever  he  doeth  shall  prosper '.  Could  the  words 
'  he  doeth  '  refer  to  the  '  tree  '  which  immediately  precedes  ?  In  that 
case  the  '  doing '  of  the  tree,  as  in  the  first  chapter  of  Genesis 
('tree  of  fruit,  making  fruit'),  is  the  fruit  that  it  produces.  And  if 
this  fruit  is  prosperous  the  words  '  full  and  perfect '  are  the  natural 
comment.  At  this  point  we  turn  to  the  Targum  and  find  that 
it  has  made  this  very  explanation;  and,  curious  to  say,  one-half  of 
the  explanation,  the  '  perfectness  '  of  the  fruit,  survives  in  the  text 
of  the  Peshitta,  which  does  not,  however,  make  it  clear  that  it  is  the 
tree  that  is  making  a  perfect  product. 

This  is  a  very  good  case  to  begin  with  :  it  shows  that  there  is 
a  nexus  between  the  Ode  and  the  first  Psalm  in  matter  that  is  derived 
from  the  Targum  or  from  the  Syriac  version  in  an  early  form  of  its 
tradition. 

Now  let  us  take  another  illustration.  In  Ode  xxix.  8  the  writer 
says  that  the  Lord  has  given  him  '  the  rod  of  His  power ': 

We  recognize  at  once  that  this  peculiar  expression  is  taken  from 
the  uoth  Psalm.  On  turning  to  the  Peshitta  text,  we  find  a  partial 
coincidence : 


THE  ODES  AND  THE  BIBLICAL  TARGUM         87 

the  word  for  '  rod '  is  the  same  :  the  word  for  '  power  '  is  different. 
If  the  Odist  varies  from  the  Syriac  Psalm  he  varies  equally  from 
the  Targum,  with  which  the  Syriac  Psalter  at  this  point  agrees. 

Using  the  result  thus  obtained  of  the  dependence  of  the  Odist 
upon  the  110th  Psalm,  we  see  at  once  that  there  must  be  further 
coincidence  or  dependence ;  for  the  '  rod  of  power '  in  either  case 
is  to  be  used  for  the  suppression  of  one's  enemies.  Then  we 
observe  a  peculiarity  of  the  Odist ;  his  military  operations  are 
to  be  undertaken  '  by  the  word,  of  the  Lord',  and  victory  over 
his  enemies  is  attained  through  'the  Lord  overthrowing  them 
by  His  Word '.  Should  we  write  in  our  translation  '  word '  or 
'  Word  '  ?  We  translated  at  first  without  a  capital  letter ;  but  on 
looking  at  the  first  verse  of  the  Psalm  we  find  that  '  the  Lord  said 
unto  my  Lord,  sit  still,  &c,  until  I  subdue  thy  enemies':  and  on 
turning  to  the  Targum  we  find  that  '  the  Lord  said  by  His  Word'  ; 
so  we  are  led  to  use  a  capital  letter,  and  to  find  the  origin  of  the 
references  in  the  Ode  in  question. 

The  case  differs  from  the  preceding  in  that  there  appears  no 
trace  of  the  Targum's  expression  in  the  Peshitta.  In  this  way  we 
are  able  to  affirm  that  the  language  of  the  Odes  is  at  certain  points 
under  the  influence  of  the  Targum  on  the  Psalms :  and  if  this 
conclusion  is  correct  the  observation  will  be  far-reaching  in  character. 
We  shall  find  our  Odist  in  a  Jewish  area  ;  he  may  even  be  a  Judaeo- 
Christian.  In  one  case  at  least  we  have  shown  an  acquaintance 
with  the  Hebrew  text  as  against  its  Targum  (and  the  leading 
translations),  for  the  Odist  knows  both  the  readings  in  Proverbs 
viii.  22,  the  'Lord  possessed  me',  and  'the  Lord  created  me'. 
The  former  is  the  Hebrew  reading  :  the  latter  that  of  the  Targum, 
the  LXX,  and  the  Peshitta.  Evidently  we  shall  have  to  enlarge 
our  idea  of  the  scholarship  of  the  author  of  the  Odes  ;  for  he 
appears  to  be  a  scholar  as  well  as  a  poet. 

The  recognition  of  occasional  Targumic  traces  in  the  language 
of  the  Odes  raises  a  further  question  ;  are  there  any  instances  of  the 
influence  of  those  devices  which  are  employed  by  Targumists,  in 


88  INTRODUCTION 

order  to  avoid  the  repetition  of  the  Divine  Name,  or  to  escape 
from  describing  the  Divine  action  in  human  terms,  such  as  attribute 
to  the  Lord  'hands,  eyes,  organs,  and  dimensions'?  We  have 
already  referred  to  the  leading  instance  of  such  substitution,  in  the 
introduction  of  the  'Word  of  God'  in  the  noth  Psalm,  and  the 
reflex  action  from  the  Targum  in  the  29th  Ode.  Let  us  sec  if  we 
can  find  traces  of  similar  substitutions. 

In  Genesis  iv.  14,  '  Cain  said  unto  the  Lord Thou  hast 

driven  me  out  this  day  from  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  from  thy 
face  shall  I  be  hid.'  Here  the  Targum  first  of  all  gets  rid  of 
the  conversation  between  Cain  and  God,  by  substituting  '  Cain  said 
before  the  Lord ',  and  then  he  has  a  double  difficulty  before  him  ; 
(i)  the  reference  to  the  face  of  God,  (ii)  the  supposition  that  any- 
thing can  be  hidden  from  God.  To  avoid  this  he  first  replaces 
'  face  of  God '  by  '  from  before  God  ',  and  then  he  boldly  says  that 
1  it  is  impossible  that  I  shall  be  hid  '.  We  notice  that  the  Targumist 
(Onkelos)  objects  to  the  '  face  of  God '  and  resorts  to  a  circum- 
locution. Here  we  come  across  a  curious  feature  of  the  Odes  : 
the  Odist  on  several  occasions  refers  to  the  '  face  of  God ',  which 
sometimes  comes  in  very  awkwardly  in  the  context,  but  he  appears 
to  have  equated  it  in  his  mind  with  the  Memra  or  Logos,  so  that 
the  difficulty  is  got  rid  of  in  another  way.  Thus  he  says  in 
Ode  xxii.  1 1  : 

'  Thy  way  was  without  corruption 
And  thy  Face : ' 

and  in  Ode  xxv.  4 : 

'  Thy  Face  was  with  me, 
Which  saved  me  by  thy  grace.' 

Here  the  expression  'thy  Face'  would  not  be  used  by  a  strict 
Targumist,  but  the  Odist  uses  it  of  Christ,  and  does  not  find  any 
difficulty  in  it.  It  has  become  for  him  one  of  the  terms  of  a  new 
and  lawful  vocabulary. 


THE  ODES  AND  THE  BIBLICAL  TARGUM         89 

In  order  to  see  more  clearly  how  the  writer  uses  these  quasi- 
Divine  Names,  we  may  compare  Ode  xv.  8,  9  : 

'  I  have  put  on  incorruption  through  His  Name, 
I  have  put  off  corruption  by  His  grace: 
Death  hath  been  destroyed  before  my  Face : 
Sheol  hath  been  abolished  by  my  Word.' 

Note  the  parallelisms  between  the  '  Face '  and  the  '  Word ' :  it 
suggests  that  God  is  the  speaker  (through  the  prophet)  in  the  last 
two  lines,  and  that  the  Word  is  the  Logos.  We  observe  further 
that  the  Odist  has  another  Targumist  substitution  in  the  use  of 
the  '  Name '  of  God,  again,  as  it  seems,  as  an  equivalent  of  the 
Divine  Word. 

We  may  compare  for  this  equivalence  Ode  xxii.  6 : 

'  Thou  wast  there  and  didst  help  me : 
Everywhere  thy  name  was  a  rampart  to  me.' 

In  another  Ode  the  '  name '  is  thrown  into  parallelism  with  the 
Holy  Spirit.     Ode  vi.  7  : 

'  The  praise  of  His  name  He  gave  us : 
Our  spirits  praise  His  Holy  Spirit.' 

A  very  interesting  passage,  charged  with  Targumic  language,  will 
be  found  in  Ode  xxxvi.  2 : 

'  The  Spirit  made  me  stand  on  my  feet  in  the  high 
place  of  the  Lord, 
Before  His  perfection  and  His  glory.' 

Here  both  of  the  terms  'perfection'  and  'glory'  are  used  as 
paraphrases  for  '  the  Lord  ' ;  the  '  glory  '  ("VP*  or  YSF20)  is  a  common 
Targumic  substitution.  In  the  next  line  of  the  Ode  the  speaker  is 
Christ,  and  the  reserve  in  language  is  not  necessary ;  accordingly 
the  Odist  says : 

'  The  Spirit  brought  me  forth 
Before  the  Face  of  the  Lord.' 


9o  INTRODUCTION 

Here  the  language  is  proper  ex  ore  Christi,  but  not  proper  (to  the 
mind  of  the  Targumist)  for  an  ordinary  person. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  use  of  Targums  has  contributed  to 
the  religious  language  of  the  time  and  the  place  where  they  were 
current.  A  Targumist  does  not  say  '  God  knows' ;  he  says,  '  It  is 
revealed  and  known  before  the  Holy  One,  blessed  is  He '.  Thus  in 
Genesis  xlix.  16  Judah  must  not  say,  'God  hath  found  out  the 
iniquity  of  thy  servants'  ;  he  says  instead,  '  From  before  the  Lord 
there  has  been  found  iniquity  in  thy  servant.'  Such  expressions 
readily  become  conventional,  at  least  among  Aramaic-speaking 
peoples.     They  pass  into  the  religious  language  of  the  time. 

Accordingly,  when  the  Odist  in  Ode  iv.  12  wishes  to  say  that 
God  knew  all  that  was  going  to  happen  to  the  Temple,  he  expresses 
it  thus : 

'  The  end  was  revealed  to  thee : 

^   loo*  J^^  )li~ 
All  was  revealed  to  thee  as  God.' 

Notice,  too,  how  the  Odist  reminds  the  Lord  of  the  impossibility 
that  He  should  repent  of  anything  that  He  gave  or  designed.  This 
is  one  of  the  crucial  cases  for  a  Targumist,  who,  when  he  finds  in 
the  Scripture  that  God  repents  of  having  made  man,  as  in  Genesis 
vi.  6,  for  example,  resorts  to  the  device  of  the  '  Word '  by  whom 
God  acts,  and  says  : 

1  God  repented  in  His  Word  that  He  had  made  man.' 

Our  Odist  is  equally  sure  that  God  could  not  change  His  mind  : 
he  is  almost  a  Targumist,  and  moves  in  the  circle  of  ideas  to  which 
Targums  belong.  A  careful  study  of  Targumic  language  will,  no 
doubt,  throw  much  light  upon  the  language  and  the  thought  of 
the  Odes. 

For  example,  in  Genesis  iii.  5,  the  serpent  says :    '  God  doth 


STYLE   OF   THE   ODES  91 

know  :  ye  shall  be  as  God  (DM7N)  knowing  good  and  evil.'     This 
language  would  certainly  offend  the  Odist  who  would  say : 

'Evil  thou  knowest  not,  neither  doth  it  know  thee.' 

Cf.  Ode  xviii.  9,  10. 

The  Targum  evades  the  difficulty  of  translating  Elohim  as  a 
real  plural  (and  so  does  the  Authorized  Version)  :  accordingly 
we  have : 

'  It  is  revealed  before  God  ; 

Ye  shall  be  as  the  magnates,  knowing  between  good  and  evil.' 

Here  the  word  '  magnates '  (pi"l2*l)  is  meant  to  express  the  '  angels ' 
or  the  '  heavenly  beings '. 

We  notice  it  is  the  very  expression  which  the  Odist  puts  into 
the  mouth  of  Christ  in  Ode  xxxvi.  4 : 

'  I  was  glorified  amongst  the  glorious  ones, 
And  great  amongst  the  magnates.' 

The  language  of  the  Odist  overlaps  that   of  the  Targum  ;    they 
have  much  in  common. 

Perhaps  enough  has  been  said  in  support  of  the  thesis  that  there 
is  common  matter  (both  in  language  and  in  ideas)  between  the 
Odist  and  the  Targums.  The  Odist  himself  lives  next  door  to 
the  Synagogue  and  in  the  Jewish  quarter. 


CHAPTER   VIII 

Style  of  the  Odes. 

We  can  state  with  confidence  that  the  Syriac  style  used  in  the 
Odes  is  not  that  of  the  Edessene  productions  represented  by 
the  Peshitta  Version  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  Hymn  of  the  Soul 
in  the  Acts  of  Thomas,  the  Book  of  the  Laws  of  Countries,  the 


92  INTRODUCTION 

Acts  of  Thomas  generally,  the  poetical  works  of  Ephrem.  &c.  In  all 
these  works  there  is  a  certain  freedom  of  writing  and  ease  of 
expression  which  cannot  be  clearly  detected  in  the  Odes.  Much 
of  this  harshness  may,  perhaps,  be  accounted  for  by  the  allegorical 
allusions  which  sometimes  underlie  the  outer  form  of  the  words ; 
but  when  every  allowance  is  made  under  this  head  there  remains 
always  something  which  distinguishes  the  style  of  the  Odes,  say, 
from  that  of  the  canonical  Psalter. 

Two  hypotheses  may  here  be  put  forward  :  either  the  writer 
was  working  with  a  language  which  had  not  undergone  a  long 
period  of  development  resulting  in  the  fixity  of  the  terms  employed, 
or  that  he  was  translating  from  another  language  a  text  that  was 
itself  obscure ;  in  this  case,  not  wishing  to  indulge  in  countersense 
or  nonsense,  he  might  have  tried  to  follow  the  original  more  closely 
than  was  consistent  with  a  fine  literary  style.  His  choice  of  terms 
is,  however,  very  happy,  and  one  could  with  difficulty  substitute 
a  better  lexicographical  vocable  for  that  adopted  in  his  actual 
phrases.  A  Syriac  scholar  with  a  tried  taste  in  Syriac  language 
might  perhaps  reproach  the  Odist  (or  his  translator)  with  an 
occasional  weakness  in  the  construction  of  a  sentence,  but  not  with 
a  wrong  use  of  a  word.  The  terminology  is,  therefore,  archaic,  and 
certainly  cannot  be  placed  after  the  seventh  century  of  our  era, 
when  foreign  linguistic  influences,  already  in  existence,  began  to 
make  themselves  felt  in  a  more  accentuated  manner  in  the  Syriac 
language. 

As  an  example  to  illustrate  the  first  hypothesis  we  may  quote 
the  two  terms  used  to  express  the  '  Word  ',  or  the  Johannine  Aoyos  : 
1j*i^3  {pcthgJiamd)  and  JfcOsoo  {melletha).  The  first  word,  derived 
from  a  Persian  root,  is  in  classic  Syriac  used  exclusively  in  the 
sense  of  word  '  in  concreto ',  i.  e.  vocable,  sentence,  order,  answer ; 
the  second,  which  is  employed  in  the  Syriac  New  Testament  to 
express  the  Johannine  Aoyoy,  has  acquired  in  post-biblical  Syriac, 
from  the  end  of  the  second  century  onwards,  the  meaning  of  word 
'  in  abstracto '.     In  reading  the  Odes  we  find  that  in  two  of  them 


STYLE   OF   THE   ODES  93 

(xvi  and  xli)  Jfc^c   is  used  to  express  '  Logos '  ;    but  this  same 
Aoyoy  is  expressed  by  the  inadequate  Juaa.^^9  in  the  Odes  xii,  xxxii. 
No  Christian  Syrian  writer  would  have  ever  used,  in  speaking  of 
Christ,  such  an  unchristian  and  unevangelical  expression  if  he  were 
writing  long  after  the  end  of  the  second   century,  i.  e.  after  the 
vulgarization  of  the   Syriac   Gospels,  any   more   than   a   modern 
English  theologian  would  say  that'  in  the  beginning  was  the  vocable'. 
It  is  certainly  remarkable  that  the  Syriac  Odes  should  prefer  to 
speak  of  Christ,  the  Word  of  God,  under  the  term  ^-aa^.9  {peth- 
ghama) rather  than  the  term  JkX»  {melletha).     It  suggests  an  early 
date  for  the  text  when  we  find  that  so  little  regard  is  paid  to  the 
ecclesiastical  use  of  terms.    The  use  of  pethghama  as  an  equivalent 
for  Logos  must  have  soon  become  obsolete  under  the  influence  of 
the  Syriac  Gospels ;  all  through  the  Syriac  literature  the  rendering 
of  the  Gospel  of  John,  where   \6yos  =  ]fc^.ao    {melletha),    is    the 
conventional  one.    There  is,  however,  a  slight  trace  of  the  existence 
of  a  double  translation  in  Syriac,  corresponding  to  the  usage  of 
the  Odes  and   to  the  Latin  Sermo   and    Verbum :    in  Aphrahat 
(i.  389)  we  find  Christ  described  as  o^so^fc-so  al^oo   where  two 
possible  renderings  stand  side   by  side.     And  in  the  very  same 
sequence  (i.  392)  there  is  a  trace  of  a  third  attempt  at  the  rendering 
of  Aoyos ;  for  Aphrahat  goes  on  to  say  that  '  it  is  written,  In  the 
beginning  was  the  Voice  (JLo  kala)  which  is  the  Word  {melletha) '. 
In  this  connexion  we  must  remark  that  in  the  prophetic   Books 
of  the  Old  Testament  Peshitta  the  use  of  melletha  and  pethghama 
alternates  confusedly  without  any  difference  of  meaning,  because 
the    Johannine   and    Christian    conception    of    Aoyo?   is   not   well 
developed  at  the  time  of  their  translation.     On  the  hypothesis  of 
a   Greek   original,  the    translator,  believing   the   Odes  to   be   the 
work  of  the  Biblical  Solomon,  must   have  adopted  the  unsettled 
terminology  of  the  Old  Testament.     On  the  other  hand,  would  not 
this  Syrian  Christian   translator  have   preferably   used   the  word 
melletha  to  make  the  sentence  more  applicable  to  Christ,  the  Word 
of  God  ? 


94  INTRODUCTION 

The  phraseology  of  the  Syraic  text  in  connexion  with  the  word 
Ju-o»  (=  spirit  or  wind)  deserves  also  special  notice.  In  the  Syriac 
Old  Testament,  when  this  term  is  applied  exclusively  to  the  wind 
or  to  the  spirit  of  men  and  angels,  it  has  commonly  the  feminine 
gender,  and  when  applied  to  the  Spirit  of  God  it  is  also  used  more 
in  the  feminine  than  in  the  masculine  gender,  except  in  the  ex- 
pression U-.j>  J—o>  (holy  spirit)  where  it  is  generally  used  in 
masculine  (cf.  Ps.  li.  IT,  &c).  At  the  beginning  of  Christianity  in 
the  Syriac  Churches,  the  Christian  Holy  Spirit,  as  constituting  a 
personality  distinct  from  God  the  Father,  was  frequently  spoken  of 
as  feminine  ;  it  is  so  used  by  Aphrahat,  by  the  old  Syriac  versions, 
and  generally  by  Ephrem,  possibly  under  the  influence  of  Old 
Testament  phraseology.  To  give  the  word  a  more  orthodox 
meaning,  when  these  versions  were  revised  sometime  in  the  second 
half  of  the  fourth  or  beginning  of  the  fifth  century  into  the  Peshitta, 
or  Vulgate  version  of  all  the  branches  of  the  Syrian  Church,  the 
revisers  changed  it  into  masculine  in  John  xiv.  17,  26,  xv.  26,  xvi. 
13,  14;  Luke  xii.  12;  but  it  has  been  retained  as  feminine  in 
Luke  i.  35,  ii.  25,  iii.  22,  iv.  1  ;  John  vii.  39,  and  John  i.  32  (but  with 
the  elimination  of  the  word  '  Holy  '). 

After  the  fifth  century,  the  expression  '  Holy  Spirit ',  U.-r.o  Uo>, 
Christian  or  Judaic,  became  conventionally  masculine  (cf.  Eph. 
iv.  30,  Pesh.)  ;  and  the  Christian  Holy  Spirit  with  J-»o»  alone,  and  to 
some  extent  with  the  expression  U.»clo>  Ju»o»,  is  also  commonly 
masculine,  except  in  the  passages  where  the  wording  is  visibly 
inspired  from  the  corresponding  passages  of  the  Peshitta  and 
Ephrem.  We  give  the  only  instances  to  the  contrary  with  the 
adjective  U-H»,  and  it  is  even  possible  that  in  two  of  these  instances 
the  '  Spirit  of  God  '  was  understood  by  the  translators  in  the  sense 
of  that  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  not  of  the  Christian  Holy 
Spirit,  a  person  distinct  from  the  Father.  This  is  probably  the 
case  with  Aphrahat  (ii.  128),  where  )Ka*»j3o  Jk-«.  o*~o»  (His  Spirit) 
is  used,  and  with  the  colophon  to  the  Lewisian  text  (page  268, 
edit.  Lewis),  and  with  1  Thessalonians  iv.  8  (=  Ezek.  xxxviii.  14). 


STYLE   OF  THE   ODES  95 

Possibly  this  could  not  be  applied  to  Luke  ii.  i$-6  in  the  Lewisian 
text,  where  )^-*-*i»  Ju-oi  is  employed.  These  are  the  only  instances 
against  the  stereotyped  formula  which  we  have  noticed  in  the  Syriac 
literature.  Probably  one  or  two  other  instances  have  escaped  our 
notice,  but  they  will  hardly  counterbalance  the  thousands  of 
examples  which  might  be  given  to  the  contrary. 

Coming  to  the  Odes,  we  notice  that  the  expression  \±++ss  J>~o» 
is  used  in  the  masculine  in  the  stereotyped  Syriac  formula  for  the 
'  Holy  Spirit',  Judaic  or  Christian  (see  Odes  vi.  7,  xi.  2,  xiv.  8, 
xxiii.  22  B).  But  in  the  famous  Ode  xix,  which  contains  indubit- 
able marks  of  the  Christian  '  Holy  Spirit '  outside  the  sphere  of  the 
stereotyped  formula,  we  see  the  Holy  Spirit  spoken  of  as  feminine. 
If  the  Syriac  text  had  seen  the  light  long  after  the  sixth  century 
we  should  have  expected  a  more  natural  masculine  use  of  i~o» 
U,»oo?.  Not  once  is  the  word  used  in  the  feminine  in  the  works  of 
Severus,  Patriarch  of  Antioch,  translated  from  the  Greek  into 
Syriac  by  Jacob  of  Edessa  about  698  (Patrologia  Orientalis,  iv. 
1-94;  viii.  100-280  et  seq.). 

On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  sentence  which  would  suggest  that 
the  style  of  the  Odes  is  dependent  on  that  of  the  New  Testament 
Peshitta.  Ode  xli.  15  has  the  expression  Joc^*?  o»k-oo»l  'the 
foundations  of  the  world '.  This  is  the  Peshitta  rendering  of 
Kara^oXf]  Koafiov  (cf.  Matt.  xiii.  35;  John  xii.  24;  Ephes.  i.4).  This 
coincidence,  which  is  not  to  be  lightly  disregarded,  is  discussed 
in  our  note  to  tlie  Ode  in  question  and  by  E.  A.  Abbott  in  T/ie 
Fourfold  Gospel,  p.  408  seq. ;  see  also  p.  122  of  the  present  volume. 
Whether  the  phraseology  of  the  Odes  is  dependent  on  the  Syriac 
Old  and  New  Testaments  is  discussed  in  another  chapter.  As  far 
as  the  particularities  of  the  Syriac  text  are  concerned  the  philo- 
logical notes  placed  at  the  end  of  every  Ode  may  be  found 
useful. 

The  subject  being  so  intricate,  it  would  be  rash  to  attach  the 
style  of  the  Odes  to  that  of  a  known  group  of  authors,  or  a 
determined  school  of  thought,  and  it  would  be  highly  precarious 


96  INTRODUCTION 

to  try  to  fix  the  epoch  of  their  composition  by  the  outward  form 
of  style. 

On  the  one  hand  they  certainly  contain  many  of  the  elements 
which  characterize  a  Syriac  composition  under  Greek  influences, 
and  in  this  respect,  were  it  not  for  some  extraneous  considerations 
arising  chiefly  (i)  from  a  certain  play  on  the  different  meanings  of 
some  Syriac  words ;  (2)  from  the  almost  certain  hypothesis  that 
Ephrem  (d.  373)  knew  them  in  their  present  form  ;  (3)  from  a  certain 
literary  ascendency  which  the  Syriac  text  possesses  when  compared 
with  the  Coptic  translation  and  the  Latin  quotation  of  Lactantius — 
we  should  without  hesitation  have  asserted  that  they  were  a 
translation  from  a  Greek  original.  The  only  Syriac  translations 
of  Greek  originals  in  the  time  preceding  Ephrem,  from  which  we 
can  form  a  judgement  as  to  the  nature  of  early  translations,  are  the 
Old  Syriac  Gospels ;  but  the  slight  linguistic  coincidences  between 
the  Odes  and  the  Lewisian  and  Curctonian  Versions  do  not  seem 
to  be  sufficiently  numerous  to  enable  us  to  draw  a  safe  conclusion 
of  a  constant  relation  between  the  style  of  the  Odes  and  the  style 
of  the  Gospels.  Something,  however,  emerges  clearly  from  an  even 
superficial  reading  of  the  phraseology  of  the  Odes,  viz.  that  the 
difficulty  of  translation  of  some  words  lies  not  so  much  in  their 
lexicographical  or  grammatical  formation  as  in  the  precise  meaning, 
sometimes  hidden  and  mystical,  which  the  author  himself  appears 
to  have  given  them. 

Everything  well  considered,  there  is  much  truth  in  F.  C.  Kurkitt's 
verdict  to  the  effect  that  no  theory  of  the  origin  of  these  Odes 
is  satisfactory  which  regards  the  Syriac  translation  (?  text)  that  we 
possess  otherwise  than  as  an  exotic.  This  is  true  if  a  comparison  is 
established  between  the  stylistic  method  of  Acta  Thomae  (which, 
however  important  for  a  theologian,  not  many  Syrians  would 
consider  as  a  model  of  Syriac  composition)  and  the  Odes,  but  it 
would  somewhat  exceed  the  boundaries  of  truth  if  that  comparison 
were  established  with  the  writings  of  Scrgius  of  Resh'aina,  John  of 
Ephesus,  Jacob  of  Edessa,  Maraba,  Paul  the  Persian,  &c. 


STYLE   OF   THE    ODES  97 

In  other  words,  Syrian  authors  with  a  Hellenic  education  write 
Syriac  in  a  very  different  way  from  that  of  a  man  who  knows  no 
Greek.  The  Acts  of  Judas  Thomas  were  written  by  a  man  who 
knew  no  Hellenic  culture,  and  the  works  of  Jacob  of  Edessa  reflect 
the  Hellenic  education  of  their  writer.  A  learned  Syrian  with 
a  Hellenic  education  would  write  in  a  more  grammatical  Syriac 
than  that  used  by  Ephrem  himself,  would  employ  happier  and 
more  technical  terms ;  but  any  one  would  notice  that  his  style 
lacked  that  grace  and  flexibility  which  characterize  a  man  with- 
out any  exotic  influence,  such  as  Ephrem.  The  stiffness  and 
the  absence  of  characteristic  native  idiom,  which  would  surely  be 
found  in  the  style  of  the  former,  would  not  prohibit  our  referring 
the  composition  to  a  real  Syrian,  who  was  writing  in  his  own 
language. 

Generally  speaking  the  phraseology  of  the  Odes  is  harmonious 
and  correct,  and  stands  in  a  very  marked  contrast  with  some 
extant  Syriac  translations  of  Greek  originals,  instances  of 
which  are  found  in  the  Psalms  of  Solomon,  the  Geoponica,  the 
Aphorisms  of  Hippocrates,  the  Didascalia,  &c.  There  are  even 
sentences  which  could  scarcely  have  been  found  in  Greek  thought 
or  in  Greek  phrase.  Ode  xii.  6  has  fU>  oo»  y*a.5o  JJ/  %&j  ^ofcoo  JJo 
And  it  (the  Word)  never  falls,  but  standing  He  stands,  for  '  He  stands 
firmly  and  continually '  ;  Ode  xxviii.  4  has  ^xoto  «aot=oo  He  blessing 
blessed  me  for  '  He  surely  and  frequently  blessed  me '.  If  the 
opinion  held  by  all  Semitists  that  the  so-called  mimmed  infinitive 
used  to  give  more  emphasis  to  the  verb  is  an  undoubted  Semitism, 
there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  instances  above  quoted,  if  not 
pure  inventions  of  the  unknown  translator,  are  genuine  marks  of 
a  Semite.  Instances  to  the  contrary  are,  however,  numerous,  and 
an  examination  of  the  early  and  late  Syriac  translations  of  Greek 
originals  is  instructive. 

In  the  old  Syriac  Gospels,  where  the  translated  text  is  not  so 
servile  to  the  Greek  as  that  of  the  Peshitta,  this  linguistic  phe- 
nomenon occurs  more  than  once  ;  examples  :  Matt.  ix.  24  (Lewis), 
11  H 


98  INTRODUCTION 

v.  32  (Lewis  and  Cureton) ;  Luke  viii.  50  and  53  (Cureton),  xvi.  18 
(Lewis),  xxii.  1 5  (Lewis  and  Cureton) ;  John  vii.  47  (Lewis  and 
Cureton). 

In  all  these  passages  the  revisers  of  the  N.  T.  text  have 
eliminated  the  mimmed  infinitives,  which  are  no  more  found  in  the 
Peshitta.  The  elimination  has  been  effected  as  follows:  \u&>.  {bis) 
for  U^£>1  •j-20*-50  :   »J^  (bis)  for  i^  ;^*>:    ^-ax.e»  for  ^-sa-ot  oi.vi.otJio  : 

In  all  these  examples  the  employment  of  the  infinitive  was 
facultative,  and  the  revisers  eliminated  it :  sometimes,  however,  it  has 
been  overlooked,  and  once  it  appears  to  have  been  retained  because 
its  position  was  necessary  to  the  expression  of  the  thought  (see 
John  ix.  9,  x.  20,  xiii.  29).  The  case  is  similar  where  the  evangelist 
is  quoting  from  the  Old  Testament  where  the  phenomenon  exists  in 
the  Hebrew  and  Syriac  texts,  as  in  Mark  vii.  10,  &c. 

As  far  as  the  Syriac  Acts  of  the  Apostles  and  the  Pauline 
Epistles  are  concerned,  the  use  of  the  infinitive  referred  to  above 
seems  to  be  infrequent,  and  is  generally  confined  to  Biblical  quota- 
tions from  the  Old  Testament  and  to  passages  where  a  special  stress 
is  required  by  the  Greek  context,,  such  as  2  Corinthians  viii.  10,  x.  9, 
xi.  7  ;  Philippians  i.  29 ;  Romans  xiv.  4  (as  in  Ode  xii.  6).  As  we 
have  already  said,  these  phrases  may  be  considered  as  remnants 
from  the  old  Syriac  Epistles,  and  for  this  reason  they  might  not 
have  been  touched,  out  of  respect  for  an  ancient  text. 

The  Syriac  translations  of  the  sixth  century  onwards  offer  very 
few  instances  of  a  constant  use  of  this  linguistic  phenomenon,  and 
for  all  practical  purposes  they  may  be  left  out  of  the  question.  We 
have  not  found  it  employed  in  the  translation  of  the  works  of 
Severus  of  Antioch  given  in  vol.  viii  of  Pair.  Orient,  except  on 
p.  245  in  a  quotation  from  3  Kings  xix.  10,  which  has  no  bearing 
on  our  case. 

In  the  following  example  there  may  have  been  in  the  mind 
of  the  Odist  the  idea  of  a  substantive  derived  from  its  verb,  )»iJ». 
(truth)  from  ii*.  {to  be  firm).    This  could  hardly  have  been  the  case 


STYLE   OF   THE   ODES  99 

if  the  author  was  a  passive  translator  from  a  Greek  original,  because 
in  this  last  language,  the  common  word  '  truth '  is  not  derived 
from  a  common  verb  meaning  to  '  consolidate  \ 

J»i*.?  Ji^cm,  ^-s.  L»>k-»,{o 

'And  I  was  established  (=  confirmed)  upon  the  rock 
of  truth  (  =  firmness) '  {Ode  xi.  5). 

This  phenomenon  is  to  be  carefully  distinguished  from  the  use  of 
a  noun  of  action  or  a  mere  substantive,  with  or  without  any  pre- 
position before  or  after  the  verb.  Any  Syriac  book  affords  examples 
of  such  sentences,  especially  where  the  noun  of  action  has  constituted 
something  like  an  inseparable  expression  with  the  verb  from  which 
it  is  derived.  It  will  be  useful  for  future  investigation  to  give 
a  list  of  all  such  phrases  found  in  the  Odes  and  Psalms  of  Solomon. 
They  do  not  constitute  by  themselves  an  irrefragable  token  of 
Semitism,  but  their  frequency  in  a  work  is  a  good  guarantee  that  it 
emanates  either  from  a  Semite  or  from  a  man  with  Semitic  learning 
and  influenced  by  a  Semitic  Bible.  It  is  a  semi-play  on  words 
which  is  not  to  be  completely  disregarded. 
(a)  Examples  with  a  preposition  : 

4  They  defiled  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord  with  defilement.' 

Ps.  Sol.  i.  8. 

j1<SSUl\.2>    \o£±.}    >0??>1.?   %£-» 

'  That  thou  mightest  be  justified,  O  God,  by  Thy  justification.' 

Ps.  Sol.  ix.  3. 

'Thou  didst  surely  covenant.' — Ps.  Sol.  ix.  19. 

'  I  was  covered  with  the  covering.' — Ode  Sol.  xxv.  8. 

'  Let  our  faces  shine  by  His  shining.' — Ode  Sol.  xli.  6. 

H2 


ioo  INTRODUCTION 

'  Let  us  exult  with  His  exultation.'—  Ode  Sol.  xli.  7. 

Cull  «.*>     tUl« 

'He  pitied  me  in  His  pity.' — Ode  Sol.  vii.  10. 

'From  the  inspiration  that  He  inspired.' — (?dfc  £#/.  xviii.  15. 

'  Like  His  own  newness  He  renewed  me.' — Ode  Sol.  xxxvi.  5. 

•a^cclS   ^ao   J»i*.  J»»  Loo?  L»>  >*-io 

'And  like  the  flow  of  water  flowed  truth  from  my  mouth.' 

Ode  Sol.  xii.  2. 

(b)  Examples  of  a  substantive  or  a  noun  of  action  : 

o*2v  v]so  £■*!  )^o&a£o 
'  Treasures  him  a  treasure  of  life/- — Ps.  Sol.  ix.  9. 

'  They  covenanted  covenants  among  themselves.' 

Ps.  Sol.  viii.  11. 

'  To  see  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  wherewith 
He  had  glorified  him.' — Ps.  Sol.  xvii.  35. 

Lin     Lj!C.=>     (UO 

'They  lived  a  life  by  the  water.' — Ode  Sol.  v.  18. 
'  I  offer  the  offering.' — Ode  Sol.  xx.  2. 
1  My  heart  gushes  out  a  gush.' — Ode  Sol.  xxxvi.  7. 
'  To  lead  captive  a  captivity.' — Ode  Sol.  x.  3. 


STYLE   OF   THE   ODES  iol 

'  Error  erred.' — Ode  Sol.  xxxi.  2. 

Another  phenomenon  which  goes  to  the  credit  of  the  Semitic 
origin  of  the  Odes  is  the  repetition  of  the  same  root  as  has  occurred 
in  a  previous  word  of  the  sentence,  although  an  interval  may 
separate  the  two  occurrences  of  the  root.  This  is  a  proof  of  a 
continuous  attention  on  the  part  of  the  Odist  which  in  some  cases 
is  quite  different  from  the  function  of  a  translator. 

Examples : 

yOJOt     &(      ollO     .*  wO»     )oj»     jkA««£0     o»*^.^     OJAPDO 

'  And  vain  people  supposed  that  it  was  something  great : 
And  they  came  to  resemble  it  and  became  vain' — Ode  xviii.  12. 

Ia~     Jooj     wOloK*/ 

'  And  they  travailed  from  the  beginning, 
And  the  end  of  their  travail  was  life.' — Ode  xxiv.  8. 

wcxoaojia    yOj*»fcoo   L^JL*   «o»aiori3   »oA)Ja 

'  The  seers  shall  go  before  Him, 
And  they  shall  be  seen  before  Him.' — Ode  vii.  18. 

y^*$  jlciNaA(Y>->\,  JLou*^   ^j©   ^aA3o»o 

yoc^ijso  ]ulX.|?  Jjwo  oaSotio 

'  And  they  turn  away  from  wickedness  to  thy  pleasantness  : 
And  have  turned  from  themselves,  &c.' — Ode  xi.  21. 

^oo»3  oot  Kj(»  ^>^-^ 

'  Let  us  also  be  saved  with  Thee  : 
For  thou  art  our  Saviour' — Ode  xlii.  18. 

More  important  for  all  purposes  is  the  play  on  the  different 
meanings  of  a  verb,  or  a  noun.     For  example  : 

'  And  I  saw  the  destroyer  of  the  corruptor!—Ode  xxxviii.  9. 


102  INTRODUCTION 

'  And  there  was  seen  at  its  head 
A  head  which  was  revealed.'-  Ode  xxiii.  18. 

The  first  example,  if  translated  by  '  corruptor  of  the  corrupter ', 
or  'of  the  corruption',  would  scarcely  yield  any  meaning  ;  obviously 
its  true  meaning  is,  '  destroyer  of  the  corruptor '.  The  author  is 
therefore  playing  on  the  different  meanings  of  the  verb  "^s^-.  '  to 
destroy  '  and  '  to  corrupt ' ;  he  used  it  first  in  the  sense  of  '  to  destroy ', 
and  second  in  the  sense  of  '  to  corrupt ',  and  this  apart  from  his 
other  play  on  the  two  different  forms  of  the  verbal  participle. 
Curiously  enough  the  same  play  on  words  occurs,  but  in  a  lesser 
degree,  in  i  Corinthians  iii.  17  : 

'  Him  that  corrupts  the  temple  of  God,  God  shall  destroy' 

But  this  unique  instance  can  hardly  weaken  the  above  statement. 

In  the  second  example  the  play  is  on  the  two  meanings  of  the 
word  U#§,  which  means  'head',  'chief,  and  'beginning',  but  as 
the  meaning  of  the  whole  Ode  is  problematical  it  would  not  be 
safe  to  build  much  on  a  'sealed  letter',  although  at  the  first  sight 
it  would  seem  that  the  first  U*>  is  to  be  translated  by  '  beginning ', 
and  the  second  by  'head',  or  'chief.  In  Ode  xxiv.  1  a  play 
exists  on  the  same  word  \»~*'y  'head'  and  'head,  superior',  but  this 
might  have  arisen  also  with  the  Greek  /ce0aA?/. 

Three  other  plays  upon  the  different  meanings  of  a  word,  in 
which  a  contrast  is  also  established  between  these  meanings, 
deserve  consideration : 

'  I  removed  from  me  the  raiment  of  skins 
For  thy  right  hand  lifted  me  up.' — Ode  xxv.  8,  9. 


STYLE   OF   THE   ODES  103 

J^mOO     is-Oo     ~ls^(     )1?     00»X    1*00-0     O     wUO^amO 

'And  they  made  me  a  criminal  when  I  rose  up, 
Me  who  had  not  been  condemned.' 

'  And  they  divided  my  spoil, 
Though  nothing  was  due  to  them.' — Ode  xxxi.  8,  9. 

jl^hXSk*    j2.CL3.20    OMhO(     ....    <*-^?0    w)l^*7    Lot.© 

'  All  the  thirsty  on  earth  were  given  a  drink  of  it : 
And  thirst  was  done  away  and  quenched  .... 
They  have  assuaged  dry  lips  : 
And  the  will  that  had  fainted  they  have  raised  up/ 

Ode  vi.  11,  14. 

In  the  first  example  y^ii  with  ^ao  means  '  take  off',  and  p >/  alone 
means  '  to  extol,  exalt,  enhance '.  The  second  example  contains 
a  contrast  between  '  to  condemn ',  ^*— £>  '  condemned,  culprit ',  and 
^  »a**.ii/  'something  due  to  somebody'.  The  third  example, 
although  the  two  terms  of  the  linguistic  play  are  separated  from 
each  other,  requires  also  careful  examination  on  account  of  the 
corresponding  Coptic  text ;  the  words  are  the  verb  «>Is*7  '  to  be 
dissolved,  to  perish',  and  the  past  participle  Jujjoo  'paralytic'. 
The  Coptic  expresses  also  the  same  words  by  the  same 
root. 

A  last  linguistic  feature  worth  mentioning  is  the  tendency  of 
the  Odist  to  repeat  the  same  verb  in  the  same  sentence  with  the 
substantive  derived  from  it.     For  example : 

ov»  lM»ia_.o)»   6©*   oot   ^o_ooo?  >^^s° 

'  I  believed,  therefore  I  was  at  rest : 
For  faithful  is  He  in  whom  /  have  believed! — Ode  xxviii.  3. 


ioA  INTRODUCTION 

U.V5   ^*^o?   ycuot?    .ootlaisoo/   Jisio 

'And  the  dykes  (lit.  restrainments)  of  men  were  not  able  to 
restrain  it : 
Nor  the  arts  of  those  whose  business  it  is  to  restrain  waters.' 

Ode  vi.  9. 

'  And  I  saw  the  Destroyer  of  the  Corrupter,  when  the  Bride 
that  was  being  corrupted  was  adorned,  and  the  Bridegroom  was 
corrupting-  and  being  corrupted! — Ode  xxxviii.  9. 

'  And  understand  my  knotvlcdgc, 
Ye  who  know  vie  in  truth.' — Ode  viii.  12. 

'  Keep  my  secret,  ye  who  are  kept  by  it 
Keep  my  faith,  ye  who  are  kept  by  it.' — Ode  viii.  10. 

Apart  from  these  general  remarks  upon  the  stylistic  method  of 
the  Odist  the  following  particular  observations  may  be  added  as 
a  corollary : 

(1)  Verbs  are  sometimes  used  in  an  absolute  manner  without 
any  complements.     For  example  : 

Ode  xlii.  10. 

taa.*~»   ooC^   \jAmi   wa*it  ^>^0   k^JLaeLf 

Ode  iii.  7. 

^.V,-.     JJ»3     ),,N^^,.V\      U^.^.Oj-     fcs^>©MO 

Ode  xix.  5. 
Ode  ix.  7. 


STYLE   OF   THE   ODES  105 

(2)  In  a  contrast  between  terms,  instead  of  a  single  verb 
expressing  a  negative,  there  is  a  tendency  to  use  a  positive  word 
with  the  negative  participle  JJ.     For  example  : 

Ode  xv.  8. 

Ode  vii.  21. 

Even  without  any  contrast  this  phenomenon  occurs  with  the 
words  JLa*»  and  Jfc^?..  in  xviii.  u,  xxxiii.  12;  this  feature,  which 
answers  to  the  privative  alpha  and  the  English  prefix  un  or  in, 
loses  its  value  when  it  is  preceded  by  a  dalath,  because  in  this  case 
the  word  has  exactly  the  English  meaning  of  '  without '. 

This  contrast  between  terms  by  means  of  JJ  is,  generally 
speaking,  much  used  in  Syriac  literature,  even  by  writers  who 
knew  no  Greek,  and  no  serious  conclusion  can  be  drawn  from  it 
in  favour  of  an  anti- Syriac  original ;  one  example  from  Ephrem 
will  suffice: 

Jlofcw?    JJ     CiUt^i    Joel    JfcO»«     JJ     ori^kf 

'  His  knowledge  will  become  ignorance,  and  His  existence 
non-existence.' — Mitchell,  p.  173. 

(3)  The  future  tense  is  more  frequently  expressed  by  the  aorist 
than  by  the  verbal  participle. 

(4)  The  Odist  has  a  marked  predilection  for  the  use  of  L^* 
with  a  substantive ;  expressions  such  as  '  without  death  ',  '  without 
corruption ',  for  '  immortal ',  '  incorruptible '. 


106  INTRODUCTION 

CHAPTER    IX 

The  Style  of  the  Odes  and  that  of  the  Psalms 
of  Solomon  compared. 

Si nci.  the  two  manuscripts  of  the  Odes  couple  with  them  the 
Jewish  Psalms  of  Solomon,  it  may  be  useful  to  examine  whether 
in  their  stylistic  form  they  resemble  so  closely  each  other  that  one 
could,  on  the  hypothesis  of  a  translation,  safely  ascribe  both  pieces 
to  a  single  translator. 

In  the  foregoing  pages  it  has  been  pointed  out  that  there  is 
much  in  the  Odes  which  would  be  explained  by  the  supposition  of 
Greek  influence;  this  being  the  case  we  should,  generally  speaking, 
expect  to  find  more  harmony  between  the  phraseology  of  the  Odes 
and  the  Psalms  than  between,  let  us  say,  that  of  Ephrem  or 
Aphrahat  and  the  Odes.  The  difference  between  a  work  which 
is  under  Greek  influence  and  another  which  is  a  direct  translation 
from  the  Greek,  is  not  as  great  as  that  which  exists  between  the 
first  work  and  the  compositions  of  a  genuine  Syrian  writer  without 
any  Hellenic  culture.  There  need,  therefore,  be  no  wonder  if  a 
comparison  between  the  style  of  early  Kdessene  productions  and 
that  of  the  Odes  and  Psalms  of  Solomon  should  show  that  the 
Odes  are  nearer  to  the  Psalms  than  to  the  Edessene  productions. 
Notwithstanding  all  this,  there  are  linguistic  characteristics,  some 
genera]  and  some  particular,  which  suggest  that  both  works  could 
not  have  emanated  from  a  single  man. 

General  Characteristics. 

1.  The  Psalms,  contrary  to  the  Odes,  contain  some  obvious 
mistakes  which  point  to  a  Greek  original ;  scholars  interested  in 
the  Syriac  translations  of  Greek  composition  know  that  from 
A.  D.  400  to  700  they  were  very  literal,  and  even  somewhat  servile. 
The  translators,  out  of  respect  for  their  text,  used  to  follow  it 
so  closely  that  often   they  transgressed   in   a  flagrant  manner  the 


STYLE  OF  ODES  AND  PSALMS  OF  SOLOMON      107 

very  rudiments  of  their  language.  The  Psalms  of  Solomon  offer 
a  striking  example  to  the  point.  In  Psalm  iii.  16  the  translator, 
who  was  rendering  literally  the  Greek  sentence,  used  instead  of 
ycmi^fco  in  plural  *a^ko  in  singular,  as  it  was  before  him  in 
Greek,  overlooking  the  fact  that  the  subject  of  the  verb,  the  word 
k~  '  life',  was  only  used  in  the  plural,  contrary  to  the  Greek  gcorj. 
The  same  mistake  of  translation,  although  in  a  lesser  degree,  occurs 
in  the  Peshitta  rendering  of  John  i.  4  kv  <xvtS>  gcor]  rjv  = 
joot  I***  o%=>. 

2.  All  the  above  linguistic  features  which  add  to  the  value  of 
the  Syriac  text  of  the  Odes,  and  their  correctness  of  style  and  the 
harmony  between  their  sentences,  are,  generally  speaking,  absent  in 
the  Psalms.  Further,  some  phrases  of  the  Psalms  suggest  that 
they  are  a  mediocre  piece  of  work  so  far  as  the  Syriac  is  con- 
cerned ;  and  contain  even  expressions  foreign  to  Syriac.  For 
example : 

Ps.  Sol.  i.  5. 
Ps.  Sol.  ii.  35. 

Ps.  Sol.  iv.  13. 

Ps.  Sol.  viii.  17. 

»^n.vi^  ^>&j ;  ]Icu2l^>o  JLo»L»:a  ;-*^  ^u^^x 

Ps.  Sol.  ix.  7. 

Ps.  Sol.  xvi.  3. 


108  INTRODUCTION 


Particular   C  Characteristics. 


The  difference  between  both  styles  will  be  more  clearly  under- 
stood in  the  case  when  the  writer  had  the  liberty  of  choice  between 
two  forms  of  verbs  or  two  ways  of  expression.  The  case  would  be 
similar  if  in  two  Latin  compositions  the  writer  of  both  had  used 
in  one  of  them  the  form  amavcrunt  in  exclusion  of  amaverc, 
or  vice  versa.  If  many  such  divergent  forms  occur  in  a  pair  of 
writings  which  arc  under  consideration  there  is  reason  to  believe 
that  their  author  was  not  the  same  man.  A  cumulative  evidence 
by  many  grammatical  licenses  of  this  kind  would  suggest  that  it 
would  at  least  be  highly  precarious  to  assign  both  pieces  to  a  single 
man  ;  le  style  e'est  V horn  me. 

Here  are  the  main  stylistic  ways  of  expression  which  characterize 
the  Psalms  and  the  Odes,  and  seem  to  separate  both  compositions 
from  each  other. 

1.  The  Odes,  but  not  the  Psalms,  have  used  a  conjugated  Joo» 
with  the  principal  verb  to  express  indicative  and  subjunctive.  For 
example : 

^lXa.r>    w^>.    )<-£-»-*>    loot? 

Ode  xxxv.  i,  2. 

Ode  xxxviii.  14. 
yQ.a^   ^.m.^too    jLoiJ'op    yOOcnJ    »o 

Ode  xxxix.  8. 

Ode  xlii.  14. 

2.  The  Psalms,  but  not  the  Odes,  have  used  the  otiose  cor- 
roborative with  both  pronouns  and  ^>-»  declined.     For  example: 

^^- '     »*?     ~fcs^>OtCOO 

Ps.  Sol.  v.  16. 


STYLE  OF  ODES  AND  PSALMS  OF  SOLOMON       109 

Ps.  Sol.  ix.  3. 

3.  The  Psalms,  but  not  the  Odes,  have  used  the  apocopated 
form  of  pronouns  with  the  declined  verbal  participle.  For 
example  : 

Ps.  Sol.  iii.  1. 

l^V?  fr-^  >^50   t^°   ^^a-'    ©-Lao   0/ 

Ps.  Sol.  v.  5. 

4.  The  Psalms,  but  not  the  Odes,  have  used  the  third  person 
plural  with  the  form  of  the  paragogic  nun.     For  example : 

Ps.  Sol.  ii.  14. 

5.  The  Psalms,  but  not  the  Odes,  have  used  an  otiose  waw : 

'  He  falls  and  because  his  fall  is  grievous,  (and)  he  rises  not 
again.' — Ps.  Sol.  iii.  13. 

'  And  if  it  should  be  that  he  repeats  his  gift, 
And  does  not  grumble,  (and)  that  is  a  wonder.' 

Ps.  Sol.  v.  15. 

jUi-aa  JJoQA.vao   o*2>   Uaon:*?   Uaj>    l^^U  Vo 

'And  every  petition  of  the  soul  that  trusts  in  Him,  (audi  the 
Lord  fulfils  it.'— Ps.  Sol.  vi.  8. 

6.  The  Odes,  and  not  the  Psalms,  have  put  the  mimmcd 
infinitive  after  the  object : 

'  And  the  power  of  the  men  of  might  to  bring  down.' 

Ode  xxix.  8. 


no  INTRODUCTION 

oC^~^>   ^m->oX   JLaslo 
'And  victory  to  take  by  His  power.' — Ode  xxix.  9. 

On  the  other  hand  some  identical  constructions  of  sentences  are 
found  in  both  Psalms  and  Odes,  possibly  owing  to  the  fact  that 
no  other  reasonable  ways  of  expression  were  available.  Of  this 
category  are  to  be  counted  : 

1.  The  comparison  between  two  objects  by  means  of  y»(  and 

Usot.  'as so  .... ;'    see  Ps.  Sol.  xvii.  2,  &o,  and  Ode 

vii.  1,  &c. 

2.  The  use  of  ^*>  and  bo«J^o,  '  from to  .  .  .  ; '  see  Ps.  Sol. 

xvii.  21,  &c,  and  Odes  xi.  4,  xxvi.  7.     Ode  vii.  14  has,  however, 
JjiOj-x  only  without  waw. 

These  are  the  main  points  of  similarity  and  dissimilarity  between 
the  style  of  the  Odes  and  that  of  the  Psalms.  Although  the 
linguistic  features  which  distinguish  both  compositions  from  each 
other  are  not  very  striking  there  is  sufficient  evidence  to  show  that 
they  emanate  from  two  different  writers. 


CHAPTER    X 

The  Biblical  Quotations  of  the  Odes. 

The  question  of  the  Biblical  quotations  found  in  the  Odes  is 
very  important,  involving  as  it  does  many  interesting  points  in 
regard  to  their  age,  their  original  language,  and  the  country  in  which 
they  were  written.  Unfortunately,  as  very  few  quotations  can 
clearly  be  singled  out  in  the  Odes,  their  total  effect  is  somewhat 
impaired.  There  are,  however,  some  unmistakeablc  semi-quotations 
drawn  from  the  Scriptures  which  bring  the  whole  collection  into 
relation  with  an  extensive  Biblical  nucleus.  Now  if  these  semi- 
quotations  arc  in  harmony  with  the  LXX  there  is  reason  for 
believing  that  the  Odes  which  contain  them  were  originally  written 


THE  BIBLICAL  QUOTATIONS  OF  THE  ODES       m 

in  Greek ;  if,  on  the  contrary,  there  are  linguistic  features  which 
suggest  their  dependence  on  the  Hebrew  text,  it  would  not  be 
very  rash  to  state  that  their  first  author  was  a  Judaizing  writer, 
who  availed  himself  of  the  Scriptural  text  with  which  he  was 
familiar  in  his  Synagogues  or  in  his  Church.  Finally,  if  these 
quotations  agree  with  the  Peshitta  Version  of  the  Syriac  speaking 
churches,  there  would  be  ample  justification  for  the  belief  that  the 
Odist,  or,  at  least,  his  translator,  was  drawing  his  phraseology  from 
a  text  with  which  he  was  already  acquainted. 

An  English  theologian  of  the  twentieth  century,  when  quoting 
Psalm  i.  4,  or  translating  a  Latin  book  in  which  the  verse  is  quoted, 
would  hardly  say,  '  But  are  as  the  stubble  that  the  wind  carrieth 
away',  but  would  very  probably,  as  far  as  the  text  which  he  is 
translating  would  allow,  use  'chaff'  for  'stubble',  and  'driveth 
away '  for  '  carrieth  away '.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  this  very  verse 
is  quoted  in  Ode  xxix.  10,  where  the  verb  Ju»?  of  the  Peshitta  is 
superseded  by  JIa*.,  the  writing  of  both  being  as  follows  : 

Peshitta :  Ju-oi  Ju»?>  Jjclx  ^} 

Odes:  J—oi  o»^  JLo»,»  J*a^  ^ 

It  is  worth  noting  that  a  semi-quotation  of  this  verse  by  Aphrahat 
has  also  Jia*-  for  U>?  (ii.  117). 

Verses  like  this  are  numerous ;  the  most  striking  parallelisms 
and  coincidences  are  the  following : 

Ode  xxvi.  II  :    J"»J-"*>?   o»ls-"»?l  y^ifco?   »ai.y   qj_so 

'  Who  is  able  to  interpret  the  wonders  of  the  Lord  ? ' ;  and  Psalm 
cvi  (cvii).  2,  which  is  quoted  here,  has:  Ju^so?  o»lwo?L  ^fc^J  cujso 
with  a  change  of  the  verb  t^^  into  y^t,  and  the  addition  of 
the  verb  wnt,»,  the  position  of  which  is  facultative  in  interrogative 
and  admirative  sentences  combined.  The  idea  of  '  interpretation 
of  the  wonders  of  the  Lord '  occurs  several  times  in  the  canonical 
Psalter,  and  it  is  always  translated  in  the  Peshitta  by  JUaofl  u2kkW 
(see  Pss.  ix.  15,  xxviii.  4,  cv.  2). 


ii2  INTRODUCTION 

Ode  xxix.  8  has  otLcu!^**.*  JnJ°-»»  'The  rod  of  His  power'. 
This  rod  of  power  occurs  in  the  canonical  Psalter  (Ps.  ex.  2),  and  is 
there  expressed  by  the  Peshitta  as  Jl^cu^*  J^a~.  Note  the  change 
of  the  language  of  the  Psalter. 

Ode  xxvi.  4  has  «ai  c*^>  *-ao  otLoX  L^/  '  I  will  cry  unto 
Him  with  my  whole  heart'.  The  idea  of  crying  from  one's  whole 
heart  is  in  Psalm  cxviii.  145,  where  it  is  expressed  in  the  Peshitta 
with  the  verb  Us,  and  not  J^^as  in  the  Odes. 

Ode  v.  8  has  yoo^  Loot  Do  ]kwJik»L  j-a^cvi*..!/  !  For  they  devised 
a  counsel,  and  it  has  come  to  nought '  (lit.  it  has  not  been  for 
them).  The  idea  of  '  devising'  a  counsel  which  does  not  succeed 
is  in  Psalm  xxi.  11,  where  it  is  expressed  by  the  Peshitta  as 
follows:  JL*.  a*_aoL/  Do  Jfcs.*^iL  q^**.!/  with  the  substitution  of 
voo,\   Loot  Do  for  1L~   a-^aoL/  Do. 

Ode  xxx.  4  has  -ota-ao  ^A*m5  ^s^0  ^-s^  U**1  ^°  '  Much 
sweeter  is  its  water  than  honey'.  A  parallel  sentence  of  Psalm 
xix.  10  is  as  follows:  U.=>?  ^ao  *.A^~o  •  And  sweeter  than  honey '. 
The  Odes  have  changed  *^~  to  ^-oo^m^. 

In  some  other  verses,  the  same  words  are  used  in  the  Odes  as 
those  found  in  the  canonical  Psalms.  Generally,  however,  this 
happens  in  the  case  when  another  word  could  hardly  be  substituted 
for  that  used  in  both  compositions ;  further,  in  most  of  these 
occurrences,  the  Odist  seems  to  have  purposely  changed  the  nature 
of  the  text  from  which  he  was  drawing  his  inspiration.  For 
example : 

Ode  v.  1 1  :  ^tw?/  D  wj-c»a3  oo»  K.;jsc»  ^^aoo  'And  because  the 
Lord  is  my  salvation,  I  will  not  fear.' 

And  Psalm  xxvii.  1  :  ^-j/  ^  ^o  wU3»o®>  ....  L,;_ao  'The 
Lord  is  my  ....  salvation,  whom  shall  I  fear  ? ' 

Ode  xxix.  1,  has  00  Lo^=>/  D  «;_=nr>  oot  L^ao  'The  Lord  is  my 
hope,  in  Him  I  shall  not  be  confounded  ;' 


THE  BIBLICAL  QUOTATIONS  OF  THE  ODES       113 

and  in  several  passages  of  the  Psalms  the  sentence  is  constructed 
as  follows : 

iots>(  JJ  iiAco  L,  ;-**.;*  '  ln  the  Lord  I  put  my  hope,  I  shall  not  be 
confounded  '  (Pss.  xxii.  5,  xxv.  2,  xxxi.  1,  lxxi.  i,  &c). 

Ode  xvii.  9  has  JJj^s?  jlocbo  Jsoo.^o  'And  I  broke  in  pieces  the 
bars  of  iron  ' ;  and  Psalm  cvii.  16  has  p«.^  Uus?  Jlod^oo  '  And  he  has 
broken  in  pieces  the  bars  of  iron  '.     Cf.  also  Isaiah  xlv.  2. 

Ode  xxviii.  13  has  Jvuas  Jii^o  yl  «jo»j-*o  'And  they  came  round 
me  like  mad  dogs';  and  Psalm  xxii.  16,  from  which  the  idea  is 
drawn,  has  JS^  ujov  '  Dogs  came  round  me  '. 

Ode  xxix.  11  has  <wfcooj»  ot^x^o  o^-vX  <*s»o{?  ^£-20  'Because 
He  exalted  His  servant  and  the  son  of  His  handmaid  '.  The  idea 
of 'servant  and  son  of  handmaid'  is  in  Psalm  cxv.  16,  where  it  is 
expressed  ^fcool?  oii^o  Jb/  ^.^v.  '  I  am  thy  servant  and  son  of  thy 
handmaid '.  There  was  possibly  no  other  way  to  express  such  an 
idea  in  Syriac. 

In  some  verses  the  change  of  words  between  the  phraseology  of 
the  canonical  Psalms  and  that  of  the  Odes  is  confined  to  a  particle 
or  to  a  facultative  way  of  expressing  the  comparative  or  super- 
lative. For  example :  Ode  iv.  5  has,  '  For  one  hour  of  thy  faith 
is  more  precious  (=  better)  than  all  days  and  years'.  There  is 
probably  a  relation  between  this  verse  and  Psalm  Ixxxiv.  10,  which 
has:  'For  a  day  in  thy  courts  is  better  (=  more  precious)  than 
a  thousand.'  The  Odes  express  the  Syriac  comparative  '  better ' 
or  '  more  precious '  with  iKoo  instead  of  that  of  ^  used  in  the 
Psalms.  Ode  xiv.  1  has  »o»aa/  "^^  Ju>»  wo»au_^  «*/  '  As  the 
eyes  of  a  son  to  his  father.'  The  verse  has  a  certain  relation 
with  Psalm  cxxiii.  2,  which  has  three  times  the  particle  ia^, 
instead  of  ^.v.  of  the  Odes,  and  in  no  case  any  attempt  is 
made  to  put  the  suffix  pronouns  at  the  end  of  Uo*.  One  of  these 
three  cases  is  :  ^o^yo  la^.  )J*±>i  Uo>*  yl  '  As  the  eyes  of  servants 
to  their  masters '. 

The  idea  that  a  mischief  should  return  upon  the  head  of  those 
11  I 


ii4  INTRODUCTION 

who  do  it  is  expressed  in  Psalm  vii.  16,  and  in  Oc!e  v.  7.  The 
difference  in  phraseology  is  in  the  use  of  the  preposition  'upon', 
which  follows  the  verb  yS>c».  This  preposition  is  ^^  in  the  Odes, 
and  o  in  the  Psalms. 

In  Ode  xxxviii.  1  the  starting-point  of  the  thought  is  un- 
doubtedly Psalm  xlii  (xliii).  3,  where  God  is  implored  to  'send  out 
His  Light  and  His  Truth,  that  they  may  lead  me  and  bring  me  to 
His  holy  mountain'.  In  the  LXX  of  the  Psalm  the  Hebrew  tenses 
have  been  rendered  by  the  past  tenses, 

avT<i  fie  ooSr/yijcrav  kcci  i\yay6i>  fie' 

which  makes  even  closer  agreement  with  the  Ode.  In  the  Peshitta 
version  the  coincidences  have  almost  disappeared.  Instead  of 
'  Truth  '  it  has  '  Faith  ',  instead  of  '  lead  me  '  it  has  '  comfort  me  '. 

In  Ode  xiv.  4,  5  we  have  distinct  traces  of  the  influence  of 
Psalm  xlvii  (xlviii).  15,  and  Psalm  xxx  (xxxi).  4.  The  Odist  prays 
that  the  Lord  may  be  his  guide  even  to  the  end  (^  woe»  )o^>»^ 
JUa^  l^s*^.),  he  has  substituted  'the  end'  for  'death',  but  agrees 
with  the  Hebrew  and  its  dependent  Peshitta  in  the  use  of  the  verb 
i=>?  ('to  guide'),  while  the  LXX  has  the  more  remote  7roifia.it?. 
After  the  manner  of  the  Odist  we  have  in  the  next  verse  the 
influence  of  Psalm  xxx  (xxxi).  '  For  thy  names  sake  lead  me  and 
guide  me ',  where  the  Peshitta  does  not  mention  the  idea  of 
guidance,  which  is  involved  in  the  Hebrew  and  the  LXX.  Here 
again  the  Odist  shows  independence  of  the  Peshitta  tradition. 

In  Ode  xxviii  we  have  signalized  a  reference  to  the  22nd  Psalm 
in  the  'mad  dogs  who  come  round  their  master';  a  further 
reference  from  the  same  Psalm,  'they  cast  lots  for  my  vesture', 
will  be  found  in  the  seventeenth  verse  of  the  Ode: 

'  Vainly  did  they  east  lots  against  me.' 

In  the  next  verse  of  the  Ode,  the  Odist  appears  to  be  drawing 
upon  Psalm  cxviii  (cxix).  161  : 

'  Princes   persecuted    me    without    a    cause '    (KareSicogdi'    //e 
Soopedv), 


THE  BIBLICAL  QUOTATIONS  OF  THE  ODES  115 
for  which  the  Ode  has  : 

.^^£)     OOO*     wtl^O     ^S©»     *a^~/ 

The  Peshitta  of  the  Psalm  has  : 

These  are  the'most  striking  parallels  and  semi-quotations  which 
attract  the  attention  of  the  reader  of  the  Odes  in  relation  to  the 
canonical  Psalter. 

In  leaving  the  Psalms  for  the  purpose  of  consulting  some  other 
prophetical  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  we  shall  find  that  such 
parallels  and  semi-quotations  are  less  numerous  and  less  significant. 
The  most  striking  are  the  following  : 

Ode  viii.  21  has  «Loou?j  yOo^oojao  Uj|o  'And  my  righteousness 
goes  before  them'.  This  is  related  to  Isaiah  lviii.  8  .^.as^o  ^ilio 
^lan>?j  'And  thy  righteousness  shall  go  before  thee',  with  the 
change  of  «*£>  of  the  Peshitta  to  »?olo  of  the  Odes. 

Ode  xxii.  9  has  J*^  yoc**^^  fcoo^oo  Jk^ao  ^•^  '  Dead  bones, 
and  it  covered  them  with  bodies '.  This  is  possibly  under  the 
influence  of  Ezekiel  xxxvii.  4-6  : 

Jlna.v   .aaAx  004.0(0  .  .  .  l^d  i-"50^, 
'  Dry  bones and  I  will  cover  you  with  skin.' 

The  changes  of  J.*!^  '  dry '  into  J^Jl^o  '  dead  ',  and  of  Js^3  '  bodies ' 
into  ).a.A.-so  '  skin ',  is  probably  due  to  the  Odist  himself,  and  has, 
therefore,  no  bearing  upon  the  phraseology  of  the  Syriac  text. 

In  Ode  xii.  3,  1 1   we  have  allusions  to   Wisdom  as  being  the 
Mouth  of  the  Lord,  or  the  Mouth,  of  the  Most  High,  which  are 
parallel  to  the  language  of  Sirach  xxiv.  3  sqq. 
We  compare  : 

Ode  xii.  3:    ]».»«*>  oo»  Uo^j^a  l^-j-so?  oooos?  s^^> 
and  Ode  xii.  11  :    )Lacu;..ao?  0.200.3  ^00^  ^Xso?  ^£..20 
with  Sirach  xxiv.  3   eycb  diro  o-to/mxtos  'T\lr[aTov  k£fj\6ov. 
The  Peshitta  of  Sirach  has  Ln>J^?  where  again  we  see  the  Odist 

I   2 


n6  INTRODUCTION 

to  be  independent  of  the  Peshitta.  The  whole  of  the  12th  ( )dc 
is  a  Wisdom  composition,  showing  striking  parallelism  with  the 
Praises  of  Wisdom  in  Sirach  xxiv. 

In  Ode  xxiii.  1-3  the  song  is  based  directly  upon  some  sentences 
in  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon  iii.  9  and  iv.  15.  Thus  we  have  for 
a  parallel  to  the  statements  that 

'  Grace  (lla^^)  is  of  the  elect  (U^») :  and  Love  ()oa~)  is  of 
the  elect ;  and  who  shall  receive  it  but  those  who  have  trusted 
(^XoU)  in  it,' 

in  the  verses  Sap.  Sol.  iii-  9: 

oi  TreTroidoTt?  err'  avTcp  avrrjaovaii'  dXrjOeiaf' 
Kal  oi  ttlo-toI  kv  dyd-rrr]  7rpocrfiei'ovo-ii'  avrcc' 
otl  \dpis  KaL  e'Aeoy  rols  €k\€Ktoi?  avrov. 

The  underlined  Greek  words  agree  with  the  language  of  the  ()<Ac, 
and  are  reflected  exactly  in  the  Peshitta.  It  is  to  be  remarked 
that  the  coincidence  is  here  so  exact  between  the  language  of  the 
Ode  and  the  Peshitta. 

In  the  20th  Ode  there  is  a  recurrent  allusion  to  the  language  of 
Isaiah  Iviii  to  which  an  indisputable  reference  had  already  been 
made  in  the  eighth  Ode  ('  Thy  righteousness  shall  go  before  thee '). 
In  the  20th  Ode  this  has  been  modified  to  '  His  glory  shall  go 
before  thee';  and  if  this  parallelism  be  admitted  for  Ode  xx.  9 
with  Isaiah  lviii.  8  we  can  hardly  avoid  recognizing  some  allusion 
to  Isaiah  lviii.  7  in  the  somewhat  obscure  verse  in  Ode  xx.  6. 
Here,  then,  the  parallel  will  be  made  with  : 

'  When  thou  sccst  the  naked  that  thou  cover  him,  and  that 
thou  hide  not  thyself  from  thy  own  flesh  :  then  shall  thy  light 
break  forth  as  the  morning  and  thy  healing  shall  spring  forth 
speedily,  and  thy  righteousness  shall  go  forth  before  thee.' 

This  reference,  however,  docs  not  supply  all  that  the  (  Mist  has 
in  mind  :  his  naked  person  is  the  one  who  has  left  his  garment  in 
pledge.  This  comes  from  Exodus  xxii.  24  6,  where  the  pledged 
garment  must  be  restored  before  sundown,  because  it  is  the  covering 


THE  BIBLICAL  QUOTATIONS  OF  THE  ODES       117 

of  a  man's  nakedness.  It  is  not  easy  to  find  close  coincidences 
of  language  between  the  Ode  and  either  the  LXX  or  the  Peshitta : 
the  underlying  ideas,  however,  seem  to  be  the  same. 

These  are  the  most  obvious  Biblical  semi-quotations.  It  is 
noticeable  that  their  phraseology  in  the  Odes  is  not  always  in 
accordance  with  the  wording  of  the  Old  Testament  Syriac.  As  far 
as  the  sense  of  the  sentences  is  concerned  we  cannot  know  from 
them  the  kind  of  text  the  Odist  was  using  ;  because  in  some  cases 
this  sense  is  exactly  the  same  in  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Syriac ;  but 
as  far  as  the  wording  is  concerned  the  divergences  are  sometimes 
striking,  and  frequently  more  noticeable  in  the  case  where  the 
quoted  phrase  has  more  the  form  of  a  real  citation  than  of  a  mere 
inspiration,  and  this  is  all  the  more  worthy  of  consideration. 

It  should  be  noted  that  in  a  few  Syriac  translations  of  Greek 
originals,  the  wording  of  the  sentence  does  not  resemble  that  of 
the  Old  Testament  Peshitta ;  this  is  especially  the  case  with  the 
homilies  of  Severus  of  Antioch,  translated  by  Jacob  of  Edessa 
(Patr.  Or.  iv,  viii).  This  anomaly  may  frequently  be  explained  by 
the  fact  that  the  text  of  the  Septuagint  had  a  meaning  which  that 
of  the  Peshitta  could  not  exactly  render,  and  the  translator  not 
wishing  to  weaken  the  statement  of  the  first  writer,  translated 
literally  the  terminology  which  was  before  him,  even  to  the  detri- 
ment of  his  own  Version  of  the  Bible.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that 
Syrian  authors  were  fond  of  literal  translation. 

Outside  the  sphere  of  the  Syriac  phraseology,  some  quotations 
seem  to  suggest  that  the  Odist  was  using  the  Hebrew  text  rather 
than  the  Septuagint.  Verse  4  of  Psalm  i  quoted  above  is  in 
Hebrew:  rvn  iJBin  -kpk  j'M-DK,  which  strictly  means  'Like  the  chaff 
which  the  wind  driveth  away'.  In  the  Septuagint  the  text  is 
longer  and  paraphrastic  at  the  end  : 

d\\'  r/  coy  6  xvov?  ov  kKpiTrrei  6  avefios  dirb  7rpo(rcoiTov  rrjs  y^y. 

The  Syriac  U©»  )-»??  ]ia-**  ^-/  JV  is  exactly  the  Hebrew  text 
faithfully  translated.     The  sentence  of  Ode  xxix.  io,  in  which  the 


n8  INTRODUCTION 

text  is  quoted,  is  in  complete  harmony  with  the  Hebrew  and  with 
the  Peshitta,  except  in  the  wording  of  the  phrase  where  JLa*.*  is 
used  for  L,»*»  ;  but  it  obviously  lacks  the  additional  sentence 
dnb  npoacoTTOv  7-779  yfjs.  One  might,  perhaps,  say  that  if  the  Odist 
was  using  the  LXX  he  would  have  added  these  final  and  additional 
words  in  a  way  similar  to  the  following  :  U±i?  s+si  ^»  '  From  the 
face  of  the  earth '.  (The  Vulgate  is  in  accordance  with  the  LXX  in 
exhibiting  a  facie  terrae.)  The  Hebrew,  the  Targums,  and  the 
Peshitta  are  at  one  against  the  LXX  and  its  dependent  Vulgate  ; 
and  the  Odes  follow  the  first  group  of  texts. 

The  twelfth  verse  of  Psalm  xxi,  is  in  Hebrew  v3V  ^2  iiDTO  QB>n 
'they  have  devised  a  counsel,  but  they  were  not  able'  (to 
perform  it).  In  the  LXX  and  the  Vulgate  the  idea  of  perform- 
ing the  counsel  which  underlies  the  Hebrew  sentence,  but  which 
is  not  expressed  in  words,  is  stated  as  follows :  SteXoyiaapTo 
fiovXrjv  tjv  ov  fir]  SvvtovTaL  a-rfjaai  and  '  cogitaverunt  consilia  quae 
non  potuerunt  stabilire '.  The  word  o-Trjaai  (stabilire)  is  not  ex- 
pressed in  Hebrew.  The  Syriac  Peshitta  and  the  Targums  are 
exactly  like  the  Hebrew  except  that  the  Targums  paraphrase  the 
word  n»TD  and  add  the  suffix  '  thee '  at  the  end  of  the  last  verb. 
The  sentence  of  Ode  v.  8  is  more  in  harmony  with  the  Hebrew  and 
the  Peshitta  than  with  the  LXX,  but  instead  of  1L-  ^f0^  ^° 
'  and  they  were  not  able '  it  exhibits  yOc*^.  loot  Ho  '  and  it  did  not 
succeed  for  them  ',  or  simply  '  they  were  not  able  V 

The  Ode,  therefore,  is  in  harmony  with  the  Hebrew,  the 
Peshitta,  and  the  Targums,  against  the  Septuagint  and  the  Vulgate, 
in  not  expressing  the  idea  of  stabilire. 

Some  verses  seem  to  suggest  remotely  a  borrowing  from  the 
Hebrew  text  and  not  from  the  Peshitta  and  Septuagint.  In 
Ode  xli.  9  the  Christ  says :  '  For  the  Father  of  Truth  remembered 
me,  He  who  possessed  me  from  the  beginning.'  In  Proverbs  viii.  22, 
Wisdom  says:  'The  Lord  possessed  me  in  the  beginning  of  His 

1  The  Syrians  frequently  say  J»o»  T  ^^??  <-J^  Loot  JJ  'I  was  not  able  to  do 
this '.     This  expression  may  even  be  considered  as  a  Syriacism. 


THE  BIBLICAL  QUOTATIONS  OF  THE  ODES       119 

ways.'  If  there  is  any  relation  between  these  two  verses  the  Biblical 
thought  must  have  come  to  the  mind  of  the  Odist  through  the 
Hebrew  text,  because  all  the  Versions  of  the  Bible,  except 
the  Vulgate,  convey  the  idea  of  creation,  and  not  of  possession  ; 
Peshitta  <*).=> ;  the  Targums  "ONIS  ;  the  Septuagint  '£ktio-£v  fie  • 
but  the  Hebrew  '•JJp  and  the  Vulgate  possedit  me.  We  must 
observe,  however,  that  the  alternative  reading  in  Proverbs  viii.  22 
has  also  found  a  place  in  our  Odes ;  in  Ode  vii.  8  we  are  told 
that  '  He  who  has  created  Wisdom  is  wiser  than  His  works',  which 
implies  the  reading  of  the  LXX  {^KTiakv  fie).  The  author  of  the 
Odes  must,  therefore,  be  credited  with  a  knowledge  of  the  Hebrew 
and  Greek  texts.  This  is  especially  interesting  because  the  Greek 
Church  did  not  get  back  to  the  Hebrew  reading  before  the  time 
of  Eusebius  and  the  Arian  controversy.  A  case  of  no  slight  interest 
occurs  in  Ode  xxv.  4,  where  the  Odist  says  : 

1  Thy  Face  was  with  me, 
He  who  saved  me  by  thy  grace.' 

The  peculiar  expression  'Thy  Face'  is  due  to  Exodus  xxxiii.  14, 
where  God  promises  Moses  that  His  presence  will  go  with  him,  and 
that  He  will  give  him  rest.  Here  the  word  which  is  commonly 
rendered  '  presence '  is  in  the  Hebrew  '  Face  '.  This  '  Face  of  God  ' 
which  accompanied  Israel  was  identified  by  the  early  Christians 
with  Christ,  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant.  It  was  an  awkward 
expression  for  those  who  wished  to  avoid  anthropomorphic  repre- 
sentations of  Deity,  especially  in  view  of  the  statement  that  no 
man  can  see  the  Face  of  God.  Accordingly  the  Septuagint  replace 
the  Hebrew  expression,  and  say,  'I  myself  will  go  before  thee'; 
while  the  Peshitta  alters  it  into  an  injunction  to  'walk  before  me'. 
When  we  turn  to  the  Targum  of  Onkelos,  we  find  that  the 
'  Shekinah '  replaces  the  '  Face  '.  Even  more  curious  is  the  manipu- 
lation of  the  passage  by  the  Targum  of  Jonathan.  Apparently 
the  Odist  is  working  from  the  Hebrew,  with  whose  text  he  is 
directly  acquainted.  If  our  explanation  is  correct  the  Odist  at 
this  point  does  not  Targum ize.     Possibly  the  Odist  also  has  in 


i2o  INTRODUCTION 

mind  Genesis  xxxii.  30,  '  I  have  seen  God  face  to  face,  and  my  life 
has  been  saved'.  Here  the  Targums  and  the  Peshitta  replace 
the  God  whose  face  is  seen  by  the  Angel  of  God. 

On  the  other  hand,  terse  11  of  Ode  xxvi:  'Who  is  able  to 
interpret  the  wonders  of  the  Lord  ? '  is  more  in  harmony  with  the 
Targums  than  with  any  other  version  of  Ps.  cvi  [cvii].  2,  because 
all  the  versions,  including  the  Hebrew  text,  omit  the  verb,  '  Who  is 
able  ',  which  is  clearly  expressed  in  the  Targum  by  N77C7  by  [D. 

Many  similar  cases  of  dependence  of  the  Odist  upon  the 
Targums  are  treated  elsewhere. 

The  only  verse  in  the  Odes  which  offers  a  definite  savour 
of  a  borrowing  from  the  Scptuagint  is  the  following :  '  An  ever- 
lasting crown  is  Truth;  blessed  are  those  who  set  it  on  their  heads; 
a  stone  of  great  price  it  is '  (ii.  8,  9).  In  Psalm  xx.  4  mention  is 
made  of  a  crown  which  the  Hebrew  expresses  as  TD  mny  '  the  crown 
of  pas'.1  The  Peshitta  rendering  of  pas  is  ^mOu^o,  'glorious'  crown. 
The  Scptuagint  understood  it  in  the  sense  of  a  '  crown  of  precious 
stones  ',  vrkfyavov  e/c  Xidov  riftiov.  Since  no  other  mention  is  made 
in  the  Old  Testament  of  a  crown  of  precious  stones  it  is  clear  that 
this  verse  of  the  Psalms  was  in  the  mind  of  the  Odist,  who,  in  this 
case,  would  have  worked  on  it  in  explaining  the  nature  of  the 
crown  which  it  contained.     But  on  this  point  v.  infra. 

Coming  to  the  semi-quotations  from  the  New  Testament  we 
notice  that  we  are  less  fortunate  in  our  investigations,  because 
although  many  thoughts  expressed  in  the  Odes  are  found  in  some 
passages  of  Johannine  and  Pauline  writings,  yet  no  clear  borrowing 
of  a  complete  sentence  can  be  singled  out.  These  identical  thoughts 
in  the  Odes  and  in  the  New  Testament  arc  more  of  the  nature 
of  parallels  than  of  any  form  of  quotation.  The  verses  which  can 
be  better  paralleled  with  statements  found  in  the  New  Testament 
are  the  following : 

1  The  origin  of  this  worth  which  sounds  more  Persian  than  Semitic,  is 
problematic;  we  may  compare  the  Arabo- Persian  p  baz  'rich  dress',  'fine 
linen'.  In  default  of  a  better  sense  the  English  Bible  has  rendered  it  by 
'  pure  gold '. 


THE  BIBLICAL  QUOTATIONS  OF  THE  ODES       121 

Ode  xxii.  12  says,  'And  that  the  foundations  of  everything 
might  be  thy  rock  {or  stone)  ;  and  on  it  Thou  didst  build  thy 
Kingdom.'  Matthew  xvi.  18  has:  'Thou  art  Cephas,  and  upon 
this  rock  {or  stone)  I  will  build  my  Church  .  .  .  And  I  will  give 
unto  thee  the  keys  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.'  In  both  texts  the 
words  used  to  express  '  to  build  '  U=>,  '  Kingdom  '  JlaaXso,  and 
'  stone  '  tel-o,  are  identical. 

Ode  xxix.  8  has :  '  That  I  might  subdue  the  imagination  of  the 
people  and  to  bring  down  the  power  of  the  men  of  might ' ;  and 
Luke  i.  51-2  says:  '  He  hath  scattered  the  proud  in  the  imagination 
of  their  hearts  ;  he  hath  put  down  the  mighty  from  their  seats.' 
The  words  which  in  these  quotations  are  nearest  to  one  another 
are  those  which  express  the  idea  of  '  to  lower ' — in  the  Odes  ^.50, 
and  in  the  Syriac  Gospel  <aj*x»  (Peshitta),  KmJ{  (Lewisian) ;  and 
'imagination' — in  the  Odes  Jk-:**-oo,  and  in  the  Syriac  Gospels 
Jfc^OkjL  (Peshitta  and  Lewisian) ;  and  '  powerful  men ' — in  the  Odes 
J^I^,and  in  the  Syriac  Gospels  l&Iol  (Peshitta  and  Lewisian). 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  whole  of  the  language  in  Luke 
i.  5T,  52  appears  to  be  borrowed  from  the  Song  of  Hannah  in 
1  Samuel  ii,  with  occasional  colouring  from  the  Psalms :  e.  g. 
Psalm  lxxxviii  (lxxxix),  10.  We  have  also  a  similar  strain  of 
thought  in  2  Corinthians  x.  5  :  '  Casting  down  (^.ij^ao)  imaginations 
(Jk.i^«^c)  and  every  high  thing  that  exalts  itself  against  the 
knowledge  of  God.'  It  will  be  very  difficult  to  establish  a  direct 
connexion  between  the  Odes  and  St.  Luke,  unless  there  should  be 
closer  linguistic  agreement. 

As  far  as  the  phraseology  of  the  Odes  is  concerned  the  most 
obvious  New  Testament  verses,  which  might  have  affected  it,  may 
be  summarized  as  follows  : 

The  idea  of  a  babe  leaping  in  the  womb  is  expressed  by  the 
same  words  in  all  the  Syriac  versions  and  the  Odes. 

Juso^ii.  Uo_x  ,?  are  the  words  used  by  the  Lewisian  and  the 
Peshitta  Versions  of  Luke  i.  44,  and  in  Ode  xxviii.  2. 

The  idea  that  the  sword  will  not  separate  us  from  the  Lord 


122  INTRODUCTION 

is  in  Romans  viii.  35  expressed  in  words  different  from  those  used 
in  Ode  xxviii.  4;  for  whereas  the  Odes  use  i^-S  to  express 
'separate',  the  Syriac  version  of  Romans  exhibits  «*^,  and 
whereas  the  Odes  use  )&*m  to  express  '  sword ',  the  Syriac  of 
Romans  has  J^;-.. 

The  idea  of  '  walking '  in  the  Lord  is  expressed  by  the  verb 
~^o»  in  Ode  xxxiii.  13,  and  Colossians  ii.  6. 

The  idea  of  a  voice  reaching  its  destination  is  expressed  in 
Luke  i.  44,  and  in  Ode  xxxvii.  2,  by  the  phrase  '  the  fall  of  the 
voice '  (JLo  ^aj),  the  only  difference  being  the  use  of  the  particle  of 
the  indirect  complement.  This  particle  is  la^  in  the  Odes  and  o 
in  the  Peshitta  and  Lewis  texts. 

The  idea  of  Christ  having  been  humbled,  and  then  exalted, 
is  expressed  in  Philippians  ii.  8-9  with  the  verb  ^a-"»  '  to  humble ', 
and  y>mzi  'to  exalt',  while  in  Ode  xli.  12  yui/  is  used  to  express 
1  to  exalt '. 

The  idea  expressed  by  the  sentence  '  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world  '  has  a  different  phraseology  in  the  Old  and  the  New 
Testaments  and  the  Odes.  Ode  xli.  15  has  o»k-oo»i  pus  ^20 
),v>\.v».  This  is  identical  with  the  Peshitta  rendering  of  rrpb 
KaTafioXfj?  KocTfiov  of  the  Greek  of  the  New  Testament.  The 
Old  Syriac  versions,  both  Lewisian  and  Curetonian,  render  this 
Greek  expression  by  the  simple  word  )P-.-o  ^o  (Matt.  xiii.  35 
=  Ps.  lxxvii  [Ixxviii].  2),  which  means  'from  the  beginning'.  In 
Matthew  xxv.  35  there  is  a  lacuna  in  the  Old  Syriac  versions,  and 
we  do  not  know  how  the  Greek  phrase  was  rendered.  In  John 
xvii.  24  the  Curetonian  text  is  missing,  and  the  Lewis  text  follows 
the  Greek  reading  npb  KarafioXfj?  koo-jiov,  and  gives  us  y*J3  ^ac 
Una  Joop?  "before  the  world  was'.  The  same  idea  is  found  in 
Proverbs  viii.  23,  29,  but  it  is  expressed  in  a  very  different  manner. 

The  idea  of  God  not  repenting  of  what  He  does  is  in  Romans 
xi.  29  ;  and  in  Numbers  xxiii.  J  9,  and  in  Ode  iv.  11.  In  Romans 
it  is  expressed  by  the  verb  «*9ot,  in  Numbers  by  yVval/,  and  in  the 
Odes  by  -oU?. 


THE  BIBLICAL  QUOTATIONS  OF  THE  ODES        123 

The  idea  of  imploring  God  to  be  delivered  from  the  Evil 
One  is  in  the  Lord's  Prayer,  which  was  evidently  known  to  every 
Christian.  In  all  theSyriac  versions  of  Matthew  vi.  13  the  sentence 
'Deliver  us  from  the  Evil  One'  is  rendered  by  the  verb  -.3, 
but  in  Ode  xiv.  5  it  is  expressed  by  the  verb  uj»3.  The  divergence 
in  phraseology  is  remarkable. 

In  Ode  vii.  23  we  have  a  parallel  to  the  language  of  1  Corinthians. 
The  Odist,  who  is  emphasizing  the  importance  of  Christian  song 
and  praise  to  God,  says : 

'  Let  there  be  nothing  without  life  (Uaj  JJ?) 
Nor  without  knowledge,  nor  dumb'  (.*♦*»?  Do). 

With  these  we  compare  1  Corinthians  xiv.  7  : 

to.  dyp-v\a  (pon'Tju  SiSovra, 

and  1  Corinthians  xiv.  10  : 

roaravra    el    tv\ol  ytvr\    <pa>v£)v    eiaiv    kv    Kocfico,   kcci    ovStv 
&<P<iovov, 

of  which  passage  the  Peshitta  rendering  is  : 

[a2lj     ^op    k^sX?    ^.*^W 


and 


JliJ    11?    .ooxaa  ♦*»   l^Ao 


where  the  Ode  has  *.♦-?  Do  instead  of  Jlo  IN.     Here  again  we  note 
the  independence  of  the  Odist  as  compared  with  the  Peshitta. 

In  Ode  vi.  6  we  have  an  interesting  parallel  in  the  language 
of  1  Corinthians  ii.  12.  The  passage  in  the  Ode  expresses  the 
desire  of  God 

'  That  those  things  should  be  known  which  by  His  grace 
have  been  given  to  us.' 

This  is  nearer  to  the  Greek  of  Corinthians, 

'iva.  elScofiev  to.  vtto  tov  @eov  yapMsQkvTa  Tjfiiv 
('  that  we  may  know  the  things  that  are  freely  given  us  of  God  ') 

than  to  the  Peshitta  rendering : 


i24  INTRODUCTION 

Thus  cither  the  passage  in  Corinthians  is  borrowed  from  the  Odes. 
or  the  Odes  have  made  use  of  the  text  of  Corinthians,  and  have 
given  us  the  borrowed  passage  in  an  earlier  and  more  exact  transla- 
tion than  we  have  in  the  Peshitta,  where  the  graciousness  of  the 
gift  (^apiaOevTa)  is  not  so  clearly  stated. 

In  Ode  xxxviii.  ]6-2i  we  have  a  sequence  which  is  closely 
parallel  to  the  argument  in  1  Corinthians  iii  where  Paul  explains 
that,  although  he  had  planted  and  Apollos  watered,  they  were 
really  only  under-workers  with  God,  so  that  the  planting  was 
really  God's.  And  he  says  the  same  thing  when  he  turns  to 
a  parallel  figure  of  the  building  of  a  house,  that,  although  he  might 
have  laid  the  foundations,  God  was  really  the  builder.  All  of  this 
is  taken  up  by  the  Odist,  who  refers  the  laying  of  foundations  and 
the  planting  of  the  field  to  the  Lord,  with  the  watering  and  the 
husbandry  of  the  same,  and  with  the  remark  that  the  Lord  alone  is 
to  be  glorified. 

These  coincidences  are  so  minute  and  so  varied  that  we  can 
hardly  believe  the  Ode  to  be  independent  of  the  Epistle.  The 
Odist  has  made  the  Pauline  position  more  clear  by  leaving  Paul 
out  entirely. 

In  Ode  xiv.  io  the  Odist  concludes  with  the  sentiment  that 
'  God  is  able  for  all  our  needs  '.  which  is  nearly  parallel  to  Philemon 
iv.  20,  '  My  God  shall  supply  every  need  of  yours'.  '  Need'  (xptia) 
is  in  the  Ode  J^.****.,  in  the  Peshitta  jloo.im.  Further,  the  Peshitta 
follows  the  Greek  in  rendering  nXrjpcoa-et  ('shall  fulfil')  literally, 
which  the  Odist  explains  in  the  sense  of  Divine  ability  ()p*>). 

In  Ode  xxxiii.  13  we  have  noted  the  coincidence  with  the  Pauline 
language  in  Colossians  ii.  6,  '  walk  ye  in  me '  being  parallel  to 
'  receive  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord  and  walk  in  Him  '.  Thus  Wisdom 
who  speaks  in  the  Ode  is  understood  to  be  Christ,  as  in  other 
passages,  and  there  is  an  exact  agreement  between  the  Ode  and  the 
Greek  or  the  Syriac  of  Colossians. 

In  Ode  xxviii.  3  we  have  what  may  be  a  case  of  dependence 
of  the  Odist  upon  the  Epistle   to  the   Hebrews  (or   conversely). 


POETRY    OF   THE    ODES  125 

It  is  certainly  remarkable  that  the  peculiar  expression  of  the  Odist : 

'  I  believed,  therefore  I  rested ', 
should  coincide  so  closely  with  the  Biblical  language : 
'  We  who  have  believed,  do  enter  into  rest.' 


CHAPTER   XI 
Poetry  of  the  Odes. 

In  the  Semitic  languages  there  is  a  great  difference  between 
a  poetical  style  and  poetry.  In  the  Hebrew  of  some  books  of  the 
Old  Testament  there  is  a  poetical  style  of  high  charm,  with  a 
certain  cadence  and  rhythm  in  the  arrangement  of  phrases  created 
by  the  use  of  the  well-known  parallelism  ;  but  poetry,  as  consisting 
of  short  and  long  vowels,  or  of  an  equal  number  of  syllables 
divided  into  two  stanzas,  or,  as  Arabs  and  Syrians  call  them, 
two  'houses',  is  utterly  missing.  The  first  category  of  poetry 
is  only  parallelistic,  and  the  second  is  metrical  and  may  be 
parallelistic  as  well. 

As  to  the  Arabic  language,  its  poetry  from  the  middle  of  the 
seventh  century  onwards  is  classed  with  the  second  category  of 
metrical  poetry.  Before  the  seventh  century  we  are  not  in  a 
position  to  know  how  this  poetry  was  constituted.  The  numerous 
poetical  compositions  known  as  '  early  Arabian  poetry ',  and  repre- 
sented chiefly  by  the  well-known  Mufaddalyat,  Mitallakat. 
Hamasah,  and  Jamharah,  are  enveloped  in  a  thick  mist  of 
prehistoricity  and  spuriousness,  and  in  the  present  state  of  our 
knowledge  we  may  assert  that  till  fuller  light  dawns  they  can 
hardly  stand  in  the  domain  of  a  positive  study.  Before  this 
metrical  poetry  showed  itself  with  all  its  complicated  rules  there 
was  the  saf  or  rhymed  prose  of  the  nomads,  in  which  traces  of 
ancient  Hebrew  parallelism  are  numerous  and  undoubted.  But 
the  same  parallelism  is,  generally  speaking,  absent  in  the  sub- 
sequent elaborate  development  of  poetry.  The  Arabic  poetry  is, 
therefore,  useless  so  far  as  the  Odes  are  concerned. 


12ft  INTRODUCTION 

Let  us  now  examine  the  Syriac  poetry.  The  style  which 
greatly  influenced  the  poetry  of  the  Syrians  from  the  fourth  to 
the  twelfth  centuries  is  that  of  Ephrem.  If  in  abstract  and  original 
studies  he  has  found  some  critics  who  perhaps  not  very  unjustly 
lowered  his  talent  far  below  the  rate  of  his  fame,  no  one  has  the 
right  to  deny  that  by  the  multiplicity  and  the  charm  of  his  poetical 
compositions  he  has  the  first  place  among  ecclesiastical  poets 
in  general,  and  certainly  so  in  all  the  branches  of  the  Syrian 
Church.  The  poetry  of  this  Father  is  metrical  and  parallelistic  ; 
but  obviously  Ephrem  did  not  invent  Syriac  poetry.  What  kiiad 
of  poetry  had  the  Syrians,  then,  before  Ephrem  ?  We  have  at 
,  our  disposal  three  independent  sources  from  which  to  draw  our 
knowledge:  (i)  the  Hymn  of  the  Soul;  (2)  poems  of  Ephrem 
purporting  to  imitate  those  of  Bardaisan  ;  (3)  genuine  quotations 
from  Bardaisan. 

The  Hymn  of  the  Soul  has  found  many  editors  and  translators. 
It  was  almost  certainly  written  in  the  school  of  Bardaisan  by  one 
of  his  disciples  about  180  to  22c.  It  is  precarious,  however,  to 
assert  that  Bardaisan  himself  was  its  writer,  because  of  the  ex- 
clusively Syriac  colour  of  its  phraseology.  Had  Bardaisan,  who 
knew  and  wrote  Greek  as  well  as  Syriac,  written  it,  he  would  have 
left  traces  of  his  Greek  science  in  it.  The  poetry  of  this  Hymn 
is  parallelistic  and  partly  metrical,  but  the  metre  is  frequently 
imperfect,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  silent  letters  of  the  declension 
might  have  been  pronounced  in  some  cases  at  that  early  time, 
or  possibly  owing  to  a  certain  corruption  of  the  text  by  the 
copyists.  As  it  stands  the  poem  can  be  reduced  to  the  five,  six, 
and  the  seven-syllable  metre:  but  in  respect  of  its  syllabic  rhythm 
it  is  far  below  the  metrical  perfection  which  the  majority  of 
Ephremic  compositions  can  justly  claim. 

Ephrem,  according  to  the  Roman  edition  of  his  works  (iii.  87- 
128),  wrote  seventeen  hymns  in  imitation  of  the  tune  of  the  Psalms 
written  by  Bardaisan,  or  sung  by  his  disciples.  These  hymns  have 
generally  stanzas  of  four  metrical  lines,  three  of  which  have  twice 
five  syllables,  and  the  last  one  once  seven  syllables;  but  frequently 


POETRY   OF   THE    ODES  127 

also  the  order  is  inverted,  and  one  finds  in  them  lines  of  nine 
syllables: 

Jj-oaX  J.*_>£iao  Jp  ]La=>  (R.E.,  p.  127) 

or  of  thirteen  syllables,  which  in  the  last  analysis  can  be  reduced  to 
two  lines  of  four  syllables,  and  one  of  five  : 

1»J.2>  {.*£>c»*o  Joocoo  \s>i~l  ^.ia.v3o  ^*_vq^d»  kse»    (ibid.) 

However  imperfect  the  metrical  arrangements  appear  sometimes  to 
be,  the  parallelism  is  in  all  of  them  obvious  and  perfect  in  all  its 
details. 

As  far  as  the  Psalms  which  Bardaisan  wrote  are  concerned  we 
are  in  complete  ignorance.  If  the  information  of  Ephrem  has  any 
historical  value  (and  it  surely  has)  his  Psalms  were  150  in  number, 
apparently  in  imitation  of  their  proto-type,  the  Psalms  of  the 
King-Prophet.  Appropriate  to  the  point  which  concerns  us  are 
the  words  (ii.  554,  R.  E.) : 

•.  JLv^soj  aoio  }h-ua-^  ^J-^0  U'i'j-so  i-*.^^^^ 

'(Bardaisan)  wrote  hymns  and  adapted  (them)  to  airs;  he 
composed  Odes  and  introduced  rhythms1  (in  them)  ;  he  divided 
the  words  in  measures  and  weights.' 

We  can  infer  from  these  words  that  Bardaisan's  Odes  certainly 
contained  rhythm  ;  but  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  terms  '  measures 
and  weights '  refer  to  the  metrical  arrangement  as  we  understand 
it  in  our  days.  The  critics  have  generally  understood  them  in  this 
sense,  and  the  tradition  of  the  end  of  the  fifth  '  century  affirmed 
that  Ephrem's  orthodox  hymns  were  written  to  counteract  the 
nefarious  effect  produced  by  Bardaisan's  heterodox  psalms.  All 
this  is  a  theme  for  speculation  to  amplify. 

The    only    clear    quotations    from    Bardaisan    are    given    by 

1  The  word  Jfcs..,».*,ai*>  refers  probably  to  a  parallelistic  poetry,  and  no  metrical 
arrangement  was  intended  by  Ephrem  when  he  used  it.  Theodore  Bar  Kewani 
says  that  the  Psalms  of  David  and  the  books  ascribed  to  Solomon  are  written  in 
Jl^MA.a.'s  (Corp.  Script.  Christ.  Orient.,  vol.  lxv,  p.  323). 


ia8  INTRODUCTION 

Tlieodorc  Bar  Kewani  (seventh  century),  and  have  been  published 
by  H.  Pognon  in  Inscriptions  Mandaites  des  coupes  dc  Khouabir, 
1899,  pp.  122-3  j1  these  quotations  contain  five  stanzas  from  a 
work  written  by  Bardaisan,  and  are  in  some  passages  difficult  to 
understand.  Their  poetry  is  parallelistic  and  rhythmical  with  an 
apparently  defective  metrical  arrangement  of  six,  seven,  and  eight 
syllables.     The  last  stanza  is  as  follows  : 

:  U»cuo   U^jk.   J0010    ".  o»a^>   i\(   K**-3l/ 
.oiii— X    )fcs-.?oi   fcoaXaoo     .*  oifcociiM^s   Ljj*>   »*»r>l^*>(o 

i.e.  'The  air  rejoiced  in  it:  And  there  was  quiet  and  rest, 
And  the  Lord  was  glorified  in  His  wisdom,  And  thanks 
mounted  to  His  grace.' 

After  these  preliminaries,  the  poetry  of  the  Odes  may  be 
summarized  as  follows  : 

Rhythm  and  Strophe. 

The  rhythm  proceeds  regularly  throughout  ;  we  give  two 
examples  according  to  the  terminology  sanctioned  by  G.  B.  Gray 
in  his  Forms  of  Hebrew  Poetry  (pp.  132-3). 

Example  of  a  balancing  rhythm  : 

'And  His  members  are  with  Him 
And  on  them  do  I  hang  and  He  loves  me.' — iii.  2. 

Example  of  an  echoing  rhythm  : 

'  Distil  Thy  dew  upon  us 
And  open  Thy  rich  fountains  that  pour  forth  to  us  milk 
and  honey.' — iv.  10. 

Generally  two  parallelisms  constitute  a  strophe  of  complete 
meaning.     For  example : 

'  ( )pen  ye,  open  ye  your  hearts  to  the  exultation  of  the  Lord, 
And  let  your  love  abound  from  the  heart  and  even  to  the  lips, 
To  bring  forth  fruits  to  the  Lord,  a  holy  life, 
And  to  talk  watchfully  in  His  light. — viii.  1,  2. 

1  They  have  been  re-cdited  by  Nan  in  Patrologia  Syriaca,  ii,  p.  517,  and  by 
A.  Scher  in  Corp.  Script.  Christ.  Orient.,  vol.  lxvi,  p.  308. 


POETRY   OF   THE   ODES  129 

Frequently,  however,  one  parallelism  andj  a  half  constitute 
a  strophe : 

'  My  heart  was  cloven  and  its  flower  appeared, 
And  grace  sprang  up  in  it, 
And  it  brought  forth  fruit  to  the  Lord.' 

Metre. 
Strictly  speaking,  no  regular  metrical  measures  are  found  in 
the  Odes.     However,  by  scanning  carefully  the  lines  many  half- 
strophes  fall  into  seven-syllabled  metre,  the  most  used  in  Syriac 
literature ;  next  come  the  fifth,  sixth,  and  fourth-syllable  metres  : 

(seven  syllables)  Ode  iii.  2. 

(six  syllables)  Ode  xxxix.  1,  2. 
•  «X  )ooj   Ui3»a£>    *.  w^i>-»?   ^.?  jLooo.^o 

(five  syllables)  Ode  xxviii.  11. 
♦.  .aaiw  "^vaolo    *.  yQ^lf9(   a*.1^3 

(four  syllables)  Ode  ix.  1,  2. 

A  combination  of  this  syllabic  arrangement  gives  even  lines 
of  8,  9,  10,  12  syllables;  but  the  arrangement  being  so  unsteady 
and  somewhat  superficial,  it  has  not  been  found  necessary  to  follow 
it  in  our  numbering  either  of  the  verses  of  the  text  or  of  those 
of  the  translation. 

Parallelism. 

The  Aramaeo-Hebraic  parallelism  is  represented  in  the  Odes 
from  beginning  to  end  with  all  its  subdivisions.  We  give  an 
example  of  complete  and  another  of  incomplete  parallelism. 

11  K 


130  INTRODUCTION 

Complete : 

'  The  work  of  His  hands 
And  the  fabric  of  His  fingers  ; 
The  multitude  of  His  mercies 
And  the  strength  of  His  word.' — xvi.  6,  7. 

Incomplete : 

'  I  have  been  united 
For  the  lover  has  found  the  beloved.' — iii.  7. 

The  numbers  of  the  verses  of  the  Odes  have  been  adapted 
to  parallelism.  This  adaptation,  as  in  the  case  with  the  canonical 
Psalter  and  some  prophetic  books,  can  sometimes  be  amplified 
by  subdivision  of  the  text  so  that  one  parallelism  should  contain 
two  verses  instead  of  one;  the  examples  just  quoted  can  serve 
as  an  illustration : 

'  I.  I  have  been  united 

for  the  lover  has  found  the  beloved, 
2.  In  order  that  I  may  love  Him  that  is  the  Son 
I  shall  become  a  son.' 

In  many  cases  we  have  assigned  one  number  which  we  have, 
however,  divided  into  two  by  means  of  letters  1  a,  1  b.  This 
might  have  been  done  for  some  other  cases,  but  in  occurrences 
of  this  kind  there  is  a  great  deal  of  variety  in  the  possible  arrange- 
ment, so  that  here,  too,  the  best  thing  to  do  is  to  leave  the  matter 
to  every  one's  own  judgement. 

Parallelism  is  not  always  a  good  guarantee  for  the  right  trans- 
lation of  adverse  ;  for  example  : 

'And  let  our  faces  shine  in  His  light 
And  let  our  hearts  meditate  in  His  love 
By  night  and  by  day 
Let  us  exult  with  the  joy  of  the  Lord.' — xli.  6,  7. 

It  is  evident  that  we  ought  to  join  the  sentence  'By  night  and 
by  day '  to  the  preceding  member ;  for  the  Odist  is  imitating 
the  first  canonical  Psalm  (Ps.  i.  2) ;    but   the  poetical  parallelism 


POETRY   OF   THE   ODES  131 

contradicts  that  of  the  MS.,  and  requires  that  the  same  sentence 
should  be  attached  to  the  following  member : 

'  By  night  and  by  day 
Let  us  exult  with  the  joy  of  the  Lord.' 

In  many  other  places  the  sense  was  not  so  obvious ;  in  such 
cases,  we  have  followed  the  indications  of  the  MS.,  leaving  the 
ultimate  question  of  division  of  the  verses  to  be  decided  by  every 
one's  own  taste.     For  example : 

'  And  His  cleaving  (of  my  heart)  became  my  salvation, 
And  I  ran  in  the  way,  in  His  peace, 
In  the  way  of  truth. 
From  beginning  and  even  to  the  end 
I  acquired  His  knowledge, 
And  I  was  established  upon  the  rock  of  truth.' — xi.  3,  4. 

It  is  obvious  that  one  may  refer  the  sentence  '  From  beginning 
and  even  to  the  end  '  to  the  first  member,  as  meaning,  '  I  ran 
in  the  way  of  truth  from  beginning  and  even  to  the  end ' ;  and 
one  may  refer  it  equally  well  to  the  following  member  as  meaning 
'From  beginning  and  even  to  the  end  I  acquired  His  knowledge'. 
In  such  cases  it  was  safer  to  follow  the  MS.  and  leave  speculations 
aside. 

We  conclude  this  short  study  by  remarking  that  the  poetical 
style,  or  the  poetry,  of  the  Odes  is  more  Hebraic  and  Bardesanian 
and  more  early  Syriac  than  Ephremic,  or  later  Syriac ;  and,  with 
some  reserve  for  our  ignorance  of  early  Syriac  poetry,  we  would 
venture  to  add  that  it  is  more  Hebraic  than  early  Syriac,  except  in 
supposing  (and  this  might  probably  have  been  the  case)  that  the 
early  Syriac  poetry  was  modelled  on  that  of  the  Hebrew  of  the  Old 
Testament. 

Another  question  dealing  with  the  Odes  will  not  be  out  of 
place  here.  Since  they  are  undoubtedly  written  in  poetical  style, 
and  are  devotional  hymns,  have  they  ever  been  used  in  the 
churches?     To  this  question  we  can  only  give  a  very  imperfect 

K  2 


132  INTRODUCTION 

answer,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  books  containing  the  breviaries 
of  the  Syrian  Churches  which  we  were  able  to  read  were  printed  for 
the  use  of  those  Syrians  who  are  in  communion  with  the  Church 
of  Rome.  Generally  the  printing  of  these  books  is  undertaken 
by  the  Roman  congregation  De  Propaganda  Fide,  and  the  editors 
carefully  expunge  from  them  everything  that  is  not  in  accordance 
with  the  doctrine  of  Rome  and  its  canon  of  the  Bible ;  such  is  the 
case  with  the  Breviarium  Chaldaicum  of  the  Eastern  Syrian  Church 
(1886-7,  Paris,  vols,  i,  ii,  iii),  and  the  Breviarium  iuxta  ritum 
cedes,  antioch.  Syrorum  of  the  Western  Syrian  Church  (1886-98, 
Mosul,  vols,  i,  ii,  iii,  iv,  v,  vi,  vii).  For  purposes  of  comparison 
we  have  read  the  first  publication  and  the  first  three  volumes 
of  the  second,  and  we  have  not  found  any  use  of  the  Solomonic 
Odes  in  them. 

Our  knowledge  is,  therefore,  reduced  to  our  two  MSS.  From 
the  indications  of  H  it  appears  that  the  text  was  sung  in  the 
churches,  or  in  some  devotional  meetings,  of  the  Western  Syrians. 
Syrians  in  general  have  the  habit  of  dividing  a  verse  of  the 
canonical  Psalms  into  two,  and  of  inserting  a  Hallelujah  between 
the  two  parts.  The  English  reader  would  have  an  idea  of  this 
process  if  in  all  half-verses  of  the  second  Psalm  he  were  to  read  : 
'  Why  do  the  heathen  rage,  Hallelujah,  and  the  people  imagine  a 
vain  thing.  The  Kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  Hallelujah  .  .  .,' 
&c.  The  Western  Syrians  have  every  day  such  Psalms  sung  in 
public  with  a  special  tune,  the  one  used  in  the  evenings  being 
invariably  the  91st.  Coming  to  the  Odes,  the  facsimiles  will  show 
that  in  the  first  part  of  them  the  verses  have  the  letter  «,  sign 
of  Hallelujah,  inserted  between  the  first  and  the  second  member, 
and  this  is  an  unmistakable  mark  that  these  same  verses  were  sung 
in  an  ecclesiastical  gathering,  or,  more  probably,  in  the  churches. 
It  is  necessary,  however,  to  point  out  that  the  letter  ©»  of  Hallelujah 
is  only  exhibited  in  Odes  iii-xxviii,  and  is  missing  in  Odes 
xxviii-xlii. 


UNITY   OF   THE    ODES  133 

CHAPTER   XII 
Unity  of  the  Odes. 

As  Kittel  has  rightly  pointed  out,  a  composition  transmitted  to 
posterity  as  a  literary  unity  is  to  be  so  considered  until  the  contrary 
is  established  beyond  doubt.  The  first  serious  attempt  to  challenge 
the  unity  of  the  Odes  has  been  made  by  Harnack,  who,  believing 
them  to  be  a  Jewish  production,  found  himself  bound  to  declare  all 
the  obviously  Christian  passages  which  they  contain  to  be  mere 
interpolations.  An  attentive  perusal  of  the  Odes  makes  it  probable, 
however,  that,  generally  speaking,  all  of  them  emanate  from  a 
single  source.  This  can  be  proved  by  the  contents  of  the  Odes 
and  by  their  form. 

1.     Contents  of  the  Odes. 

The  concordance  to  the  text  of  the  Odes  placed  at  the  end 
of  this  volume  will  be  useful  for  our  investigations.  It  will  be 
found  that  in  general  the  theme  developed  by  the  Odist  is  one 
throughout.  The  most  striking  features  in  the  whole  collection 
may  be  summarized  as  follows  : 

Love.  Ode  iii.  2-5:  'And  (His?)  members  are  with  Him,  and 
on  them  do  I  hang,  and  He  loves  me.  For  I  should  not  have 
known  how  to  love  the  Lord,  if  He  had  not  loved  me.  For  who 
is  able  to  distinguish  love,  except  one  that  is  loved  ?  I  love  the 
Beloved,  and  my  soul  loves  Him,  and  where  His  rest  is,  there 
also  am  I.'  See  further  vi.  2;  vii.  19;  viii.  1,  13  ;  xi.  2;  xii.  12; 
xiv.  6  ;  xvi.  2,  3  ;  xvii.  12  ;  xviii.  1  ;  xxiii.  3  ;  xl.  4  ;   xli.  2,  6  ;  xlii. 

7,  9.     Besides,  the   verb   meaning    '  to    love '    is    used    five  times, 
and  the  adjective  '  beloved  '  three  times. 

Knozvledge.  Ode  vi.  6  :  '  The  Lord  has  multiplied  His  know- 
ledge, and  is  zealous  that  those  things  should  be  known  which  by 
His  grace  have  been  given  to  us.'     See  further  vii.  7,  13,  21  ;  viii. 

8,  12;  xi.  4 ;  xii.  3;  xv.  5 ;  xvii.  12;  xxiii.  4;  xxxiv.  5.     Besides, 
the  verb  meaning  '  to  know  '  is  expressed  forty-five  times. 

Ignorance  is  expressed  in  vii.  21,  23  ;  xi.  8  ;  xviii.  11  ;  xxviii.  13. 
Faith.     Ode  iv.  5  :  '  For  one  hour  of  thy  faith  is  more  precious 


134  INTRODUCTION 

than  all  days  and  years.'  See  further  viii.  1 1  ;  xvi.  4 ;  xxii.  7  ; 
xxviii.  3  ;  xxix.  6  ;   xxxiv.  6  ;  xxxix.  5,  13  ;  xli.  1  ;  xlii.  9,  19. 

Truth.  Ode  viii.  8  :  '  Hear  the  Word  of  Truth  and  receive  the 
knowledge  of  the  Most  High.'  See  further  ix.  8  ;  xi.  3,  5  ;  xii.  1,  2, 
13,  13  ;  xiv.  7  ;  xv.  4 ;  xvii.  5,  7  ;  xviii.  6,  15  ;  xx.  9  ;  xxiii.  18  ; 
xxiv.  10,  12  ;  xxv.  10;  xxxi.  2  ;  xxxii.  2  ;  xxxiii.  8  ;  xxxviii.  1,  4, 
7,  10,  15;  xxxix.  10;  xli.  1,  9,  15,  16. 

Error.  Ode  xv.  6  :  '  The  way  of  error  I  have  left  and  I  went 
towards  Him.'  See  further  xviii.  10,  14;  xxxi.  2  ;  xxxviii.  6,8,  10. 
For  the  use  of  the  verb  meaning  '  to  err '  see  xvii.  5  ;  xxxi.  2  ; 
xxxviii.  4,  5,  II. 

Glorification  or  Praise.  Ode  vi.  7  :  'And  His  praise  He  gave 
us  for  His  name.'  See  further  x.  4  ;  xi.  17  ;  xii.  4  ;  xiii.  2  ;  xiv.  5  ; 
xvi.  1,  2,  5,  20  ;  xvii.  16  ;  xviii.  16  ;  xx.  9  ;  xxi.  9  ;  xxvi.  1,  5  ; 
xxix.  2,  11  ;  xxxi.  3  ;  xxxvi.  2  ;  xl.  2  ;  xli.  4,  16.  Besides,  the  verb 
meaning  to  '  glorify ',  to  '  praise  ',  is  used  twelve  times. 

Rest.  Ode  iii.  5:  'And  where  His  rest  is,  there  also  am  I.' 
See  further  xi.  ]  2  ;  xiv.  6  ;  xx.  8  ;  xxv.  12  ;  xxvi.  3,  10,  12  ;  xxviii. 
3  ;  xxx.  2,  7  ;  xxxv.  6  ;  xxxvi.  1  ;  xxxvii.  4. 

Grace.  Ode  iv.  6  :  '  For  who  is  there  that  shall  put  on  Thy 
grace  and  be  injured  ?  '  See  further  v.  3  ;  vi.  6  ;  vii.  22,  25  ;  ix.  5  ; 
xi.  1  ;  xv.  8  ;  xx.  7  ;  xxiii.  2,  4  ;  xxiv.  13  ;  xxv.  4  ;  xxix.  2,  5  ; 
xxxi.  3,  7;  xxxiii.  1,  10;  xxxiv.  6;  xxxvii.  4;  xli.  3. 

Light.  Ode  vii.  14:  'And  He  set  over  it  the  trace  of  His 
light.'  See  further  v.  6  ;  vi.  17  ;  viii.  2  ;  x.  1,  6  ;  xi.  11,  19  ;  xii. 
3,  7  ;  xv.  2  ;  xvi.  15 ;  xxi.  3,  6  ;  xxv.  7  ;  xxix.  7  ;  xxxii.  1  ; 
xxxviii.  1  ;  xli.  6,  14. 

Darkness.  Ode  xi.  19:  'And  they  grow  in  the  growth  of  thy 
trees,  and  the}-  change  from  darkness  to  light.'  See  further  v.  5  ; 
xv.  2;  xvi.  15,  16;  xviii.  6;  xxi.  3;   xxxi.  1  ;  xlii.  16. 

Thought.  Ode  ix.  3  :  '  The  word  of  the  Lord  and  His  good 
pleasures,  the  holy  thought  that  He  has  thought  concerning  His 
Messiah.'  See  further  ix.  4-5;  X11-  4>  7  !  xv-  5!  xvl-  8,  9,  19; 
xvii.  5  ;  xviii.  14  ;  xx.  2,  3  ;  xxi.  j  ;  xxiii.  5,  19  ;  xxiv.  7  ;  xxviii. 
19  ;  xxxiv.  2  ;  xxxviii.  21 ;  xli.  10. 


UNITY    OF   THE   ODES  135 

Mark,  Trace,  Seal.  Ode  iv.  7  :  '  For  Thy  seal  is  known  and 
Thy  creatures  are  known  by  it.'  See  further  vii.  14;  x.  6  ;  xxiii. 
8,  9,  12;  xxvii.  2  ;  xxix.  7  ;  xxxix.  7,  10,  11  ;  xlii.  1. 

Way.  Ode  vii.  13  :  ' For  it  is  to  Knowledge  He  hath  appointed 
His  way.'  See  further  iii.  10  ;  xi.  3  ;  xii.  6;  xvii.  8  ;  xxii.  7,  1 1  ; 
xxiii.  15;  xxiv.  13;  xxxiii.  8,  13;  xxxiv.  1  ;  xxxviii.  7;  xxxix.  7, 
13  ;  xli.  11  ;  xlii.  2. 

Righteousness  and  Jtistification.  Ode  viii.  5  :  'Ye  who  were 
despised  be  lifted  up,  now  that  your  righteousness  has  been  lifted 
up.'  See  further  viii.  21  ;  ix.  10;  xvii.  2;  xx.  4;  xxv.  10,  12; 
xxix.  5  ;  xxxi.  5  ;  xxxvi.  7  ;  xli.  12. 

Corruption  and  Incormption.  Ode  viii.  23  :  '  And  ye  shall  be 
found  incorrupt  in  all  ages  to  the  name  of  your  Father.'  See  further 
vii.  n  ;  ix.  4 ;  xi.  12;  xv.  8  ;  xvii.  2;  xxi.  5;  xxii.  11  ;  xxviii.  5; 
xxxiii.  1,  7,  12;  xxxviii.  9;  xl.  6.  Besides,  the  verb  meaning  'to 
corrupt '  is  used  fifteen  times. 

Life.  Ode  ix.  4  :  '  For  in  the  will  of  the  Lord  is  your  life,  and 
His  thought  is  everlasting  life.'  See  further  iii.  9  ;  vi.  18  ;  viii.  2; 
x.  2,  6;  xv.  10  ;  xxii.  10  ;  xxiv.  8  ;  xxvi.  9  ;  xxviii  6  ;  xxxi.  7  ; 
xxxviii.  3  ;  xl.  6 ;  xli.  3  ;  xlii.  14.  Besides,  the  verb  meaning  '  to 
live '  is  used  seven  times,  and  the  adjective  meaning  '  living ' 
eight  times. 

Salvation.  Ode  v.  1 1  :  '  And  because  the  Lord  is  my  salvation 
I  will  not  fear.'  See  further  vii.  16  ;  xi.  3  ;  xv.  6  ;  xvii.  2  ;  xviii.  7  ; 
xix.  11  ;  xxi.  2  ;  xxv.  2 ;  xxviii.  2  ;  xxxi.  13  ;  xxxiv.  4  ;  xxxv.  2  ; 
xxxviii.  3 ;  xl.  5.  Besides,  the  verb  meaning  '  to  save '  is  used 
seventeen  times. 

Word.  Ode.  x.  1  :  '  The  Lord  hath  directed  my  mouth  by  His 
Word.'  See  further  vii.  7  ;  viii.  8  ;  ix.  3  ;  xii.  3,  5,  8,  10,  12  ;  xv.  9 ; 
xvi.  7,  8, 14,  19  ;  xviii.  4  ;  xxiv.  9  ;  xxix.  9,  10;  xxxii.  2  ;  xxxvii.  3; 
xxxix.  9;  xli.  11,  14;  xlii.  14. 

Face.  Ode  xi.  14 :  '  My  eyes  were  enlightened  and  my  face 
received  the  dew.'  See  further  viii.  14  ;  xiii.  2,  3  ;  xv.  2,  9  ;  xvii.  4; 
xxi.  6,  9  ;  xxii.  1 1  ;  xxv.  4 ;  xxxi.  5  ;  xxxvi.  3  ;  xl.  4  ;  xli.  6  ; 
xlii.  13. 


136  INTRODUCTION 

Right-hand.  Ode  xix.  5 :  '  And  gave  the  mixture  to  the  world 
without  their  knowing,  and  those  who  take  it  are  in  the  fullness  of 
the  right  hand.'  Sec  further  viii.  6,  20;  xiv.  4;  xviii.  7  ;  xxii.  7  ; 
xxv.  2,  7,  9  ;  xxviii.  15 ;  xxxviii.  20. 

Some  less  general  but  more  characteristic  topics  of  the  Odes  are 
the  following : 

1.  Allusions  are  made  to  a  mystical  crown  in  Odes  i.  1  ;  v.  12  ; 
ix.  8,  9,  11  ;  xvii.  1  ;  xx.  7. 

2.  Four  passages  mention  a  harp,  generally  the  Lord's  harp  on 
which  the  believer  wants  to  play.  Odes  vi.  1  ;  vii.  17  ;  xiv.  8  ; 
xxvi.  3. 

3.  The  idea  of  God  being  the  helper  of  man  is  expressed  in 
vii.  3 ;  viii.  6;  xxi.  2,  5 ;  xxii.  6  ;  xxv.  2,  6  ;  xxvi.  13. 

4.  The  idea  of  experiencing  an  effect  on  the  face,  or  of  acquiring 
a  new  face,  is  expressed  in  xvii.  4 ;  xxi.  9  ;  xl.  4  ;  xli.  6.  See  for 
further  references  the  above  heading,  Face. 

5.  The  offering  to  God  of  the  fruit  of  the  lips  (Heb.  xiii.  15)  is 
mentioned  in  viii.  1-2  ;  xii.  2  ;  xvi.  2;  xx.  4;  xxxvii.  2-3;  xl.  2. 

6.  The  figure  of  the  milk  from  the  breasts  of  God  is  emphasized 
in  viii.  16  ;  xiv.  2  ;  xix.  2-3  ;  xxxv.  4-6  ;  xl.  1. 

7.  The  joy  felt  by  good  people  is  found  in  vii.  1-2,  17;  xv.  1  ; 
xxiii.  1  ;  xxxi.  3,  6  ;  xxxii.  1. 

8.  The  peace  in  which  true  believers  live  is  mentioned  in  viii.  7  ; 
ix.  6  ;  x.  2 ;  xi.  3  ;  xxxv.  1  ;  xxxvi.  8. 

9.  The  general  idea  of  fruits  of  God  or  man  is  expressed  in 
iv.  4  ;  vii.  1 ;  viii.  2  ;  xi.  1  ;  xiv.  6-7  ;  xvii.  13  ;  xxxvii.  3. 

jo.  For  putting  on  of  Christ,  His  grace,  His  light,  &c,  see  iv. 
6,  8  ;  vii.  4 ;  xiii.  3  ;  xv.  8 ;  xx.  7  ;  xxi.  3  ;  xxiii.  1,3;  xxxiii.  1 2  ; 
xxxix.  8. 

11.  On  the  rescue  from  bonds  affected  by  Christ  by  His  descent 
into  Hades  or  otherwise,  see  x.  2-5;  xv.  9  ;  xvii.  8-16 ;  xxi.  2,  4  ; 
xxii.  8-9;  xxv.  1,  3-4,  9,  11-12;  xiii.  11-20. 

12.  The  idea  of  God  being  our  hope  is  in  v.  2,  10;  xxix.  1  ; 
xl.  1. 

From  the  foregoing  quotations  and  references  it  seems  to  us 


UNITY   OF   THE    ODES  137 

probable  that  the  Odes  are  derived  from  one  source.  The 
characteristic  features  which  form  their  essence  link  them,  indeed, 
to  one  another  so  closely  that  it  is  very  difficult  not  to  ascribe 
the  whole  collection  to  a  single  man,  or,  at  all  events,  to  a  single 
school  of  thought.  This  unity  of  thought  had  evidently  been 
noticed  by  Harnack  himself,  for  he  writes  '  Nimmt  man  sie  in  der 
Gestalt,  in  der  sie  uns  vorliegen,  als  eine  einheitliche  und  originale 
Sammlung '. 

z.    Form  of  the  Odes. 

If  we  examine  the  form  in  which  the  Odes  have  come  down  to 
us  it  will  appear  that  as  their  main  thoughts  and  theological 
expressions  are  one,  the  thread  of  their  narrative  is  also  unmis- 
takably one.  The  following  considerations  will  render  this  view 
probable  : 

(a)  In  all  the  above  features  the  Syriac  words  used  are  identical. 
In  case  of  the  Odes  being  a  translation  from  another  language 
it  goes  to  the  credit  of  the  Syrian  translator  that  so  little  change 
in  the  lexicological  form  of  the  narrative  is  noticeable  in  his  work. 
Two  instances  only  to  the  contrary  are  somewhat  striking ;  the 
first  is  the  employment  of  the  verbs  *a«./  and  |*~J  in  the  sense 
of 'to  love'.  Lexicographically  speaking,  the  former  conveys  more 
the  sense  of  '  love '  than  the  latter,  which  naturally  means  to 
'  unite  in  friendship,  to  befriend,  to  pity'.  This  etymological  sense 
is,  however,  not  followed  by  Syrian  writers,  with  whom  both  verbs 
have  acquired  an  almost  identical  meaning,  although  in  their 
derived  nouns  of  action  the  etymological  distinction  is  frequently 
preserved.  The  second  example  is  the  alternate  use  of  jl^x»  and 
Uo^fc-3  to  express  '  Word '  or  '  word ',  cf.  p.  92.  Some  other 
instances  may  be  mentioned  here,  such  as  JJ^aaOo  and  JK*-V»i 
'thought',  'intention',  U*j  and  jlcu*o  'rest',  Jl**aoJ  and  J»aioJ»ao 
'  ode,  psalm  ',  &c.  But  since  the  exact  meaning  conveyed  through 
them  by  the  first  author  is  not  clear,  the  determination  of  their 
linguistic  meaning  would  require  useless  lexicographical  subtleties 
on  which  much  should  not  be  built. 


i.?N  INTRODUCTION 

(b)  Some  Odes  are  united  to  one  another  by  the  same  process 
of  introducing  the  subject.  So  Odes  viii,  ix,  x,  and  xiii  begin  with 
the  imperative  '  open  ye  '.  Odes  111,  vii,  viii,  xiii,  xxxiv  end  with  an 
exhortation  to  the  believers  or  singers,  and  Odes  xi,  xvi,  xvii,  xviii, 
xx,  xli  with  a  doxological  formula.  The  beginning  of  Odes  vi.  xiv, 
xv,  xvi,  xxviii  have  an  identical  way  of  expressing  a  comparison. 


CHAPTER   XIII 

Syriac   or   Greek? 

We  come  now  to  one  of  the  most  difficult  parts  of  our  inquiry, 
the  determination  of  the  original  language  in  which  the  Odes  were 
composed.  We  shall  assume  them  to  be  Christian,  for  all  objections 
on  this  side  are  either  superficial  and  need  not  be  regarded,  or 
they  are  such  as  are  evanescent  as  soon  as  we  succeed  in  getting 
at  the  meaning  of  the  author.  No  one  who  has  spent  any  time 
on  the  study  of  the  book  would  lay  any  stress  on  the  fact  that 
the  name  of  Jesus  does  not  appear  in  its  pages,  for  it  is  clear 
that  the  author  has  a  distinct  Christology,  not  very  different  from 
that  of  the  Nicene  theology,  and  employs  most  of  the  terms  and 
figures  in  which  the  early  Christians  expressed  their  doctrine  of 
the  Divine  nature.  His  Christ  is  the  Christian's  Christ,  with  an 
Incarnation  in  terms  more  pronounced,  in  some  respects,  than 
the  New  Testament  itself. 

In  many  of  the  Odes,  Christ  is  Himself  the  speaker,  for  whom 
the  Odist  artificially  moves  on  one  side,  after  a  slight  overture, 
and  who  is  the  subject  of  the  final  doxology  with  which  the  Ode 
concludes,  at  least  in  certain  cases. 

Consequently  our  problem  reduces  to  this :  we  have  a  Christian 
book  of  hymns  written  in  or  on  the  borders  of  the  first  century, 
and  we  have  to  decide  whether  of  two  forms  to  which  we  trace 
it  in  early  times  (the  Greek  or  the  Syriac),  either  can  be  regarded 
as  the  origin  of  the  other.     Did  the  Odist  write  in  Syriac?   and 


SYRIAC   OR   GREEK 


139 


did  someone  render  him  into  Greek?  Or  was  it  the  converse? 
Is  it  possible  that  the  author  was  responsible  for  the  issue  of  his 
^*r*c.  <n  a  bilingual  form  ?  For  we  have  great  bilingual  scholars 
like  Bardaisan  capable  of  writing  such  Odes,  and  we  have  great 
bilingual  Churches  like  Antioch  capable  of  singing  them.  We 
shall  try  in  the  present  chapter  to  clear  up  the  relation  between 
the  Greek  and  the  Syriac.  If  any  further  hypothesis  should  be 
necessary,  such  as  the  existence  of  another  Semitic  speech  behind 
the  Greek  and  Syriac,  we  can  resort  to  it,  but  certainly  not  before 
it  is  necessary ;  for  the  antiquity  of  both  Greek  and  Syriac  forms  of 
the  Odes  is  now  well  attested. 

One  of  the  first  things  which  the  student  of  the  Odes  will 
gather  from  the  translations  which  are  offered  in  the  present 
volume  is  the  unusual  amount  of  Semitism  in  the  language  of 
the  Odes.  There  is  a  constant  recurrence  of  paronomasia,  to  which 
we  have  drawn  attention  elsewhere,  which  at  first  sight,  at  all 
events,  appears  to  be  Semitic  paronomasia  ;  such  cases  as : 

'  I  was  truthed  on  the  rock  of  truth' — Ode  xi. 

'  I  was  covered  with  the  covering  of  thy  Spirit.' —  Ode  xxv. 

'  Blessing  He  blessed  me.' — Ode  xxviii. 

'  My  heart  gushes  out  a. gush.' — Ode  xxxvi. 

and- the  like. 

Besides  these  Semitic  idioms  and  assonances  there  are  instances 
of  Semitic  word-play  which  at  first  sight  seem  inexplicable  except 
in  the  Syriac  language.  It  was  not  surprising  that  the  'midwife' 
passage  in  Ode  xix  should  have  been  claimed  by  Mingana  as 
a  decisive  Syriacism,  since  such  language  as 

'  She  had  not  sought  a  midwife  ()l^*«), 
For  He  was  midwife  to  her  (e»— »/),' 

does  not  appear,  at  first  sight,  to  be  possible  except  in  Syriac, 
for  in  what  other  language  would   it  be  possible  to  produce  or 


HO  INTRODUCTION 

reproduce  the  word-play  ?  Thus  \vc  find  ourselves  face  to  face 
with  a  row  of  decided  Semitisms,  such  as  would  not  normally 
occur  in  translation,  and  the  first  suggestion  is  to  conclude  that 
the  Syriac  Odes  have  precedence  over  the  Greek  Odes. 

The  same  suggestion  comes  up  when  we  explore  into  the  Greek 
Odes  which  underlie  the  Coptic  tradition.  Cases  occur  in  which 
the  Syriac  appears  to  be  the  better  text  than  the  Copto-Greek 
text,  and  perhaps  to  be  responsible  for  it.  Here  is  an  extremely 
suggestive  instance.     The  opening  of  the  fifth  Ode  is  in  Syriac  : 

L.;_ao   ^   \i(   )»o-ao 

of  which  the  natural  translation  is  : 

'  I  will  give  thanks  to  thee,  O  Lord.' 

The  Coptic  equivalent  to  this  has  caused  hesitation  to  translators, 
who  have  wavered  between 

'  Gratias  tibi  agam,  domine; ' 
and 

•  Manifestabo  tibi,  domine  ; ' 

and  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  second  translation,  which  is  a  literal 
rendering  of  the  Coptic,  should  be  regarded  as  a  misunderstanding 
of  the  Syriac,  through  the  substitution  of  U^?a.ao  for  the  almost 
equivalent  Ja.-?aio.  If  such  a  substitution  could  be  justified,  and 
if  parallel  cases  of  misreading  or  misunderstanding  could  be  found, 
the  Syriac  would  move  into  the  place  of  honour. 

These,  then,  are  some  of  the  directions  in  which  a  careful  study 
of  the  related  texts  is  necessary.  Even  a  late  Syriac  text  like  ours 
would  acquire  predominance  if  it  furnished  explanation  of  variants 
or  readings  in  Greek  or  Coptic,  and  if  it  was  intelligible  where  the 
Greek  was,  relatively  to  itself,  obscure ;  and  in  our  case  the  Syriac 
is  no  longer  to  be  regarded  as  late,  for  its  antiquity  is  established. 
The  MSS.  may  be  modern,  but  the  text  is  that  of  Ephrem,  and, 
perhaps,  of  Bardaisan. 

On   the   other  hand,  we  shall    have  to  walk  warily,  if  we  are 


SYRIAC    OR    GREEK  141 

to  reach  the  true  solution.  For  example,  in  the  sporadic  instances 
already  cited,  no  conclusion  is  to  be  drawn  from  the  expression 
in  Ode  xxviii  : 

'  He  has  richly  blessed  me  ; ' 

for  this  is  a  reproduction  of  Genesis  xxii.  17,  where  the  LXX  is 
ev\oya>v  tvXoyijaa)  ere,  and  may  just  as  well  be  a  reproduction  of 
a  Greek  text  as  an  original  Semitism  of  the  Odist. 

In  the  same  way  the  instance  of  misunderstood  Syriac  in  the 
opening  verse  of  Ode  v  disappears  upon  closer  examination.  The 
case  is  exactly  the  same  as  that  in  which  Pistis  Sophia  quotes 
the  107th  Psalm,  where  the  German  translators  have  again 
given  us : 

'  Manifestate  Domino,  quod  (/.  quia)  est  xprjGTos : ' 

it  is,  however,  the  regular  translation  of  the  LXX  : 

egofxoXoyeiaOe  tw  Kvpico  on  Xprjo-Tos  ktL 

and  should  have  been  translated  : 

'  Gratias  agite  Domino/  &c. 

We  were,  then,  correct  in  explaining  the  Syriac  word  as  e£op.o- 
Xoyrjao/xai,  but  wrong  in  suggesting  '  manifestabo '  as  a  translation 
of  the  parallel  Coptic.  With  the  translation  corrected  the  supposed 
Syriac  variant  disappears.  It  was  a  mere  blunder  of  the  first 
German  translators  in  the  use  of  the  Coptic  dictionary. 

The  '  midwife '  passage  is  not  so  easy  to  clear  up.  Here  the 
paronomasia  in  the  Syriac  is  very  pronounced,  and  the  challenge  to 
produce  a  similar  one  in  Greek  is  very  resonant.  We  may  find  the 
key,  perhaps,  in  Eusebius,  who  has  used  the  Greek  Odes  in  this 
very  passage,  and  who  speaks  of  God  the  Father  as  /xaiovpasos. 
This  suggests  a  Greek  rendering : 

ovk  k£rjTT]o-c  jicuav' 

eKtivos  yap  ep.aia>craTo  avTrjv. 

and  when  we  write  it  down  in  that  form  we  see  another  possible 


142  INTRODUCTION 

word-play  involved  in  the  text ;  for  the  word  fia.i6ofj.ai,  '  to  bring 
to  bed ',  has  another  word,  so  closely  related  to  it  as  hardly  to 
be  distinguished  from  it,  viz.  fiaiofiai,  'to  seek  '.  We  must,  there- 
fore, replace  e^r/T^cre  by  kfiaUro  (or  some  nearly  coincident  form)  : 
we  may  then  restore  as  follows : 

ovk  in^fiaUro  fialav' 

kKzivos  yap  efJ.aia)aaro  avrrju. 

The  paronomasia  would  then  be  double  in  Greek  ;  and  the  Syriac 
would  have  cleverly  retained  one  half  of  it. 

These  considerations  will  show  how  careful  one  needs  to  be 
in  avoiding  hasty  or  premature  solutions  of  the  problem. 

It  may  perhaps  be  thought  that  this  attempt  to  reconstruct 
the  lost  Greek  of  the  sentence  in  the  Ode  which  describes  the 
miraculous  birth  has  the  inherent  weakness  of  conjectural  restora- 
tion and  of  over-subtlety.  The  following  consideration  will  operate 
in  support  of  the  theory  of  an  original  Greek  at  this  point.  The 
Syriac  sentence  is  certainly  an  exposition  of  the  verse  in  the 
22nd  Psalm  to  which  allusion  has  been  made  above  ;  but  this  verse 
is  not  extant  in  the  Peshitta  version  ;  it  is  replaced  by  something 
quite  different.  It  follows,  then,  that  unless  we  assume  the  Peshitta 
version  as  we  possess  it  to  have  varied  from  its  original  type,  the 
verse  in  the  Psalm  cannot  have  been  expounded  in  the  Syriac, 
but  only  from  the  Greek,  or  (in  the  last  resort  for  possible  sources) 
from  the  Hebrew. 

This  makes  it  possible  that  we  have  restored  the  Greek  with 
some  measure  of  correctness,  and  that  the  Greek  is  the  original 
rather  than  the  Syriac. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  sentence  which  is  wanting  in  the  Peshitta 
is  extant  in  the  Targum,  and  we  must  reserve  the  possibility  that 
the  Odist  was  acquainted  with  the  Targum.  For  such  an  ac- 
quaintance might  exactly  reverse  the  argument,  and  reduce  to 
zero  the  value  of  our  Greek  speculation.  Mingana's  argument  for 
Aramaism  would  hold  the  field. 


SYRIAC    OR   GREEK  143 

Now  let  us  see  whether  there  are  other  directions  in  which 
we  can  pick  up  clues  for  the  determination  of  priority.  Here  is 
an  extremely  interesting  case  at  the  close  of  the  25th  Ode.  In 
this  Ode  the  sentence,  '  I  became  the  Lord's  by  the  name  of  the 
Lord ',  was  emended  wrongly  in  the  first  edition  to  '  I  became 
admirable  by  the  name  of  the  Lord',  on  the  ground  that  the 
former  expression  was  unintelligible.  There  was  no  need  of  such 
a  correction.  It  means  '  I  became  a  Christian  by  the  name  of 
Christ ',  or  '  I  became  Christ's  by  becoming  a  Christian '.  We  may 
compare  the  following  passages : 

Just.  Ap.  i,  12:  'Jesus  Christ,  from  whom  also  we  have 
received  the  appellation  of  Christians' 

Just.  Dial.  63  :  '  The  Church,  which  arose  from  his  name 
and  partakes  of  his  name  (for  we  are  all  called  Christians).' 

Just.  Dial.  96  :  '  You  curse  all  those  who  from  Him  have 
become  Christians '  {tcov  air'  eKeivov  yevo/xevoov  Xpicrriavcov). 

Just.  Dial.  117  :  '  All  those  who  by  the  Name  of  Jesus  have 
become  Christians' 

lien.  Adv.  Haer.  iii.  17  :  '(in  Antiochia)  pro  fide,  quam  in 
Christo  habebant,  vocati  sunt  Christiani.' 

So  there  seems  no  doubt  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  words  '  I  became 
the  Lord's  by  the  name  of  the  Lord '.  We  may  set  down  the 
following  as  an  equivalent  Greek  sentence : 

eyeuo/xr]]/  Se  rov  Xpccrrov,  Sia  rov  6v6p.aros  rod  Xpccrrov' 
or : 

kyevojirjv  Se  rov  Kvpcov,  81a  rov  6v6p.aros  rov  Kvpiov. 

If  this  is  correct  the  next  sentence.  '  I  was  justified  by  His  gentle- 
ness ',  should  stand  for  : 

kSiKCLiaidriv  8ia  rrjs  \pr]ar6rr]ros  avrov 

with  employment  of  the  favourite  paronomasia  between  xPVa"T^ 
and  xpio-ros,  with  which  we  are  familiar  in  Justin  Martyr  and 
elsewhere. 


144  INTRODUCTION 

The  transition  of  thought  is  exactly  the  same  as  in  Just.  Ap.  i,  4: 

Xpiariavol     yap    eivai     KaTJjyopovfxeOa'     to     8e     \pi]arbi- 
fxicreicrOai,  ov  Sikcuov 

where  there  is  no  need  to  correct  Xpio-riavoi  to  ^prjaTiavot. 

That  we  have  rightly  restored  xprjo-TOTrjTo?  in  the  Greek  appears 
by  a  reference  to  the  Coptic  text,  where  the  word  has  been  pre- 
served with  a  slight  modification  (aVtax^Vo  gu  T€KJu.ivrxPHCTOC)- 
The  Coptic  translator,  however,  did  not  know  what  to  make  of  the 
previous  sentence,  which  is  altogether  omitted.  The  existence  of 
this  favourite  early-Christian  play  on  words  is  evidence  that  the  Ode 
was  composed  in  the  Greek  language  :  in  the  Syriac  the  allusion 
disappears,  nor  is  the  first  clause  intelligible. 

The  correctness  of  our  interpretation  may  be  further  seen  by 
the  light  which  it  throws  upon  the  New  Testament  itself.  When, 
for  example,  Paul  tells  the  Corinthians  (iii.  23)  that  they  are 
Christ's,  and  that  Christ  is  God's,  he  means  that,  being  Christians, 
they  are  Christ's  by  the  name  of  Christ,  and  are  in  a  relation 
of  ownership  to  or  of  derivation  from  Christ,  just  as  Christ  is 
in  a  relation  to  God,  implying  either  sonship  or  dependency.  Even 
more  striking  is  the  light  which  is  cast  upon  a  passage  in  the 
Gospel  of  Mark,  by  this  expression  of  '  becoming  the  Lord's  by 
the  name  of  the  Lord  '.  In  Mark  ix.  41  we  have  the  following 
sequence : 

09  yap  av  TTOTLcrr]  v/j.a.9  TrorrjpLov  vSaTos  kv  ovojiaTi,  otl 
XpiaTov  core,  dp.r]v  Xiyco  vp.lv  otl  ov  fir]  drroXiar)  tov  fiicrOoi' 
avTov. 

The  difficulty  here  is  to  determine  what  is  meant  by  '  in  the 
name ',  and  also  to  explain  how,  at  the  time  involved  in  the 
narration,  Jesus  could  speak  to  his  disciples  as  '  belonging  to 
Christ'.  Matthew  (x.  42)  apparently  gets  over  the  difficulty  by 
saying  that  the  name  is  '  the  name  of  a  disciple ',  and  leaves  out 
the  clause  about  Christ's  ownership ;  but  this  does  not  explain 
what  is  meant  by  the  '  name  of  a  disciple  ' ;  is  it  the  same  thing 


SYRTAC    OR    GREEK  145 

as  the  c  name  of  a  prophet '  ?  Matthew  appears  to  mean  some- 
thing of  the  kind,  to  judge  from  the  preceding  verse,  but  he  has 
clearly  misunderstood  Mark,  who  either  means  : 

1  In  my  name,  because  ye  are  Christ's,' 
or: 

'  In  the  Christian  name,  because  ye  are  Christ's.' 

The  Ode  comes  to  our  aid  at  this  point,  and  shows  that  the 
alternatives  mean  the  same  thing.  We  are  Christ's  because  we 
are  Christians.     The  name  is,  therefore,  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

The  play  upon  Christos  and  Chrestos  is  a  very  early  one,  and 
probably  belongs  to  the  period  of  the  nicknames  of  the  Antiochenes. 
There  is  a  reflexion  of  it  in  the  New  Testament ;  cf.  Ephesians  ii.  7  : 

kv  Xprjo-TOTTjTi  €0'  rjjj.ds  kv  XpiaTO)  'Irjaov. 

Here  the  paronomasia  is  easily  missed  by  the  modern  student : 
it  would  be  quite  otherwise  with  a  Christian  of  the  first  or  second 
century,  who  is  always  trying  to  explain  to  his  tormentors  why 
he  is  anointed,  and  how  he  is  good. 

For  instance,  in  Tertull.  Apol.  3,  we  have : 

'  Nemo  retractat,   ne  ideo  bonus  Caius  et  prudens  Lucius, 
quia  Christia7ins'  (i.  e.  xp-qcrros  =  bonus  aut  prudens). 

Ad  Naliones,  i.  3  c  Christianum  vero  nomen,  quantum  signi- 
ficatio  est,  de  unctione  interpretatur :    etiam  cum  corrupte  a 

vobis  Chrestiani  pronuntiamur sic  quoque  de  suavitate 

vel  bonitate  modulatum   est'   (i.e.   xprja-Torrj^  =  suavitas  mit 
bonitas). 

The  ultimate  origin  of  these  etymologies  is,  as  is  generally 
agreed,  to  be  sought  in  Antioch. 

Such  an  instance  as  that  which  we  have  been  discussing  almost 
implies  that  the  Ode  was  composed  in  Greek ;  for  the  play  upon 
Christos  and  Chrestos  is  only  to  be  made  in  that  language.  When 
it  passes  into  another  language,  as  in  the  sentence  quoted  from 
Tertullian,  it  requires  the  assistance  of  a  commentator  to  make  the 

11  L 


146  INTRODUCTION 

argument  intelligible.  We  shall  assume  then,  provisionally,  that 
the  Ode  in  which  the  writer  talked  of  becoming  the  Lord's  by 
the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  of  being  justified  by  His  goodness,  is 
a  Greek  composition. 

In  the  foregoing  discussion  we  could  readily  imagine  ourselves 
back  in  early  times  and  at  Antioch,  where  believers  were  called 
Christians  as  belonging  to  Christ,  with  ironical  references  to  their 
personal  ointment  or  superior  goodness,  according  to  which  they 
became  either  Christs,  or  Chrests  because  they  were  Christ's.  The 
believers  accepted  all  these  titles  and  appellations.  They  even 
took  the  title  of  Christ  to  themselves  personally,  and  gave  the 
explanation  of  it  in  the  sense  that  they  had  received  a  Divine 
Anointing.  In  consequence  of  this,  we  cannot  always  tell  whether 
the  word  \piar6?  in  early  Christian  tradition  belongs  to  the  Lord 
or  to  His  followers ;  and  similar  difficulties  arise  in  the  Odes  upon 
which  we  are  engaged.     In  Ode  xxxvi.  6  the  writer  says : 

'  He  anointed  me  from  His  own  perfections: 
And  I  became  one  of  His  neighbours.' 

The  first  edition  remarked  on  this  sentence  that  it  '  was  almost 
impossible  to  determine  whether  the  Psalmist  is  speaking  in  his 
own  name,  or  in  that  of  the  Messiah,  or  whether  it  is  an  alternation 
of  one  with  the  other '.  Most  probably  the  Odist,  as  in  so  many 
other  cases,  is  speaking  in  the  person  of  Christ,  but  the  sentence 
which  we  have  quoted  shows  that  the  decision  is  not  an  easy 
one  to  make.  We  might  have  quoted  Theophilus  of  Antioch  on 
the  other  side,  who  says :  '  We  are  called  Christians  because  we  are 
anointed  with  the  oil  of  God'  (ad  Antol.  i.  12). 

The  foregoing  argument  for  interpreting  the  name  as  the 
Christian  name,  followed  by  a  play  upon  xpiaros  and  xpt](tt6$,  is 
undoubtedly  a  very  strong  one.  Let  us  sec  whether  there  is  anything 
that  can  be  said  on  the  other  side. 

It  is  possible  that  the  expression 

'  I  became  the  Lord's  by  the  name  of  the  Lord  ' 


SYRIAC   OR   GREEK  147 

may  be  derived  from  the  Old  Testament.  For  instance,  in 
Isaiah  xliv.  5  we  find  the  following  prediction  of  the  admission 
of  proselytes  to  the  covenant  of  Israel : 

1  One  shall  say,  I  am  the  Lord's ;  and  another  shall  call 
himself  by  the  name  of  Jacob ;  and  another  shall  subscribe 
with  his  hand  unto  the  Lord,  and  surname  himself  by  the  name 
of  Israel' 

We  may  fairly  assume  (at  all  events  as  a  working  hypothesis)  that 
this  passage  underlies  the  language  of  the  Ode.  It  is  quite  in  the 
Odist's  manner  to  say  '  by  the  name  of  the  Lord '  instead  of  '  by 
the  name  of  Jacob '  or  '  by  the  name  of  Israel '.  But  then  this 
rules  out  the  LXX  as  the  starting-point  of  the  Odist's  thought, 
for  the  LXX  has 

Ovtos  e/oet,  rod  Oeov  cl/ir 

while  on  the  other  hand  the  Peshitta  says  exactly : 

'  This  one  will  say,  /  am  the  Lords.' 

Thus  the  Syriac  would  become  the  prime  authority  and  not  the 
Greek  :  the  reference  to  xprjcrTorrjs,  which  certainly  stood  in  the 
Greek  text  of  the  Ode,  might  be  due  to  the  fact  that  the  Odist 
was  bilingual,  but  would  hardly  have  originated  in  the  Syriac. 

We  have  discoursed  at  some  length  on  this  passage  in  the 
Odes  on  account  of  its  importance.  At  this  stage  of  the  argument 
we  can  hardly  draw  a  final  conclusion,  as  the  considerations  on 
either  side  are  so  strong.  We  must  look  to  the  rest  of  the  Ode  to 
see  whether  it  furnishes  further  indications  of  Greek  or  Syriac 
origin. 

It  is  interesting  to  notice,  in  passing,  that  the  passage  in  Isaiah 
was  recognized  as  being  the  language  of  a  proselyte.  The  Targum, 
for  instance,  says,  '  I  became  one  of  the  God-fearers ',  which  is 
the  regular  term  for  Gentiles  who  attach  themselves  to  Judaism, 
and  occurs  in  the  New  Testament  itself.     Thus  we  shall  raise  the 

L  2 


148  INTRODUCTION 

further  question  as  to  what  kind  of  proselyte  is  speaking,  and 
perhaps  revive  for  further  study  the  theory  of  Professor  Menzies 
that  the  Odes  are  the  Hymns  oi  Jewish  Proselytes.  Every  stone 
must  be  turned,  and  turned  again ! 

We  propose  in  the  next  place  to  try  and  explain  the  opening 
verses  of  the  38th  Psalm,  which  have  been  the  centre  of  a  good 
deal  of  discussion.     The  Syriac  tells  us  that  the  Odist 

1  Went  up  into  the  Light  of  Truth  as  into  a  chariot ', 

and  then  that  the  Truth  took  him  and  led  him,  preserved  him 
from  rocks  and  waves  (?)  and  brought  him  to  the  haven  of  salvation. 
The  suggestion  was  made  that  the  language  was  that  which  describes 
a  sea-voyage,  and  that  the  writer  had  embarked  on  the  good 
ship  '  Light  of  Truth  '.  Carriages  naturally  do  not  require  special 
names,  and  travelling  in  a  carriage  involves  more  delight  than 
danger,  and  does  not  end  up  in  a  haven,  except  by  extreme  poetical 
licence.  At  this  point  the  Syriac  lexicons  barred  the  way :  they 
could  not  supply  a  sufficiently  early  instance  for  the  translation 
of  J^^o^tf)  (niarkaba)  as  '  ship  '  ;  but  the  text  of  the  Odes,  whether 
translated  or  original,  is  certainly  early :  so  it  seemed  that  the 
rendering  '  chariot '  would  have  to  stand.  On  that  supposition  it 
was  natural  that  the  word  for  'waves'  should  be  read  as  'cliffs' 
or  '  valleys ' :  though  why  '  cliffs '  should  be  a  special  terror  to 
carriages  was  not  clear.  Some  persons  wished  to  get  rid  of  the 
'  haven '  which  had  been  misread  in  the  editio  princcps ;  but  this 
word  is  certain :  it  is  guaranteed  by  manuscript  authority,  and 
by  the  fact  that  it  is  a  quotation  from  Psalm  cvii.  30.  The 
42nd  Psalm  is  also  in  evidence,  for  it  is  thence  that  the  language 
is  derived  about  the  leading  and  guiding  of  the  Truth.  In  the 
LXX  it  runs  thus  : 

e^anoareiXoi'  rb  0a>9  crov  kglI  ttjv  a'SfjOeidv  crov 

aura  fj.€  coSrjyrjcrai'  Kal  -qyayou  /j.(. — Ps.  xlii  (xliii).  3- 

Moreover,  the  Ode  here,  in  the  use  of  the  past  tense,  is  nearer 


SYRIAC   OR  GREEK  149 

to  the  language  of  the  LXX  than  to  that  of  the  Hebrew  or  the 
Peshitta.  So  we  are  led  to  look  for  some  Greek  word  (such  as 
6\r]ixa)  by  which  to  explain  the  Syriac. 

The  two  Psalms  quoted  must  be  the  key  to  the  understanding 
of  the  Ode.  It  occurs  to  us  to  inquire,  also,  whether  this  Ode 
(whatever  be  its  original  meaning)  may  not  have  been  interpreted 
in  later  times  in  a  baptismal  sense,  as  indeed  Dr.  Bernard  maintains 
to  have  been  the  meaning  of  the  whole  body  of  the  Odes.  For 
instance,  it  appears  to  have  been  so  interpreted  in  the  Nestorian 
ritual,  where  we  find  the  following  sequence : 1 

'  Save  me,  O  God,  by  thy  name  (Ps.  liv.  1).  In  the  hidden 
valleys  of  the  world  thou  walkest  as  in  the  sea,  O  thou  who 
art  unbaptised ;    hasten   to   come   to   the   glorious   haven    of 

baptism And  he  led  them   to  the  haven  where  they 

would  be  (Ps.  cvii.  30) :  to  the  covenant  of  the  haven  of  life  we 
have  come  :  to  the  glorious  resurrection  of  Christ  our  Saviour.' 

Here  we  recognize  at  once  the  reference  to  the  same  Psalm  that 
certainly  underlies  our  38th  Ode.  And  the  rest  of  the  language, 
with  its  picturesque  confusion  between  land  and  sea,  reflects  closely 
the  Ode  itself.  In  the  mind  of  the  composer  of  the  Liturgy, 
Baptism  is  the  ritual  and  the  Church  the  haven.  We  find  some- 
thing similar  as  far  back  as  Theophilus  of  Antioch.  It  is  not, 
however,  in  the  Nestorian  ritual  only  that  we  find  suspicious  traces 
of  the  38th  Ode.  We  have  already  suggested  that  the  difficulty  in 
translating  the  Syriac.  which  seems  to  record  the  feat  of  taking 
a  chariot  and  going  to  sea,  was  due  to  a  natural  misunderstanding 
of  a  Greek  word  susceptible  of  two  meanings,  to  which  the  Syriac 
translator  has  given  the  more  common  meaning.  What  is  remark- 
able is  that  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  is,  perhaps,  guilty  of  the  same 
misunderstanding,  because  he  did  not  realize  that  the  usage  was 
poetical.  He  calls  baptism  the  '  chariot  to  heaven ' ;  and  the 
expression  is  so  peculiar  that  we  naturally  connect  it  with  the 
opening  sentences  of  the  38th  Ode.     What  then  is  the  term  which 

1  Nestorian  Ritual,  ed.  Conybeare  and  Maclean,  p.  335. 


150  INTRODUCTION 

Cyril  uses?  If  we  look  at  his  introductory  lecture,  from  which 
Dr.  Bernard  drew  his  striking  baptismal  analogies,  we  shall  find 
him  describing  baptism  as 

ei'Svfia    <P(tiTeii'6i>'    cr0pay*9    ayia    dKard\vro<,"    6\rjfj.a    npbs 
ovpavdv     irapaSeiaov  rpv(prj. 

All  of  these  expressions  are  borrowed  from  or  illustrated  by  the 
Odes;  and  the  6xvH-a  's  ^c  'chariot'  of  Ode  xxxviii.  Only  it 
ought  not  to  have  been  rendered  '  chariot '  (for  the  word  may 
be  rendered  '  ship ')  except  on  the  assumption  that  Cyril  mis- 
understood it.  If  he  did  misunderstand  it  there  is  no  need  why 
we  should  follow  him  :  there  is,  however,  the  residual  possibility 
that  his  translators  are  at  fault  (including  J.  H.  Newman).  Every 
one  did  not  misunderstand  the  language.  For  instance,  in  the 
Coptic  Book  of  the  Resurrection  of  Christ  by  Bartholomew  the 
Apostle,1  we  find  the  following  language  used  by  the  Apostle 
Thomas : 

1  Behold  !  Jesus  Christ  set  me  on  board  the  ship  of  Salvation, 
and  brought  me  into  the  haven  of  peace.'  - 

The  advantage  of  the  new  interpretation  is  that  it  rids  us  of 
the  difficulty  which  Syriac  students  had  felt  in  attaching  the 
meaning  '  ship '  to  the  Syriac  word.  We  get  rid  also  of  the 
confusion  in  the  language  of  the  Ode,  where  the  terrors  of  travels 
in  a  coach  are  described  in  terms  of  rocks  and  waves.  We  have  no 
need  of  emendation  of  the  translation  of  the  text  in  order  to  get 
rid  of  the  '  waves  '.  The  '  haven  '  for  the  chariot  is  no  longer  a  matter 
of  allegory ;  and,  most  important  of  all.  we  see  that  the  Greek 
is  the  original  which  has  been  the  subject  of  misunderstanding. 

We  referred  above  to  the  possibility  that  Theophilus  of  Antioch 
was  also  acquainted  with  the  good  ship  '  Light  of  Truth  \ 
On  this  point  we  note  as  follows :  The  first  thing  that  would 
occur  to  a  thoughtful  person  on  reading  the  Ode  would  be  that 

1  Loc.  cit.,  p.  2ii. 

2  The  ordinary  Sahidic  word  for  'ship'  is  employed,  and  there  is  no  (ireek 
transliteration  to  assist  us. 


SYRIAC    OR   GREEK  151 

the  Truth  stands  for  the  ship  as  well  as  for  the  shipmaster.  The 
'  Light  of  Truth '  is  the  name  of  the  ship,  the  '  Light '  and  the 
'  Truth '  of  the  42nd  Psalm  correspond  to  the  '  Truth '  in  the  Ode 
which  has  charge  and  direction  of  the  passengers  in  the  ship  ; 
thus  the  ship  and  the  shipmaster  appear,  as  far  as  nomenclature 
goes,  to  be  interchangeable.  The  peculiarity  appears  to  have 
struck  Theophilus  of  Antioch ;  in  presenting  an  argument  for 
the  necessity  of  Faith  he  tells  Autolycus  that  one  cannot  cross 
the  sea  unless  he  first  trust  himself  to  the  ship  and  the  shipmaster : 

779  Svvarai  Siajrepdcrai  tt]V  OdXaacrav  kdv  fir]  Trpu>TOV  iavrbu 
TnaTevcrrj  tu>  nXoicp  kcli  ra>  Kv^epurjrr]  ; — ad  Autolycum,  i.  8. 

The  conjunction  of  ideas  may  have  been  suggested  by  the  terms  of 
a  familiar  hymn :  to  go  on  board  was  an  act  of  faith. 

Theophilus  is,  perhaps,  under  the  influence  of  the  same  opening 
verses  of  the  38th  Ode  at  a  somewhat  later  point,  where  he  explains 
how  advantageous  to  the  storm-tossed  voyager  are  those  islands 
which  have  havens  in  which  they  may  take  refuge,  and  how  they 
are  guided  to  these  havens  and  anchorages  by  the  Word  of  Truth. 
And  he  explains  that  the  havens  are  to  be  understood  mystically 
as  being  Christian  congregations,  that  is,  holy  Churches.  The 
whole  passage  is  inspired  by  the  Ode,  and  is,  like  the  Ode,  a 
parable  of  Truth  and  Error.  We  will  transcribe  the  passage,  and 
underline  the  expressions  which  are  especially  reminiscent  of 
the  Ode: 

'Just  as  in  the  sea  there  are  islands  inhabited,  well- watered 
and  fruitful,  having  anchorages  and  harbours,  so  that  the 
storm-tossed  mariners  may  find  refuge  in  them  :  so  God  has 
given  to  the  world,  wave-driven  and  storm-tost  by  sins, 
assemblies  (I  mean  holy  Churches)  in  which,  as  in  havens  with 
good  anchorage,  there  are  to  be  found  the  teachings  of  the 
Truth,  to  which  those  who  wish  to  be  saved  flee  for  refuge, 
having  become  lovers  of  the  Truth,  and  desirous  to  escape 
the  wrath  and  judgement  of  God.  And  just  as  there  are  other 
islands,  rocky  and  waterless  and  barren  and  beast-ridden  and 
uninhabited,  to  the  hurt  of  the  mariners  and  the  storm-tost, 


152  INTRODUCTION 

where  ships  arc  broken  and  those  who  go  on  board  of  them 
perish,  so  is  it  with  the  teachings  of  the  Error  (I  mean  heresies) 
which  utterly  destroy  them  who  meddle  with  them.  For  such 
persons  are  not  led  by  the  word  of  TrittJi,  but  like  pirates, 
when  they  have  filled  their  ships,  run  them  on  the  aforesaid 
places,  with  the  object  of  utterly  destroying  them,  so  does 
it  happen  with  those  that  wander  from  the  Truth,  and  are 
utterly  ruined  by  the  Error.' — Theoph.  ad  Auto/,  ii.  14. 

The  motive  of  the  foregoing  allegory  is  to  be  sought  in  the 
first  chapter  of  Genesis,  where  the  Synagoge,  or  gathering  together 
of  the  waters,  is  described,  and  where  the  dry  land  appears.  This 
leads  to  the  describing  of  the  islands  of  the  sea,  as  above,  and 
to  the  mystical  explanation  of  the  '  Congregation  of  the  Waters '. 
Theophilus  found  these  explanations  a  convenient  starting-point 
for  the  description  of  Truth  and  Error,  of  which  one  guides  to  the 
haven  and  the  other  runs  on  the  rocks.  He  makes  his  parable, 
as  we  have  said,  in  terms  that  are  reminiscent  of  the  3#th  Ode 
of  Solomon. 

It  appears,  then,  that  there  are  at  least  three  distinct  traces 
of  the  influence  of  this  38th  Ode  on  his  mind  :  for  besides  this 
parable  of  Truth  and  Error,  there  is  the  description  of  heresy 
as  deadly  poison  mixed  with  wine,  and  the  joint  faith  in  the  Truth 
as  the  ship  and  the  shipmaster.  It  is,  however,  quite  likely  that 
this  argument  for  a  Greek  original,  and  the  interpretation  attached 
to  it,  are  too  subtle  to  carry  conviction.  To  begin  with,  although 
cx7Wa  ls  a  poetical  term  for  a  ship,  it  is  not  the  natural  one :  and 
if  the  word  is  somewhat  strained,  the  interpretation  is  even  more  so. 
The  main  difficulty  lies  in  the  use  of  the  word  'haven',  which 
appears  to  be  out  of  place  in  overland  travel.  That  such  overland 
travel,  however,  is  contemplated,  appears  to  be  involved  in  the 
subsequent  language  of  the  Ode,  where  the  Truth  (ver.  7)  takes  the 
traveller  on  the  right  road.  This  is  not  nautical  language.  We 
leave  the  discussion  with  a  margin  of  uncertainty. 

Now  let  us  turn  to  another  point  in  which  the  study  of  the 
doctrine  of  the  Odes  throws  light  upon  the  language  in  which  that 


SYRIAC    OR   GREEK  153 

doctrine  s  expressed.  We  have  shown  elsewhere  that  the  writer 
has  a  Christology  which  contains  the  germs  from  which  the  Nicene 
Creed  was  evolved.  For  instance,  there  is  the  doctrine  of  the 
pre-existent  Wisdom  of  God,  co-eternal  with  the  Father  and 
identified  with  the  Son.  The  proof-text  for  this  doctrine,  from 
which  all  the  later  theological  developments  take  their  rise,  is 
Proverbs  viii.  22  ff.,  where  Wisdom  says  : 

'  The  Lord  possessed  me  in  the  beginning  ' : 

or  according  to  the  LXX  : 

'  The  Lord  created  me  the  beginning' : 

These  words  with  their  context  were  transferred  at  an  early  date  in 
the  first  century  from  the  Wisdom  of  God  to  Christ  as  the  Wisdom 
of  God  ;  and  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  both  the  Hebrew  and  the 
LXX  forms  are  involved  in  the  Christology  of  the  Odes. 
Thus  in  Ode  xli.  9,  apparently  ex  ore  Christi: 

'  The  Father  of  Truth  remembered  me  ; 
He  who  possessed  me  from  the  beginning' 

and  in  Ode  vii.  8,  in  an  impersonal  manner,  God  is  said  to  have 
'  created  Wisdom  ',  which  involves  the  reading  e/crio-e  /ze.  As  we 
have  pointed  out,  the  Church  teachers  used  almost  exclusively  the 
LXX  rendering,  and  got  into  difficulties  thereby ;  and  did  not 
recognize,  as  far  as  we  know,  before  the  time  of  Eusebius,  that  the 
Hebrew  text  had  another  sense  than  the  LXX.  These  passages 
suffice  to  show  that  we  are  in  a  region  of  thought  where  Christ  has 
been  recognized  as  the  Wisdom  of  God.  So  we  may  proceed  to 
inquire  into  the  use,  if  any,  which  the  Odes  make  of  the  language  in 
which  Wisdom  is  described  (and  Christ  by  implication)  in  the  Old 
Testament.  This  we  have  done  in  another  chapter,  and  we  only 
repeat  some  of  the  matter  in  order  to  prepare  the  way  for  the 
question  as  to  whether  the  particular  title  dnoppoia  is  found  in 
the  Odes. 


154  INTRODUCTION 

The  statement  of  the  case  for  dnoppoia  is  as  follo\\s : 

(i)   It  is  an  undoubted  title  of  Wisdom  in  Sap.  Sol.  vii.  25,  where 

Wisdom   is    said  to   be   'a    pure  effluence  from  the  glory  of  the 

Almighty  :. 

(ii)   It  was  applied  to  Christ  as  being  the  Wisdom   of  God  ; 

as  (  h-igen  says  in  his  commentary  on  Romans  : 

'  Ipsius  unius  Paterni  fontis  (sicut  Sapientia  dicit)  purissima 
est  manatio  Filius. 

Here  the  Son  is  defined   in   Sapiential  language  as  the  dnoppoia 
of  the  Father.' 

(iii)  It  appears,  however,  that  a  good  while  before  Origen's 
time  the  title  had  been  transferred  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  indeed 
Origen  was  aware,  for  he  goes  on  to  say  that  the  term  '  Wisdom 
of  God  ',  may  be  also  applied  to  the  Holy  Spirit : 

'  Hoc  idem  autem  Sapientia  Dei  etiam  de  Spiritu  Sancto 
intelligi  debet,  ubi  dicit:   Spiritus  Domini/  &c. — Sap.  Sol.  i.  7. 

We  can  see  the  change  already  made  in  the  following  passage  from 
Athenagoras : 

'  The  prophetic  spirit  also  is  in  concord  with  our  argument, 
for  it  says.  "  The  Lord  created  me  the  beginning  of  His  ways, 
for  His  works".  Yea,  and  the  very  Spirit  that  was  operating 
in  those  who  made  prophetic  utterances  we  affirm  to  be  an 
effluence  {dnoppoia)  of  God,  flowing  forth  (dnoppeoi>)  and 
reflected  back  again  like  a  ray  of  the  sun.' l 

Thus  Athenagoras  first  finds  Christ  in  the  Wisdom  doctrine 
of  Proverbs,  and  then  finds  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  same  Wisdom  as 
described  in  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon.  The  transference  of  this 
particular  title  of  Wisdom  from  the  Son  to  the  Holy  Spirit  had, 
then,  already  been  made  as  early  as  the  time  of  Athenagoras 
(A.D.  177).  Wisdom  generally  had  been  transferred  as  a  title  to 
the  Holy  Spirit  by  Theophilus  of  Antioch  in  the  famous  passage  in 
which  he  says  that  the  three  days  which  elapsed  before  the  creation 

1  Athenagoras,  Sitpplicalio  10. 


SYRIAC    OR   GREEK  ,  155 

of  the  luminaries  are  a  type  of  the  Trinity,  i.  e.  of  God  and  His 
Word  and  His  Wisdom. 

It  appears,  then,  that  diroppoia  is  a  classic  term  in  the  evolution 
of  Christian  theology.  It  denotes  the  procession  of  the  Son  from 
the  Father,  and  the  procession  of  the  Holy  Spirit  from  the  Father 
(and  the  Son).  Now  turn  to  the  Odes.  The  sixth  Ode  opens  with 
a  prologue  about  the  impossibility  of  resistance  to  God,  and  the 
impracticability  of  taking  the  position  of  an  adversary  to  Him. 
The  writer  is  thinking  of  the  Wisdom  of  God  which  is  described  in 
the  Sapiential  Books  in  just  such  terms  : x  e.g. 

Prov.  iii.  15  ovk  avrird^eraL  avrfj  ov8ev  irovr\pov. 
Sap.  Sol.  vii.  30  votyias  Sh  ovk  dvricryyzi  KaKia. 

From  this  prologue  the  Odist  proceeds  to  his  main  theme,  the 
coming  of  the  d-iroppoia :  '  for  there  went  forth  a  stream  and 
it  became  a  river ',  &c.  It  is  clear  that  this  effluence  is  either 
Wisdom  itself,  or  it  is  some  point  of  view  of  Christ  or  the  Holy 
Spirit.  In  any  case  it  is  the  classic  d-nbppoia  that  has  turned  up. 
Fortunately  for  us  the  Sahidic  Bible  preserved  the  term,  and  its 
importance  was  so  evident  that  the  writer  of  the  Pistis  Sophia 
makes  it  one  of  his  main  themes.  He  knows,  moreover,  that  it  was 
susceptible  of  an  interpretation  as  an  diroppoia  of  Light  as  well 
as  one  of  Water,  and  changes  the  Ode  accordingly,  with  a  per- 
sistent reference  to  the  efflux  of  Light,  of  which  the  unfortunate 
Pistis  Sophia  has  been  deprived  by  malevolent  powers.  No  one 
can  read  or  understand  the  Pistis  Sophia  who  does  not  observe 
the  stress  that  is  laid  in  it  on  the  efflux  of  Light.  The  use  and 
importance  of  the  term  being  established  and  conceded,  we  can 
by  no  means  derive  the  language  or  the  involved  doctrine  from  the 
Syriac  language. 

The  Odist  says  in  the  Syriac  that  '  there  went  forth  a  brook '  ; 
this  is  quite  colourless,  and  has  nothing  in  it  to  guide  us  to  the 

1  See,  however,  on  this  point  the  coincidence  which  we  have  noted  with  the 
Apology  of  Aristides. 


i.-,6  INTRODUCTION 

Sapiential  thought  or  language :  in  fact  it  misleads  us,  rather  than 
leads  us,  for  it  suggests  the  torrent  in  Ezekiel  which  flows  from 
the  Temple,  and  our  investigation  has  shown  that  this  is  not  the 
right  quarter  in  which  to  find  the  dwoppoia  or  its  meaning.  The 
use  of  this  Greek  term,  taken  from  a  Greek  book,  and  expressive  of 
a  Greek  theology,  is,  at  first  sight,  decisive  against  the  possibility 
of  a  derivation  of  the  Odes  from  an  original  Syriac.  The  sixth 
Ode,  in  its  fundamental  conception,  is  Sapiential.  The  argument 
would  be  equally  decisive  against  the  belief  in  any  other  Semitic 
origin  for  the  Odes  ;  for  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon  is  a  fundamentally 
Greek  book,  which  has  no  Hebrew  original  behind  it ;  and  even 
if  it  had  such  an  original  (as  Professor  Margoliouth  once  tried  to 
maintain),  the  chance  that  the  Odist's  '  translator '  would  have 
turned  up  the  form  d-rroppoia  in  making  his  rendering  is  quite 
negligible.  Thus  the  Odes  are  seen  to  be  fundamentally  and 
altogether  Greek,  unless  the  argument  can  be  met  from  other 
quarters. 

Now  let  us  return  to  the  seventh  Ode,  from  which  we  have 
already  detected  a  quotation  in  Eusebius.  There  is  still  some- 
thing to  be  cleared  up  in  the  passage  of  the  seventh  Ode  which 
we  have  been  considering  in  a  previous  chapter.  If  we  consider 
the  verses  referred  to, 

'He  hath  caused  me   to  know  Himself  without  grudging,  in 
His  simplicity 
For  His  kindness  has  minished  His  greatness,' 

the  question  will  arise  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  words  '  In  His 
simplicity ',  when  taken  in  connexion  with  the  Incarnation,  to 
which  we  have  shown  the  succeeding  words  to  apply.  If  we  turn 
the  words  back  into  Greek  we  have  : 

kv  ttj  aTrXoTTjTi  avrov,  t)  yap  xprjarorrj^  avrov  kayLLKpvvd  rfju 
fj.eyaXaioTr]Ta.1 

Now  let  us  turn  to  Tatian's  Oration  to  the  Greeks.     We  shall  find 
1  Connolly  has  already  noted  this  :  J.J.S.,  1913,  p.  531. 


SYRIAC    OR    GREEK  157 

that  after  establishing  the  doctrine  of  the  One  True  God,  he  goes 
on  to  state  the  doctrine  of  the  Logos  as  follows : 

'  With  Him,  through  rational  power,  the  Logos  also  itself 
which  was  in  Him  subsisted.  By  the  will  of  his  airXoTr)? 
springs  forth  the  Logos  ;  and  the  Logos,  not  having  gone  into 
vacuity,  becomes  the  First-born  Work  of  the  Father.' 

Tatian,  Oratio  5. 

The  words  OeXrj/xaTi  7779  d7r\6rr)T09,  when  spoken  of  the  Incarnation, 
correspond  closely  to  the  language  of  the  Ode.  The  only  question 
is  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  dnXorr}^,  which  the  Syriac  gives 
in  the  sense  of  'simplicity'.  If  this  is  really  the  meaning,  the 
'  simplicity '  referred  to  is  that  of  the  Divine  Nature,  alone  in  itself, 
and  yet  possessing  in  itself  the  8vva[ii$  XoyiKrj.  Thus  the  Divine 
Goodness  makes  His  simple  nature  known  by  ministering  His 
greatness.  It  has  been  suggested,  however,  that  we  ought  to 
take  the  later  meaning  of  dirXorrj^,  and  interpret  it  as  '  liberality ' 
and  '  wealth ',  just  as  we  interpret  a7rX<Sy  to  mean  not  merely 
'  simply  '  but  '  abundantly  '.     We  should  then  have  the  sentence, 

'By  His  liberality  His  kindness  miuished  His  greatness.' 
Now  turn  back  to  the  Syriac,  and  we  shall  see  the  alternative 
translation  involved  in  the  words  '  without  grudging ',  which  cor- 
respond ordinarily  to  dcpOovoos,  and  really  mean  '  abundantly ', 
'liberally'.  Thus  the  Syriac  may  have  made  two  translations  of 
kv  rfj  aTrXoTrjTi  avrov,  and  in  that  case  is  not  the  original.  The 
Greek  is  the  original,  and  corresponds  closely  to  the  language  of 
Tatian,  who  may  even  have  been  acquainted  with  the  Ode.  A 
parallel  passage  in  the  Odes  will  be  found  in  Ode  xli.  10,  where 
Christ  is  made  to  say : 

'  His  wealth  begat  me 
And  the  thought  of  His  heart.' 

The  arguments  for  a  Greek  original  which  we  have  been  con- 
sidering thus  far  are  as  follows  : 

(1)  The  '  midwife '  passage  in  Ode  xix  :  where  the  dependence 
is  on  the  22nd  Psalm. 


i.-S  INTRODUCTION 

(2)  The  '  proselyte  passage '  in  Ode  xxv,  with  a  probable 
dependence  on  Isaiah  xlv,  and  a  possible  Greek  play  upon 
\pt]crr6?  and  \ptaros. 

(3)  The  'chariot'  passage  in  Ode  xxxviii,  which  depends  on 
Psalm  xliii  and  Psalm  cvii,  and  has  a  possible  reference  (to 
which  we  have  endeavoured  to  do  justice)  to  the  initiation 
of  baptism. 

(4)  The  '  Efflux '  passage  in  Ode  vi,  with  the  assumed 
dependence  on  Sap.  Sol.  vii. 

(5)  The  linguistic  argument  in  Ode  vii. 

These  are  the  five  strongest  arguments  that  we  have  found 
for  a  Greek-original :  of  these,  we  may  say  on  review  that  the 
evidence  for  (1)  inclines  rather  to  the  Greek  side,  unless  we  can 
adduce  the  Targum  to  turn  the  scales ;  for  (2)  the  evidence  is 
again  somewhat  in  favour  of  the  Greek,  but  not  decisively.  In 
(3)  the  difficulty  of  the  Syriac  reading  is  relieved  (but  not  really 
got  rid  of)  by  substituting  the  Greek  counterpart,  and  no  definite 
conclusion  can  be  reached  ;  in  (4)  the  argument  for  a  Greek  original 
appears  at  its  clearest  and  strongest ;  in  (5),  the  linguistic  argument 
is  somewhat  on  the  side  of  a  Greek  original.  The  argument  is  not 
final,  and  it  does  not  necessarily  carry  the  whole  body  of  the  Odes, 
but  it  certainly  has  the  field  at  present  as  regards  the  Odes  in  question. 

Other  suggestions  of  a  Greek  original  may  be  found  in  the 
papers  of  Frankenberg,  Preuschen,  and  Connolly,  and  will  be 
discussed  later. 

It  remains  to  be  considered  whether  any  light  is  thrown  upon 
the  original  text  of  the  Odes  by  the  Biblical  or  semi-Biblical 
quotations  which  they  contain.  On  this  question  of  Biblical  cita- 
tions we  have  made  a  careful  study  in  a  previous  chapter  ;  the 
results  of  that  examination  would  be  naturally  affected  by  the  early 
date  to  which  we  have  referred  both  the  Odes  (if  Greek)  and  their 
Syriac  form.  It  will  be  useless  to  look  for  coincidence  with  the 
Peshitta  version  of  the  New  Testament  in  a  document  which  ante- 
dates the  time  of  Kphrem  and  Bardaisan.  With  the  Old  Testament 
the  case  is  different,  for  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  some  parts 


SYRIAC   OR    GREEK  159 

of  the  Old  Testament  were  rendered  into  Syriac  at  a  very  early 
date,  directly  from  the  Hebrew.  So  that  here  coincidences  with 
the  Peshitta  on  the  part  of  the  Odes  would  have  weight.  We  have, 
however,  seen  that  in  the  case  of  the  most  obvious  Biblical  semi- 
quotations  their  phraseology  in  the  Odes  is  not  always  in  accordance 
with  the  wording  of  the  Old  Testament  Syriac.  There  are 
suspicions  of  an  occasional  Hebrew  influence  in  quotations,  and 
now  and  then  the  text  of  the  Septuagint  asserts  itself;  but  it  does 
not  appear  as  if  there  was  much  in  this  region  of  inquiry  to  turn 
the  scales  very  definitely  one  way  or  the  other. 

The  real  question  that  remains  is  as  to  whether  there  are 
sufficient  genuine  Semitisms  in  the  Odes  to  set  off  against  the 
numerous  cases  in  which  we  have  affirmed  the  existence  of  Greek 
language  and  Greek  thought. 

CHAPTER   XIV 
Syriac  or  Greek?  {continued). 

Up  to  this  point  we  have  found  ourselves  still  in  the  region 
of  uncertainty :  some  considerations  pleaded  strongly  for  a  Syriac 
(or  at  all  events  a  Semitic)  original ;  others  suggested  Greek  ex- 
pressions at  the  back  of  the  tradition  of  the  Odes.  Where  we  have 
thus  far  traced  Biblical  coincidences  we  did  not  get  much  that 
weighed  the  scales  on  one  side  or  the  other.  Evidently  we  must 
make  a  closer  study  both  of  the  Biblical  allusions  and  of  the 
general  fabric  of  the  Odes. 

One  thing,  however,  is  coming  out  clearly,  viz.  that  the  portion 
of  the  Bible  which,  more  than  any  other,  underlies  the  Odes,  is 
the  Canonical  Psalter,  and  next  to  that  come  the  Sapiential  books 
and  Isaiah. 

It  may  be  suggested  that  this  was  something  which  could  have 
been  guessed  in  advance ;  for  if  we  are  making  a  book  of  hymns  or 
Psalms  of  any  length,  it  is  only  natural  that  it  should  imitate 
the  style  and  thought  of  such  Psalters  as  are  already  in  existence. 


i6o  INTRODUCTION 

This  may  readily  be  granted,  so  far  as  the  use  of  the  prevailing 
modes  of  thought  is  concerned,  or  the  use  of  known  metres  and 
tunes.  Ephrem,  for  instance,  in  order  to  displace  Bardaisan's 
hymns  and  counteract  their  witchcraft,  had  to  use  Bardaisan's  tools, 
his  metres,  and  his  harmonies  ;  and  Bardaisan  went  further  than 
this :  for  if  Ephrem  tells  true,  he  imitated  David  by  making  a  new 
Psalter  of  150  Psalms.  Such  a  Psalter  does  more  than  affect 
unconsciously  the  style  of  Hebrew  sacred  song ;  it  becomes  a 
deliberate  imitation,  surely  not  confined  to  mere  number.  So  the 
question  is  raised  for  us  whether  our  book  of  Odes  is  also,  in 
a  deliberate  sense,  dependent  upon  the  Psalter.  That  is  the  question 
to  which  we  address  ourselves.  If  it  turn  out  that  the  question 
is  answered  affirmatively,  and  that  the  Odist  has  constantly  one 
eye  fixed  on  the  Canonical  Psalter,  we  may  be  in  a  position  to 
decide  more  definitely  the  question  of  the  dependence  of  the  Odist 
upon  the  Septuagint  or  the  Peshitta,  that  is,  upon  the  relative 
order  of  the  Greek  or  Syriac  Odes. 

Before  we  examine  this  point  we  may  say  a  word  or  two  about 
the  supposed  Bardaisan  Psalter  and  certain  Psalters  that  may  be 
grouped  with  it  or  related  to  it. 

The  tradition  of  the  Church  knows  of  at  least  three  second- 
century  Psalters,  besides  our  Odes,  which  cannot  be  later  than 
the  second  century.  That  is,  to  all  appearance,  there  were  four 
separate  Psalters  current  in  the  second  century. 

Now  of  these,  the  first  is  ascribed  to  Valentinus,  the  second  to 
Marcion,  and  the  third  to  Bardaisan.  Of  Valentinus  and  his 
Psalter  Tertullian  speaks  with  contempt : 

'  Nobis  quoque  ad  hanc  speciem  Psalmi  patrocinabuntur, 
non  quidem  apostatae  et  haeretici  et  Platonici  Valentini,  sed 
sanctissimi  ct  reccptissimi  prophetae  David. 

De  Came  Christi,  chap.  20. 

Of  Marcion  we  have  a  well-known  statement  in  the  Muratorian 
Canon,  that  amongst  the  books  which  the  Church  does  not  receive, 


SYRIAC   OR   GREEK  161 

and  the  authors  whom  it  rejects,  must  be  reckoned  the  new  Psalter 
made  for  Marcion,  and  its  authors  : 

'  Qui  etiam  novum  psalmorum  librum  Marcioni  conscripserunt.' 

Of  Bardesanes,  Ephrem  tells  us  that  he  composed  hymns  and 
Psalms  in  various  metres,  that  he  imitated  David  and  composed 
150  Psalms,  and  that  he  administered  his  false  doctrine  in  this  way 
to  simple-minded  people,  like  poison  in  Jia*^**  (Patr.  Syr.  ii.  49.5). 

The  suggestion  naturally  arises  whether  these  three  lost  Psalters 
are  really  independent,  and  whether  they  do  not  reduce  to  a  single 
Psalter.  Valentinus  and  Bardaisan  are  known  to  have  some  con- 
nexion one  with  the  other,  the  latter  having  been,  it  is  said,  at  one 
time  a  disciple  of  the  former.  On  the  other  hand  the  tradition 
of  independent  Psalm-writing  in  Syriac  is  closely  bound  up  with 
the  name  of  Bardaisan  and  his  followers ;  Ephrem  could  not  have 
made  a  mistake  on  that  head.  So  if  any  one  is  to  disappear  it 
should  be  Valentinus.  We  should  be  left  in  that  case  with  Bardaisan 
as  the  great  Psalmist  of  the  second  century,  unless  it  could  be 
shown  that  he  had  imitated  Valentinus  as  well  as  David. 

It  becomes  a  matter  of  great  interest  to  determine  whether  our 
ncw  Odes  are  in  any  way  related  to  the  Psalms  that  we  are  dis- 
cussing. Do  they  also  imitate  the  Canonical  Psalter  ?  Are  they 
heretical,  say  with  Valentinus  as  author  in  general,  as  Preuschen 
promises  to  prove  ?  Or  with  Valentinus  and  Bardaisan  in  particular, 
in  ignoring  the  resurrection  of  the  body  ? 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  relation  of  the  Odist  to  the  Canonical 
Psalter  is  really  one  of  importance  ;  we  must  clearly  do  more  than 
pick  up  a  stray  reference.     The  matter  requires  a  closer  scrutiny. 

The  inquiry  is  complicated,  as  Connolly  and  others  have  pointed 
out,  by  the  fact  that  the  Odist,  when  he  quotes,  deliberately  alters 
his  text.     If,  for  instance,  he  is  quoting  as  Paul  does,  the  words : 

'  I  believed,  therefore  have  I  spoken  ', 
he  makes  out  of  it : 

'  I  believed,  therefore  I  was  at  rest.' 

11  M 


i62  INTRODUCTION 

And  it  follows  from  this  that  when  we  find  him  quoting  the  Psalter 
the  agreement  is  often,  of  necessity,  limited  ;  but,  whether  limited 
or  not,  it  is  that  agreement  that  we  are  in  quest  of;  the  disagree- 
ment is  not  to  be  reckoned  as  of  the  first  importance  in  the  case 
of  free-handling  and  of  adaptation  like  that  which  the  Odes  offer 
us.  It  is  the  agreements  that  count.  We  know,  then,  what  to  ask 
for  in  searching  the  Odes  that  we  may  find  the  Psalms.  We 
are  looking  for  unmanipulated  sentences  and  half-sentences  and 
expressions.  For  we  do  find  them,  not  merely  those  sentences 
which  we  have  already  tabulated,  but  a  great  deal  more,  and  the 
closer  we  look  the  more  we  shall  see.  In  not  a  few  cases  we  can 
detect  (i)  a  Psalm  underlying  the  Ode,  (ii)  we  can  watch  the  Odist 
picking  up  the  bits  of  the  Psalm  on  which  he  is  working  and 
putting  them  together  in  the  Ode  that  he  is  composing.  The  key 
to  the  Ode  will  then  lie  in  the  printing  of  a  certain  Psalm  of  David 
by  the  side  of  it  and  using  it  as  a  search-light.  It  will  be  con- 
venient to  do  this  generally  in  the  notes  that  we  attach  to  each 
translated  Psalm,  but  one  or  two  specimens  may  be  given  here 
in  order  to  illustrate  the  method,  and  to  help  us  with  our  problem 
of  the  relations  of  the  Syriac  to  the  Greek. 

For  example,  when  we  read  our  first  Ode,  with  its  reference 
to  a  crown  upon  the  writer's  head  that  does  not  fade  nor  wither, 
but  blossoms  and  bears  fruit,  we  arc  evidently  under  the  influence 
of  the  first  canonical  Psalm,  where  the  righteous  man  is  described 
under  the  terms  of  a  tree  planted  by  rivers  of  water,  whose  leaf 
does  not  wither,  and  which  brings  forth  its  fruit  in  its  season. 
So  much  being  clear,  we  have  to  find  the  motive  for  the  statement 
in  the  Ode,  that 

'  Thy  fruits  are  full  and  perfect, 
Full  of  thy  salvation.' 

The  parallel  to  this  is : 

'Whatsoever  he  doeth  shall  prosper', 

taking  'doeth'  in  the  Hebrew  sense  of '  producing  fruits'.  ("")•:  "'"•;•). 


SYRIAC    OR    GREEK  163 

and  making  the  subject  of  the  verb  the  '  tree '  in  the  previous 
sentence.  This  is  actually  the  sense  given  by  the  Targum,  and  the 
Peshitta  Syriac  has  preserved  a  trace  of  it  by  saying : 

'  Whatever  he  does  he  perfecteth  V 

This  will  serve  as  an  illustration  of  the  action  of  the  Psalter  upon 
the  Ode.  In  the  present  case  it  seems  clear  that  the  action  could 
not  have  been  effected  through  the  LXX.  It  might  have  come 
through  the  Targum  or  an  early  form  of  the  Peshitta  (which  is 
known  to  have  been  under  the  influence  of  the  Targum). 

Now  we  begin  to  see  the  direction  in  which  to  go  to  work. 
Let  us  take  another  instance.  In  Ode  xvii.  9  every  one  will 
recognize  that  the  words 

'  I  brake  in  pieces  the  bars  of  iron  ' 

come  from  the  107th  Psalm  (Ps.  cvi  (cvii).  16).  The  agreement  is 
complete  as  far  as  the  Peshitta  Psalter  goes,  every  word  used  being 
the  same  ;  but  one  must  not  form  a  hasty  judgement  since  both 
the  Ode  and  the  Peshitta  have  transliterated  the  Greek  word  for 
'  bars ',  which  occurs  in  the  LXX  (fioxXovs).  Why  should  they 
transliterate  at  all  ?  Is  their  agreement  in  this  transliteration  a 
proof  of  interdependence?  Does  it  mean  that  there  was  a  Greek 
Ode  for  the  original,  agreeing  at  this  point  with  the  LXX,  or 
was  it  a  Syriac  Ode  that  agreed  with  the  Peshitta?  A  pretty 
problem  ! 

However,  we  have  caught  the  Odist  pilfering  from  the  Psalm . 
and  we  look  round  for  more :  in  verse  4  the  Odist  says  that  '  the 
choking  bonds  were  cut  off  by  His  hands ' ;  on  comparing  the  text 
with  the  Peshitta,  we  find  that  this  is  the  same  as  verse  14  of  the 
Psalm,  which  appears  in  the  Greek  as  'He  brake  their  bands  in 
sunder'.  Here,  then,  we  have  a  crucial  instance.  The  Odist  is 
not  using  the  Greek  Bible ;  he  is  using  the  Peshitta  rendering  of 
the  Hebrew  text. 

1  We  follow  the  traditional  vocalization. 
M    2 


1 64  INTRODUCTION 

Here  is  a  similar  instance  in  which  use  has  been  made  of  a  very 
noble  anti-ritualistic  passage  in  the  prophet  Isaiah,  where  the  true 
fast  of  the  soul  is  described.  In  Ode  xx.  9  the  writer  has  borrowed 
from  this  passage  the  words 

'  His  glory  shall  go  before  thee  '  (Isa.  Iviii.  8), 
making,  as  his  custom  is,  a  slight  adaptation  of  the  words 

'  His  righteousness  shall  go  before  thee, 
And  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  thy  rearward.' 

He  has  just  before  said  that  one  is  to 

'  Come  into  Paradise  and  make  a  garland  from  its  tree.' 

This  is  taken  from  Isaiah  Iviii.  1 1  : 

'  Thou  shalt  be  as  an  irrigated  garden.' 

Here  the  Hebrew  is  'garden'  (fj).  and  the  Greek  is  the  same 
(kj)ttos)  ;  but  the  Syriac  is  '  Paradise '. 

Finally  the  Odist  says  : 
'Thou  shalt  he  fat  in  truth  in  the  praise  of  His  holiness.' 
This  also  is  taken  from  Isaiah  Iviii.  11  : 

'  The  Lord  shall  satisfy  thy  soul '. 

where  the  Syriac  says  '  satisfy  With  fatness";  ^cx*  'to  fatten'  is 
the  same  as  the  word  for  '  fat '  in  the  Ode.  There  are  several 
other  words  available  to  express  'fatness'.  If  any  doubt  remained 
as  to  the  dependence  of  the  Odist  on  the  Peshitta  at  this  point, 
it  would  disappear  on  setting  the  two  texts  side  by  side,  when  it 
will  at  once  become  clear  that  the  (  >dist  is  engaged  in  actual  word- 
play with  the  Syriac  text.     We  compare  Isaiah  Iviii.  1  1  (Peshitta) 

with  Ode  xx.  9 

where  the  sequence  of  the  underlined  words  shows  that  the  (  Idist  is 
playing  with   two  different   senses  of 'the  root   i*.  'to   confirm  or 


SYRIAC    OR    GREEK  165 

establish ',  and  '  to  be  true'.  This  appears  to  be  decisive  as  to  the 
dependence  of  the  Odist  upon  the  Syriac  text. 

We  had  a  precisely  similar  word-play  on  the  very  same  root  in 
Ode  xi.  5  ('  I  was  established  upon  the  rock  of  truth ') ;  vide  supra, 
p.  99. 

These  instances  will  show  that  we  have  picked  up  an  important 
clue.  We  prove  the  dependence  of  the  Ode  (in  these  particular 
cases  at  least)  from  the  Peshitta.  That  is  a  great  point  gained : 
it  has  history  and  chronology  in  it.  It  has  long  been  suspected 
that  portions  of  the  Old  Testament  were  done  into  Syriac  at  a 
very  early  date,  by  Jewish  hands  (or  with  the  assistance  of  Jewish 
hands),  and  long  before  any  portions  of  the  New  Testament  had 
been  done  into  Syriac.  Such  portions  were  the  Psalter,  then  the 
Pentateuch,  and  perhaps  some  part  of  Isaiah.  Our  Odist  has  used 
this  rendering. 

If  we  can  find  sufficient  cumulative  evidence  of  this  kind  we 
may  state  the  result  in  a  general  form.  For  this  the  reader 
is  directed  to  the  notes  on  the  separate  Odes.  Supposing  this 
reasoning  to  be  justified,  we  must  now  go  over  the  previous 
arguments  on  the  opposite  side,  and  see  if  they  can  be  countered. 
If  not,  we  shall  have  a  bilingual  Psalter,  some  of  which  was 
produced  in  Syriac  and  some  in  Greek,  and  then  each  part 
translated  from  the  primary  to  the  secondary  language.  In  any 
case  it  must  have  been  translated  so  early  that  we  may  safely 
assume  its  origin  to  be  in  a  bilingual  community,  such  as  the 
district  of  Antioch.  Probably  the  arguments  referred  to  for  Greek 
origins  can  be  met  upon  further  study.  Provisionally,  then,  and 
with  all  due  homage  to  light  that  may  come  from  unexpected 
quarters,  we  suggest  tentatively  that  the  Syriac  of  the  Odes  is  the 
original  language  in  which  they  were  composed. 

On  reviewing  the  foregoing  argument,  it  may  be  instructive 
to  compare  the  Odes  with  the  Psalms  of  Solomon  ;  and  some  one 
might  say  that  the  very  same  treatment  may  prove  the  Psalter  of 
Solomon  to  be  under  the  influence  of  the  Peshitta  Old  Testament, 


166  INTRODUCTION 

whereas  we  know  that   they  come  into  the  Syriac  by  translation 
from  the  Greek.     Let  us  examine  into  this  a  little  more  closely. 

It  is  evident  to  the  most  superficial  reader  who  looks  at  the 
text  of  the  Psalms  of  Solomon  that  it  is  saturated  with  Biblical 
language.  If  we  remove  the  historical  references  and  allusions 
to  Pompey  the  great  dragon  and  the  Romans,  we  have  often  a 
mere  cento  of  Old  Testament  references  for  the  residue.  A  glance 
at  the  uncial-typed  words  in  the  edition  of  Ryle  and  James  will 
show  what  we  mean.  When,  however,  we  come  to  the  detailed 
examination  of  these  borrowed  words  and  phrases,  we  do  not  find 
that  the  writer  takes  any  special  theme,  as  the  Odist  does,  and 
reverts  to  it.  We  have  only  noted  one  place  where  a  Psalm  of 
the  Old  Testament  that  has  been  quoted  appears  to  have  lingered 
in  his  memory.  In  Ps.  So/,  v.  we  have  the  following  sequence  : 
Ps.  Sol.  v.  i  1.  Thou  givest  rain  in  the  desert  to  cause  the  grass 
to  spring  up,  (Ps.  civ.  u.) 

v.  12.     to  prepare  food  in  the  wilderness  for  ever)'  living 
thing,  (Ps.  civ.  2<S  ;   Ps.  cxlv.  16.) 

and   if  they  be  hungry,  to  thee  they  will  lift  up 
their  faces.  (Ps.  civ.  27  ;  Ps.  cxlv.  15.) 

v.  14.  His  soul  shall  be  satisfied  when  thou  openest  thy 
hand  in  mercy.  (Ps.  civ.  2<S  ;  Ps.  cxlv.  16.) 
There  is  no  necessity,  however,  to  refer  more  than  the  first  of  the 
passages  quoted  to  the  104th  Psalm,  the  remainder  come  from 
the  145th  Psalm.  Nor  is  there  any  peculiar  agreement  of  the  Psalter 
of  Solomon  at  this  point  with  the  Syriac  Psalter.  So  far  from  any 
such  agreement  being  detected,  the  evidence  is  in  the  other  direction. 
We  have  examined  a  good  many  cases  of  occurrence  of  Biblical 
language  in  the  Psalms  of  Solomon-  without  finding  more  than 
superficial  or  inevitable  coincidences  ;  and  there  arc  many  diver- 
gences in  the  language,  and  no  special  Syriac  singularities.  This 
is  what  we  should  naturally  have  expected.  Our  reason  for  alluding 
to  it  is  to  remove  any  possible  misapprehension  with  regard  to  our 
linguistic  criticism  of  the  Odes. 


SYRIAC    OR    GREEK  167 

Suppose  we  try  and  tabulate  in  a  preliminary  manner  some  of 
the  results  as  to  the  original  language  of  particular  Odes  which  we 
have  tentatively  reached.  We  anticipate  some  results  that  will 
be  worked  out  in  the  notes. 

Ode  i.     Certainly  of  Semitic  origin.     (See  explanation  of  '  fruits 

full  and  perfect '.) 
Ode  iv.     Of  Semitic  origin  :  traces  of  Targumism. ' 
Ode  vi.     Probably  of  Greek   origin   (reference  to   the   dwoppoia 

of  the  Divine  Wisdom). 
Ode  vii.     Of  uncertain  origin  ;  contains  Wisdom  references  (Prov. 

viii.  22)  and  has  very  early  attestation. 
Ode  viii.    Of  Syriac  origin  with  some  traces  of  Targumic  influence 
Ode  ix.     At  first  sight  appears  to  be  under  the  influence  of  LXX 

(cf.  \i6os  Ti/xios),  but  see  note,  and  reserve  judgement. 
Ode  xvii.     Based  upon  the  107th  Psalm,  Syriac  version. 
( )de  xix.     If  the  Ode  is  based  on  Proverbs  ix  it  is  a  Greek  Ode ; 

the  references  to  Psalm  xxii  are  capable  of  either  Greek  or 

Syriac  illustration. 
Ode  xx.     Based  on   Isaiah  lviii,  and   the  evidence  is  in  favour 

(but  not  conclusively  in  favour)  of  a  Syriac  origin. 
( )de  xxi.      Certainly    modelled    on    Psalm  xxx    in    the    Syriac 

version. 
Ode  xxiii.     Probably  based  in  its  opening  verses  on  the  Greek 

of  the  third  chapter  of  Sap.  Sol. 
( )de  xxv.     Decided  suggestion  of  a  Greek  origin  in  closing  verse. 
Ode  xxvi.     Probably  based  on  the  107th  Psalm  in  Syriac  (but 

some  hesitation   on  account  of  the   form  of  the  refrain  of 

the  Psalm  in  the  Peshitta). 
Ode  xxviii.    Shows  significant  coincidence  with  the  Syriac  Psalter 

(an   objection  on  the  part  of  Connolly    that   in  verse  4  it 

reflects  a  Greek  816). 
Ode  xxix.      Indecisive  references  to  the  Psalter. 
( )de  xxx.     Depends  upon  24th  chapter  of  the  Wisdom  of  Sirach  ; 

probably  Greek  original. 


i68  INTRODUCTION 

Ode  xxxvii.     Probably  Semitic  in  origin  (suggestion  of  influence 

from  Targum  ;  cf.  Ode  i). 
Ode  xl.     Apparently   connected   internally  with    Ode   xx,   and 

like  that  Ode  dependent  upon  the  Syriac  of  Isaiah  lviii. 
Ode  xli.     Shows  acquaintance  with   the   Hebrew    of   Proverbs 

viii.  22. 
Ode  xlii.     Depends   on    Psalm  lxxxviii,  but   not  decisive  as  to 
Syriac  or  Greek. 
This    is    a    rapid    glance    at    the    phenomena    of    the    textual 
transmission    (omitting  altogether  the    Syriacisms    and   Semitisms 
which  we   have  collected  elsewhere).     It  is  perplexing  because  of 
the  cross-evidence  within  the  individual  Odes.     It  would  have  been 
easy   to   affirm   bilingual   authorship  and    refer   the  hymns  to  the 
use  of  a  bilingual  church;    but   we  have  against  this  the  lack  of 
decisive    evidence    within    the    particular    Psalms,    and    sometimes 
there  is  ambiguity  which  arises  from  the  evidence  being  given  on 
both  sides.     If  we  had  to  decide  at  this  point  we  should  be  tempted 
to  say  that  the  Wisdom  Odes  were  composed  in  Greek  and  the 
rest  in  Syriac  ;  but  the  conclusion  would  be  too  rapid. 

There  remains,  then,  the  internal  evidence  of  Syriacism.  This 
is  abundant,  but  it  requires  sifting.  For  example,  it  is  not  a  peculiar 
Syriacism  to  say  that  '  all  who  overcome  shall  be  written  (booked) 
in  her  book ',  for  how  else  could  one  express  it  in  Syriac  ? 

There  are,  moreover,  cases  of  supposed  Syriacism  like  the 
'  midwife '  passage  in  Ode  xix,  where  the  evidence  can  be  countered 
as  we  have  shown,  so  that  it  is  not  possible  to  leave  the  Syriac 
label  any  longer  on  the  text  without  an  attached  mark  of  caution. 

There  are.  however,  very  many  Syriacisms  and  Aramaisms 
which  we  have  tabulated,  far  beyond  the  natural  accidents  of  a 
translator.  Wcllhauscn  made  a  distinction  between  '  biblisms  '  and 
•Aramaisms',  conceding  the  former  and  denying  the  latter.  We 
ma)r  concede  all  the  possible  '  biblisms '  like  '  blessing  he  blessed 
me',  and  we  have  still  a  rich  harvest  of  remaining  Aramaisms. 
It  is  probable  that  these  will  be  the  deciding  factor  in  the  question, 


SYRIAC    OR    GREEK  169 

and  will  require  us  to  admit  that  the  greater  part  of  the  Odes 
(to  say  the  least)  are  of  Syriac  origin  (vide  supra,  pp.  97-104). 

Amongst  the  Aramaisms  those  will  be  felt  to  be  of  the  greatest 
weight  which  involve  Syriac  word-play,  with  various  meanings 
for  the  same  root,  or  for  related  roots.  Upon  such  cases,  where 
they  can  be  clearly  made  out,  and  upon  the  cases  of  influence 
from  the  Targums  and  the  methods  of  Targums,  the  decision  as  to 
origins  will  ultimately  be  made  (vide  supra,  pp.  101-3,  164). 

To  give  one  or  two  more  illustrations,  the  35th  Ode  will  exhibit 
even  to  the  eye  of  a  person  that  knows  no  Syriac,  that  the  writer  is 
using  recurrent  expressions,  almost  coincident  in  form.  The  words 
^/,  Jh>^,  U^J,  and  JLj  stand  up  from  the  page.  The  Syriac 
scholar  knows  that  three  different  roots  are  being  played  with, 
conveying  the  ideas  of  'dew',  'shelter',  and  'boyhood'.  These 
ideas  are  woven  together  in  the  Ode,  and  the  assonance,  which 
even  the  eye  can  detect,  is  the  key  to  the  Ode.  This  cannot 
possibly  be  Greek  work  :  it  may  be  bad  philology,  but  it  is  Syriac 
philology.  And  when  we  have  proved  this  35th  Ode  to  be  a 
Syriac  product,  a  very  little  study  will  show  that  the  result  carries 
with  it  a  similar  conclusion  for  other  Odes,  such  as  the  36th  Ode 
where  the  same  '  cloud  of  dew '  is  detected,  and  can  be  traced 
to  an  ultimate  origin  in  the  Syriac  of  Isaiah  and  the  Targum. 

Equally  decisive  is  the  study  of  Targum  quotations  and  the  use 
of  Targum  methods  of  interpretation.  The  Odes  are  full  of  both. 
The  Odist  is  always  avoiding  anthropomorphism  in  the  Targumist's 
manner.  He  is  constantly  saying  '  Before  the  Lord '  instead  of 
'  the  Lord ',  or  quoting  the  '  Name  of  the  Lord ',  or  the  '  Word 
of  the  Lord  ',  in  the  place  of  '  the  Lord '.  As  soon  as  we  take  this 
key  into  our  hands  any  number  of  textual  locks  fly  open.  We  see 
at  once  why,  in  Ode  xxix.  9,  '  War  is  made  by  the  Word ',  and 
'  Victory  taken  by  the  Word  ',  for  the  writer  is  making  metre  out  of 
the  Targum  on  the  110th  Psalm. 

We  see  why  in  Ode  xxii  '  the  name  of  the  Lord  '  was  surround- 
ing the  Odist ;  it  is  a  Targumist  periphrasis  for  'the  Lord  is  round 


ijo  INTRODUCTION 

about  his  people'  (Ps.  cxxv.  2).  And  it  is  not  merely  an  oral 
Targum,  or  the  method  of  an  oral  Meturgeman  that  is  employed  ; 
sometimes  we  catch  the  Odist  poring  over  a  written  Targum  and 
picking  up  stray  expressions  from  it.  See  the  notes  on  Ode  xxxv, 
where  it  is  shown  that  the  motive  for  the  expression  '  More  than 
shelter  was  He  to  me  ;  is  caught  up  from  the  Targum. 

Xo  doubt  these  discoveries  of  the  influence  of  the  Targum  and 
its  closely  related  Peshitta  text  upon  the  Odes  are  of  ultimate 
importance  for  the  history  of  the  Targum  itself;  but  the  immediate 
result  is  that  they  carry  the  Odes  back  into  the  time  when  the 
Church  was  still  adjacent  to  the  Synagogue,  and  they  show  con- 
clusively the  Aramaic  origin  of  the  Odes  in  which  the  influence  of 
Targum  can  be  traced. 

We  may  make  a  reserve,  if  we  please,  for  the  possible  bilingual- 
ism  of  the  author ;  he  may  have  known  some  Greek,  he  must  have 
known  a  great  deal  of  Aramaic  ;  he  may  have  known  the  Septuagint  ; 
he  must  have  known  the  Hebrew,  the  Peshitta.  and  the  Targum. 
With  the  reserve  in  question  which  comes  under  the  formula  exceptis 
excipiendis,  we  affirm  the  Aramaic  origin  of  the  (  )des.  The  result 
has  been  reached  after  a  close  and  careful  inquiry,  with  the  scales 
vibrating  alternately  to  this  side  and  that  ;  in  our  judgement  they 
have  now  inclined  to  one  side. 

It  must  be  clear  to  any  who  has  followed  carefully  the  argument 
up  to  the  present  point,  that  the  introduction  of  the  idea  of  the 
Targum  is  the  decisive  factor  in  the  solution  of  the  problem  before 
us.  If  we  can  show  either  the  methods  of  a  Meturgeman  or  the 
actual  use  of  a  Targum,  the  problem  is  solved  so  far  as  relates 
to  the  Odes  in  which  such  methods  and  influences  are  at  work. 

It  would  take  us  too  long  to  discourse  at  length  on  the 
mentality  of  the  Aramaic  interpreter  of  the  Scripture  to  a  con- 
gregation ;  and  in  the  collection  of  readings  that  may  be  fairly 
described  as  Targum  we  have  a  wide  area  to  select  from.  We 
know  that  we  must  not  ascribe  personality  to  God  in  terms 
borrowed   from  human  life,  and  that   we  must  say  "Word  of  God ' 


SYRIAC    OR    GREEK  171 

instead  of  '  God '.  We  must  not  say  that  '  God  sees '  or  that 
'  God  knows ',  much  less  that  He  '  walks  '  or  '  smells  sweet  savours '. 
If  we  want  to  say  that  '  He  knows ',  let  us  say  '  it  is  revealed 
and  known  before  Him',  and  generally  let  the  periphrase  'done 
before  Him'  be  used  for  everything  that  He  does.  This  con- 
sideration alone  should  have  betrayed  the  secret  to  us ;  for  the 
Odist  uses  the  very  expression  '  it  was  revealed '  which  is  current 
all  over  the  Targums  (U^s^,  v^^l/).  And  the  abnormal  recurrence 
of  y>+£>  {before  a  person)  should  have  been  recognized. 

As  for  expressions  to  be  avoided,  a  good  plan  will  be  to 
read  through  a  section  of  the  Pentateuch  or  Prophets  or  Psalms, 
and  see  what  changes  are  chronic.  For  example,  God  is  never 
called  '  a  rock '  in  the  Targums,  but  he  may  be  called  '  the  strong 
one '.  In  the  Psalms  where  the  appellation  of  '  rock '  occurs,  this 
substitution  is  chronic  ;  and  we  shall  see  why  the  Odist  who  is 
working  so  constantly  on  the  Psalter  never  uses  the  term.  In 
one  case  there  is  a  reference  to  '  foundations  laid  upon  God's  rock ', 
but  that  is  not  the  same  thing.  What  was  the  ultimate  reason 
for  the  avoidance  of  the  term  we  are  not  at  present  in  a  position  to 
determine. 

The  recurrence  in  the  Odes  of  the  expression  '  His  Word  '  is 
not  to  be  taken  as  necessarily  Targumic  ;  but  sometimes  it  must  be 
so  taken,  for  it  will  be  seen  to  be  a  substitute  for,  or  an  evasion 
of,  the  utterance  of  the  Divine  Name.  When  we  say  that  '  His 
Word  is  with  us  in  all  our  way',  or  that  the  Lord  has  '  bridged  the 
rivers  by  His  Word ',  or  '  my  voice  fell  to  him  and  his  Word  came  to 
me ',  we  are  dealing  with  what  may  fairly  be  labelled  as  Targum. 

This  relates,  however,  to  the  method  of  the  Meturgeman,  which 
appears  to  be  also,  if  occasionally,  the  method  of  the  Odist. 
Method  is  one  thing:  actual  employment  of  existing  Targums  is 
another.  It  is  here  that  our  investigation  becomes  decisive,  for 
we  shall  find  over  and  over  again  that  we  have  to  refer  an  ex- 
pression in  the  Odes  to  the  Targum  or  to  the  closely  related 
Peshitta,  if  we  are  to   understand   it   rightly.     The   proof  of  this 


[7a  INTRODUCTION 

statement  must  be  sought  in  the  foot-notes  to  the  separate  Odes. 
We  believe  it  will  be  accepted  as  final  and  conclusive. 

This  does  not  mean  that  the  Odist  is  always  making  or  quoting 
Targum.  Sometimes  he  speaks  as  a  Meturgeman  would  have  been 
slow  to  do,  of  God's  'right  hand',  or  the  'Lord's  hand':  and  we 
doubt  if  any  Meturgeman  would  have  invented  or  tolerated  the 
'  breasts  of  God  '.  The  use  of  such  expressions  does  not  invalidate 
the  statement  that  the  Odist  can  be  shown  to  have,  in  certain 
places,  Targumized. 

We  must  observe  also  that  the  value  of  this  discovery  is  two- 
fold :  first  of  all,  it  is  of  value  with  regard  to  the  Targum  itself, 
whose  antiquity  and  written  transmission  is  established  more 
clearly  than  ever  ;  second,  it  makes  the  Odes  themselves  into  a 
commentary  upon  the  older  Scriptures  as  well  as  a  book  of  songs. 
Such  a  commentary  is  of  the  highest  value  ;  just  as  the  Targum 
on  the  Scripture  is  regarded  by  the  interpreter  of  Scripture  as 
an  •  inestimable  treasure ',  so  the  Odes,  in  so  far  as  they  reflect 
the  Targum,  acquire  additional  worth  and  value,  and  constitute 
a  precious  link  between  the  Judaism  of  Palestine  in  the  first  century 
of  our  era  and  the  Christianity  of  the  same  period. 

Knough  has  been  said  to  accentuate  the  importance  of  the 
conclusions  to  which  we  have  been  led  in  a  somewhat  extended 
and  often  perplexing  investigation. 

A  very  judicious  summary  of  the  arguments  for  and  against  a 
Greek  original  for  the  Odes  will  be  found  in  Tondelli's  excellent 
edition  to  which  we  have  already  made  reference.  Tondelli,  indeed, 
concludes  for  a  Greek  original,  but  that  is  not  altogether  surprising: 
many  of  the  considerations  which  we  have  adduced  for  an  opposite- 
view  are  new,  and  our  own  first  judgement  was  the  same  as  that 
of  Tondelli  and  the  majority  of  the  critics.  Bernard,  however, 
expressed  his  belief  definitely  in  a  Syriac  original,  though  he  was 
unable  to  work  the  thesis  out ;  Abbott  made  a  strong  fight  (against 
Connolly  and  others)  for  a  Semitic  base;  and  Grimme  went  so 
far    as   to    turn    the   Odes   back   into   classical   Hebrew,  and   even 


SYRIAC    OR    GREEK  173 

declared  that  they  showed  traces  of  Acrostic  arrangement  according 
to  the  letters  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet !  Bruston  brought  forward 
cases  of  Syriac  assonance,  and  of  Syriac  corruption,  but  as  Tondelli 
rightly  observes,  his  instances  were  not  very  strong.  For  example, 
it  was  surely  incorrect  to  suppose  that  in  the  opening  verse  of 
Ode  xxxiv  there  was  an  intentional  assonance  between  JK**j3  (hard) 
and  i^*s  (simple) :  the  Oriental  does  not  confuse  the  sounds  in 
question  :  to  him,  at  all  events,  they  are  not  assonant. 

On  the  other  hand,  many  of  the  arguments  for  a  Greek  original 
have  also  disappeared  in  the  course  of  the  investigation.  It  was 
quite  natural  to  suppose  that  when  the  Odist  uses  the  expression 
)la*U  !a=>>,  he  was  translating  literally  from  the  Greek  /xeyaXo- 
trpkiTtia  in  the  two  instances  where  the  expression  occurs.  Only 
it  had  been  overlooked  that  the  Syriac  Psalter  had  already  made 
the  expression  common  property,  so  that  there  was  no  need  to 
think  of  translation  at  all.  The  same  thing  is  true  of  a  number 
of  primitive  forms  like  Jkx~  U  =  aepdapros  or  yxoa.~  D  =  acpOovm  ; 
for  it  can  be  shown  that  such  forms  were  at  home  in  the  Syriac 
language  and  literature  from  the  earliest  times;  Ephrem,  for 
example,  uses  them  freely,  and  without  any  possible  suspicion  of 
translation.  There  is  really  no  reason  why  the  writer  of  the  Odes, 
if  a  Syrian,  should  not  have  employed  the  transliteration  of 
Trpoarooirov,  klvSvvos,  or  yivo?.  These  are  superficial  Grecisms,  and 
not  necessarily  evidences  of  an  immediate  derivation  from  Greek. 
Frankenberg,  by  retranslating  the  Odes  into  Greek,  was  able  to 
take  the  argument  somewhat  deeper  ;  the  suggestion  in  Ode  xxx 
that  the  couplet  : 

'  It  flows  forth  from  the  mouth  of  the  Lord, 
And  from  the  heart  of  the  Lord  is  its  Name,' 

had  been  affected  by  a  misreading  of  vap.a  (flow)  for  ovopa  (name) 
was  certainly  striking,  and  restored  parallelism  to  the  members 
of  the  couplet.  It  is,  however,  possible  that  there  may  be  a  Syriac 
explanation  of  the  passage.     See  our  note  on  the  verse. 


174 


INTRODUCTION 


Another  suggestive  instance  is  in  the  13th  Ode,  where  Franken- 
berg  and  Preuschen  would  have  us  restore 

'  Open  your  eyes  and  sec  yourselves  in  Him  ' ; 

thus  reading  avrovs  (=  iavrovs)  instead  of  avrovs,  and  crediting 
the  translation  with  a  wrong  reference  of  avrovs  to  the  eyes  instead 
of  the  observers.  The  suggested  modification  of  an  assumed  under- 
lying Greek  text  was  very  attractive.  We  should  also  note  that 
the  expression  in  Ode  vii.  17  ('harp  of  many  voices')  may  very  well 
be  the  equivalent  of  a  Greek  Kiddpa  7ro\v(f)oovo$. 

Somewhat  different  is  Nestles  suggestion  that  in  Ode  vii.  12  we 
should  read  ovaia  for  the  implied  Bvcria,  a  very  easy  change  in 
Greek  uncial  writing.  This  interpretation  would  give  us  an  original 
sentence  to  the  effect,  '  He  granted  me  that  I  should  ask  of  Him 
and  partake  of  His  nature',  presumably  in  the  attainment  of  im- 
mortality as  a  gift  of  God.  We  might  compare  2  Peter  i.  4,  where 
believers  are  said  to  become  'partakers  of  the  Divine  Nature',  but 
here  the  word  is  (pvais  and  not  ovaia.  There  is,  however,  a  doubt 
whether  any  change  is  necessary :  we  have  suggested  in  the  note 
that  the  Syriac  is  intelligible  as  it  stands,  and  that  it  means: 

■  That  I  should  ask  of  Him 
And  receive  of  His  largesse' 

These,  then,  are  some  of  the  best  cases  for  Grecism. 

Connolly,  who  spent  a  good  deal  of  time  and  labour  in  vindi- 
cating the  priority  of  the  Greek  text,  made  an  interesting  point  out 
of  the  words  : 

'  I  believed,  therefore  I  was  at  rest.'1 

The  argument  is  that  the  Odist,  after  his  usual  manner,  is  imitating 
a  canonical  Psalm  with  slight  variations  in  the  terms  of  speech 
or  the    language    used.      In    this   case   it   will   be   Psalm  cxvi.   10. 

1  Is  there  any  connexion  with  Heb.  iv.  4:  'We  who  have  believed  do  enter 
into  rest  '  ? 


SYRIAC    OR    GREEK 


i7.7 


•  I  believed,  therefore  have  I  spoken  '.  and  we  are  entitled  to  affirm 
that  the  word  'therefore'  is  taken  from  the  Psalter.  It  answers,  in 
fact,  to  the  816  of  the  Septuagint,  which  will  be  found  reflected 
in  the  Pauline  correspondence  at  2  Corinthians  iv.  13.  This  816 
is  not  represented  in  the  Syriac  text  of  the  Psalms,  which  simply 
says,  'I  believed  and  I  spake'.  Connolly,  not  unnaturally,  con- 
cluded that  it  was  not  the  Syriac  Psalter  that  underlay  the  language 
of  the  Ode.  A  past  tense,  too,  seemed  to  be  postulated  for  the 
model  which  has  been  imitated  by  the  expression  '  therefore  I  was 
at  rest ' ;  and  this  is  not  the  Hebrew  of  the  Psalm  which  runs  : 

'  I  believe,  therefore  /  will  speak.' 
Thus  there  was  a  slight  balance  in  favour  of  the  Septuagint.  We 
note,  however,  that  the  Targum  has  also  the  desiderated  '  there- 
fore', so  that  its  omission  by  the  Peshitta  is  not  quite  decisive 
of  the  question.  As  it  stands,  the  balance  of  the  argument  is  on 
Connolly's  side,  unless  it  should  be  overborne  by  the  general 
considerations  contained  in  the  previous  pages  of  the  present  work. 
We  may  now  relegate  the  discussion  of  other  and  minor  points 
of  difference  between  the  Greek  hypothesis  and  the  opposing  Syriac 
to  the  notes  attached  to  the  translation  of  the  individual  Odes. 
We  have  been  anxious  not  to  omit  anything  of  importance  in 
the  extant  criticisms  of  the  Odes,  but  it  is  permissible  to  pass 
over  in  silence  some  things  which  do  not  require  a  serious 
refutation  or  a  sustained  discussion. 


CHAPTER    XV 

The  Coptic  (Sahidic)  Version. 

We  have  already  explained  that  five  of  the  Odes  of  Solomon 
are  found  embedded  in  that  curious  Gnostic  book  which  goes  under 
the  name  of  Pistis  Sophia.  In  this  book  a  number  of  the  Psalms 
of  David  and  the  afore-mentioned  five  Odes  of  Solomon  are  the 
basis   of  the   penitences  which   the   unfortunate    Sophia   addresses 


[76  INTRODUCTION 

to  the  Saviour,  disguised  in  each  case  by  the  substitution  of 
Gnostic  language  for  that  of  the  selected  Psalm  or  Ode.  Then  the 
Psalm  having  been  identified  by  some  one  of  the  Disciples,  male  or 
female,  we  have  the  actual  text  of  that  Psalm  or  Ode,  after  which 
in  a  number  of  cases  the  Gnostic  Targum  and  the  Biblical  text 
are  gone  over,  sentence  by  sentence,  for  the  purpose  of  comparison, 
so  that  we  have  the  Ode  or  Psalm  in  two  forms,  and  sometimes 
in  what  looks  like  a  third. 

Evidently  we  must  try  and  find  out  what  light  the  text  of  the 
Pistis  Sophia  and  the  methods  of  its  author  can  throw  on  the  origin 
of  the  Odes. 

The  first  thing  that  comes  to  light  in  reading  the  I^istis  Sophia 
is  that  its  Old  Testament  is  the  Septuagint,  and  not  the  Hebrew 
nor  the  Peshitta  Syriac,  which  is  based  for  the  most  part  on  the 
1  lebrew. 

For  'instance,  the  first  passage  of  Scripture  discussed  is  Isaiah 
xiv.  1,  3,  12,  which  is  explained  as  follows  by  the  Virgin  Mary 
(in  quoting  we  use  the  translation  of  Schwartze-Petermann) : 

'  Locuta  est  hoc  modo  vis.  quae  in  Esaia  7rpo0r/T?7  et  protulit 
eum  in  7rapa(3o\i}  7ri'€Vfj.aTLKfj,  tempore  quo  dixit  dc  opdo-ei 
Aegypti,  id  est : 

'  Ubi.  igitur,  Aegypte,  ubi  sunt  tui  divinatores,  et  ordinatores 
horae:  et  hi,  qui  vocant  c  terra  ct  Jii,  qui  vocant  ex  scsc. 
Monstranto  tibi  facinora,  quae  perpetrabit  Dominus  Sabaoth.' 

The  heading,  opaai?  AlyvnTov,  and  the  equivalents  for  e'/c  7779  yfjs 
(fxjovovvra^  and  eyyaaTpifivOovs,  betray  the  use  of  the  Septuagint, 
or  of  an  l^gyptian  translation  based  upon  the  Septuagint.' 

In  this  passage  it  will  be  found  on  examination  that  it  is  Jesus 
who  is  speaking  Gnostically  and  is  interpreted  by  Mary.  A  similar 
case  will  be  found  when  we  come  to  the  sixth  Ode  of  Solomon, 
where  again   it   is   Jesus   who  has  to  be  interpreted   and  not  the 

1  The  chapter  quoted  must  have  been  often  in  use  in  the  propagation  of  the 
Christian  religion  in  Egypt,  since  it  predicts  the  return  of  Egypt  from  idolatry  to 
monotheism  and  the  service  of  Jahweh. 


THE    COPTIC    (SAHIDIC)    VERSION  177 

repentant  Sophia.  So  it  was  not  absolutely  true  that  the  book 
was  made  out  of  the  penitences  of  Sophia,  which  some  have 
imagined,  apparently  without  sufficent  reason,  to  be  incorporated 
from  without  in  the  texture  of  the  Pistis  Sophia. 

Returning  to  the  text  of  the  Psalms  in  the  Pistis  Sophia  we 
may  make  comparison  with  the  Sahidic  Psalter  recently  published 
by  Dr.  Budge  from  a  papyrus  of  the  sixth  century,  and  we  shall 
find  in  the  greater  part  of  the  Psalms  discussed,  that  the  coincidence 
is  so  close  (often  there  will  hardly  be  a  sensible  variation  in  the 
texts)  as  to  leave  no  doubt  that  the  Sahidic  Psalter  was  extant 
when  the  Pistis  Sophia  was  written,  and  that  it  was  employed 
by  the  author.  Now  this  Sahidic  Psalter  is  simply  the  Septuagint 
done  out  of  Greek  into  Sahidic.  Unless,  then,  the  Pistis  Sophia 
has  substituted  the  Sahidic  version  for  some  other  version  which 
lay  before  the  author,  of  which  he  has  avoided  the  trouble  of 
making  a  fresh  translation,  there  is  a  strong  presumption  that 
the  Pistis  Sophia  is  a  genuine  Coptic  book,  and  not  a  rendering 
of  some  other  work  (Greek  or  Syriac)  into  Coptic.  Let  us  see 
if  we  can  confirm  this  by  a  closer  examination. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  book  the  problem  is  raised  as  to  what 
is  to  be  done  with  persons  who  are  baptised  but  do  not  bring  forth 
fruits  meet  for  repentance.  The  story  which  deals  with  the  problem 
is  as  follows : 

'After  these  things  Jesus,  seeing  a  woman  who  came  to 
repent,  baptised  her  three  times,  though  she  had  not  done 
anything  worthy  of  baptism.  And  the  Saviour,  wishing  to 
try  Peter,  in  order  to  see  whether  he  was  merciful  and  remitted 
sins,  as  He  had  commanded  him,  said  to  Peter:  "  Lo !  these 
three  times  I  have  baptised  this  soul,  and  in  these  three  times 
she  has  done  nothing  worthy  of  the  Mystery  of  Light.  Why 
then  does  she  also  render  the  body  useless  ?  Now,  therefore, 
Peter,  perform  the  Mystery  of  Light,  which  cuts  off  souls  from 
the  Inheritance  of  Light ;  perform  that  mystery,  so  as  to  cut 
off  this  woman  from  the  Inheritance  of  Light."  When  the 
Saviour,  therefore,  had  said  these  things,  he  tried  Peter,  to  see 
whether  he  was  merciful  and  forgiving.     When,  therefore,  the 

11  N 


178  INTRODUCTION 

Saviour  had  said  these  things,  Peter  said,  "  My  lord,  leave  her 
alone  this  time  also,  that  I  may  give  her  the  sublime  mysteries. 
And  if  she  turns  out  useful,  you  allow  her  to  inherit  the 
Kingdom  of  Light."  When  Peter  had  said  these  words,  the 
Saviour  recognized  that  Peter  was  merciful  like  Himself  and 
forgiving.' 

Evidently  we  have  been  treated  to  a  Gnostic  Targum  upon  the 
parable  of  the  barren  fig-tree  in  Luke  xiii.  The  explanation 
promptly  follows,  for  the  writer  continues : 

'  When,  therefore,  all  these  things  had  taken  place,  the 
Saviour  said  to  his  disciples,  "  Have  ye  understood  all  these 
things  and  the  pattern  of  this  woman?"  Mary  answered  and 
said,  "  My  lord,  I  understand  that  mystery  of  the  words  which 
were  done  to  this  woman  ;  concerning  the  things,  then,  that 
were  done  to  her,  thou  didst  speak  to  us  aforetime  in  a  parable, 
saying  :  '  A  certain  man  had  a  fig-tree,  in  his  vineyard.  And 
he  came  seeking  its  fruit,  and  found  nothing  in  it.  He  said  to 
the  gardener :  Lo  !  three  years  do  I  come  seeking  fruit  in  this 
fig-tree  and  I  find  nothing  in  it.  Cut  it  down,  therefore,  why 
does  it  also  cumber  the  ground  ?  But  he  answered  and  said  to 
him  :  My  Lord,  let  it  alone  this  year  also  until  I  shall  dig 
about  it  and  give  it  dung  ;  and  if  it  produce  fruit  next  year, 
you  leave  it  alone ;  but  if  you  do  not  find  anything  you  cut 
it  down.'  Behold,  my  lord,  this  is  the  solution  of  the  matter." 
The  Saviour  answered  and  said  to  Mary  :  "  Very  good,  spiritual 
woman,  that  is  exactly  the  case. 

Here,  then,  we  have  a  parable  of  the  New  Testament  treated  in 
precisely  the  same  way  as  the  Psalms  and  Odes.  We  have  a  passage 
of  the  Sahidic  New  Testament  before  us,  and  a  Gnostic  Targum, 
apparently,  on  the  same.  When  we  look  closely  at  the  Sahidic 
text  we  see  a  number  of  readings  peculiar  to  that  version.  For 
instance,  the  lacuna  in  the  unfinished  Greek  sentence  in  verse  9  : 
Kav  fikv  TroirjcrT)  Kapwov  eis  to  /leWov — 

is  filled  up  by  the  explanatory  word  akk^&c  (=  siiiis  earn)  :  the 
word  creeps  back  into  the  Greek  in  the  bilingual  (Graeco-Sahidic) 
codex  T  in  the  form  deftr/creis. 


THE   COPTIC   (SAHIDIC)   VERSION  179 

Now  let  us  look  back  at  the  Gnostic  Targum  on  the  passage 
and  we  find  the  same  Sahidic  gloss  in  the  sentence : 

'  Et  si  fuerit  utilis,  sinis  cam  KXrjpovojxslv  regnum  lucis.' 

From  which  it  appears  that  the  Targumist  was  also  operating 
on  a  Sahidic  text.  So  then,  for  our  purposes,  it  is  clear  that  the 
Pistis  Sophia  is  a  Sahidic  book,  and  the  writer  is  using  his  Sahidic 
Bible,  from  which  he  took,  as  need  required,  Psalms,  Odes  of 
Solomon,  Prophecies  of  Isaiah,  Gospels,  &c.  The  Old  Testament 
upon  which  he  operated  was  itself  based  upon  the  Greek  text 
of  the  LXX,  and  the  Odes  of  Solomon  were,  for  the  author  of 
the  Pistis  Sophia,  a  translation  of  the  Greek,  fragments  of  which 
lay  before  him  in  the  untranslated  Greek  words  that  adorn  his  text. 
Now  when  we  examine  side  by  side  the  Coptic  text  of  a  Psalm  of 
David,  as  it  occurs  in  the  penitences  of  Sophia,  with  the  same  Psalm 
as  it  occurs  in  the  Sahidic  Psalter  of  Dr.  Budge,  we  see  no  difference, 
or  hardly  any  difference,  in  the  transferred  Greek  words,  any  more 
than  we  do  in  the  Psalms  generally.  Occasionally  one  or  other 
of  the  contrasted  texts  may  replace  a  Greek  word  by  its  Coptic 
equivalent :  for  instance,  in  Psalm  xxxiv  (xxxv).  3  : 

A/xic  ivr&.\^r'Y9£H  xe  &.noK  nencyccoTHp 
the  Pistis  Sophia  has 

nenoyoyxdwi  (—  crau-qpia). 

In  Psalm  xxx  (xxxi).  12  : 

aA'p  ee  no*YgJi&a>*Y  e&.qcu)p5I : 
the  Pistis  Sophia  has 

noycKe-yoc : 

In  the  former  case  the  Psalter  has  the  original  Greek  word  (o-eoTrjp 
standing  for  acoTr]p[a) ;  in  the  latter  the  Pistis  Sophia  has  preserved 
the  original  cr/ceOoy  of  the  Septuagint.  In  neither  case  has  the 
Coptic  text  been  Grecized  by  the  author  of  the  Pistis  Sophia. 

The  importance  of  these  observations  lies  in  their  application  to 
the  Odes  that  are  mixed  with  the  Psalms  in  the  Pistis  Sophia. 

N   2 


j8o  INTRODUCTION 

In  every  case  where  a  Greek  word,  or  a  fragment  of  a  Greek  word, 
is  found  in  the  text  of  the  Odes  in  the  Pistis  Sophia,  we  are 
entitled,  unless  some  strong  reason  can  be  shown  to  the  contrary, 
to  read  back  that  Greek  word  into  the  lost  Greek  of  the  Odes. 
We  have  already  seen  the  importance  of  this  in  the  Sapiential  word 
arroppoia,  which  is  thus  vindicated  for  the  Ode  in  which  it  occurs  ; 
and  we  may  be  sure  that  such  a  highly  specialized  and  profoundly 
theological  word  never  came  into  our  Coptic  text  except  from  the 
Greek.  A  Syriac  intermediary  or  a  Hebrew  antecedent  is  not  to  be 
thought  of. 

The  next  thing  that  we  may  be  reasonably  sure  of  is  that  the 
primary  authority  for  the  text  of  the  Ode  is  not  the  Gnostic 
Targum  ;  it  must  be  clearly  shown  that  the  text  which  underlies 
the  Targum  differs  from  that  which  is  in  the  Bible  of  the  composer 
of  the  Pistis  Sophia,  before  the  Targum  comes  into  evidence  at 
all ;  and  even  when  it  differs  the  Biblical  text  has  a  prejudice  in 
its  favour;  it  must  not  be  disturbed  except  for  very  strong  reasons. 

We  may,  however,  observe  that  occasionally  the  Biblical  text 
in  the  Pistis  Sophia  shows  internal  traces  of  variation  or  of  cor- 
rection.    Here  is  an  instance  : 

In  Psalm  lxviii  (Ixix).  2,  where  the  text  of  the  LXX  is 

kvetra.yr\v  els  iXiiv  fivdov, 
the  Sahidic  has,  according  to  Dr.  Budge's  edition, 
&.iT(oXc  crXoYoe  HmiOTii : 

while  the  Pistis  Sophia  has 

dk'iTioXc  h  ekVtoAic  crXoVoe  Aiitncyit : 
('  infixus  sum  ant  immersus  in  coenum  abyssi '). 

Here  we  have  an  alternative  rendering  for  kveir&yrjv  which  has 
crept  into  the  text.  Lower  down  in  the  Psalms,  where  the  word 
recurs  {u>a  pr)  Ivrrayco).  there  is  no  variation  suggested  The  first 
rendering  is  clearly  ewY-rcoXc  :  the  other  is  a  reviser's  correction.  The 
advantage  we  gain  from  such  corrections  is,  that  \vc  can  see  that 


THE   COPTIC    (SAHIDIC)   VERSION  181 

the  Sahidic  Psalter  has  a  history  of  its  own,  even  before  the  time 
when  we  find  it  made  use  of  in  the  Pistis  Sophia.  We  must  also 
be  careful  to  see  that  we  do  not  justify  casual  omissions  of  single 
words,  half  verses,  &c,  with  which  any  manuscript  is  likely  to  be 
affected. 

Let  us  now  look  a  little  more  closely  into  the  relations  one 
to  another  of  the  forms  in  which  the  Pistis  Sophia  presents  to 
us  any  Ode  of  Solomon  which  it  quotes  or  works  over.  In  the 
most  extended  case  we  have  three  forms  :  (i)  the  Ode  itself;  (ii)  the 
Gnostic  Targum  on  the  Ode ;  (iii)  the  Commentary  upon  the  Ode, 
which  last  is  made  by  taking  sentences,  one  after  another,  from  the 
Ode  and  equating  them  with  their  proper  Targum.  Strictly  speak- 
ing, the  third  form  ought  to  add  nothing  to  the  other  two ;  for 
if  the  sentences  are  properly  transcribed  and  accurately  paralleled, 
no  new  matter  is  introduced.  But  we  shall  find  cases  in  which 
this  is  not  confirmed.  If  we  call  the  Coptic  text  C,  the  Targum  T, 
and  the  Commentary  com,  then  com  ought  to  break  up  into  two 
parts,  com  i  and  com  2,  of  which  com  I  should  equal  C  and  com  1 
should  equal  T.  We  must  examine  carefully  into  cases  where  this 
is  not  found  to  be  verified. 

Suppose  we  take  a  specimen  passage.  In  the  sixth  Ode  we 
find  the  following  sequence  (we  quote  the  Latin  rendering  of 
Schwartze-Petermann  for  convenience,  without  trying  to  reform  it 
in  every  particular) : 

verse  15  comprehenderunt  animas  (\jrvxds)  eiicientes  halitum,  ne 

morerentur. 
verse  16  restituerunt  membra  (fi£\rj)  quae  ceciderunt. 
For  this  the  Targum  is : 

vivificarunt  aco/xa  eius  v\t]s,  in  qua  nullum  lumen,  haec  quae 

peritura  est  aut  haec  quae  perit,  et  constituerunt  eius  vires 

omnes,  quae  erant  solvendae. 
And  the  Commentary  is  : 

verse  15,  com  1  vivificarunt  -tyvyas,  eiicientes  halitum,  ut  ne  more- 
rentur. 


182  INTRODUCTION 

com  i  vivificarunt   croi/xa  eius  vXtjs,  a  quo   lumina  sua 

abstulcrunt  prius,  hoc,  quod  erat  periturum. 
verse  16,  com  i   constituerunt  fieXt],  quae  collapsa  sunt,  aut  ut  ne 

collabercntur. 
com  2  quum  intulissent  in  earn  eius  lumina,  constituere 

(i.  e.  crcxerc)  eius  vires  omnes,  quae  erant  dis- 

solvendae. 

Here  we  have  three  peculiarities  to  explain  :  (i)  the  substitution  of 
vivificarunt  for  comprehenderunt  in  coin  i  ;  (ii)  the  double  rendering 
in  the  Targum  which  is  not  exhibited  by  com  1  ;  (iii)  the  double 
rendering  in  com  i ,  which  does  not  appear  in  C. 

That  comprehenderunt  is  right  may  be  seen  from  its  cor- 
respondence with  the  Syriac :  the  eye  of  the  Commentator  has 
wandered  to  the  Targum  which  he  was  comparing  with  the  text, 
so  as  to  read  vivificarunt.  The  double  rendering  in  the  Targum, 
which  wavers  between  a  future  participle  and  a  present  tense, 
appears  in  the  Coptic  in  the  form  : 

t*/i"  e   itecn&.T*.KO  ne 

H    T*Jl    e    UJA.CT&KO 

Here  we  may  recognize  a  variant  translation  of  the  Greek,  just 
as  we  did  in  a  previous  case :  we  conjecture  that  the  difficulty 
arose  in  translating  the  Greek  text : 

"tyvyh.<i  ai-ivts  e/zeAAor  airoOvrjcrKeLV' 
which  would  answer  very  nearly  to  the  Syriac : 

The  alternative  reading  probably  found  its  way  in  from  the  margin 
of  the  text  of  the  Odes. 

The  other  double  translation  is  similar :  the  text  of  the 
Odes  has : 

&YT&00  ii  oen  jue\oc  epaaoy  e  a.Y2c 

to  which  the  Commentary  adds  : 

h  •s.e.  ii  Jieyoe 


THE   COPTIC    (SAHIDIC)   VERSION  183 

We  need  not  assume  any  variation  in  the  underlying  Greek,  it  was 
probably : 

dvcopOcoaav  ra  fieXr]  ra  napaXeXv/xeua, 

very  nearly  as  in  Isaiah  xxxv.  3. 

If  we  make  an  allowance  for  a  few  cases  in  which  the  reading  of 
the  Targum  may  be  nearer  to  the  Syriac  than  the  reading  of  the 
Coptic  Ode,  we  do  not  need  to  make  any  detachment  of  the  Targum 
from  the  Coptic  text  which  accompanies  it,  so  as  to  assume  that 
the  Gnostic  parts  of  the  Pistis  Sophia  belong  to  an  independent 
tradition  which  has  been  re-incorporated  with  the  Odes  by  the 
author  of  the  Pistis.  We  have  already  pointed  out  that  the  same 
method  of  Gnosticising  a  Scripture  text  prevails  throughout  the  book, 
and  is  applied  both  to  Old  and  New  Testaments.  Any  thoughts 
of  separating  out  the  Penitences  of  Sophia  must  be  abandoned. 

Mr.  Worrell  has  attempted,  in  the  Journal  of  Theological  Studies 
for  October  191 1,  to  prove  that  'the  Syriac  through  its  ancestor 
was  influenced  by  those  very  Gnostic  Hymns  which  are  now  in 
the  Pistis  Sophia,  and  that  these  were  at  an  early  date  in  circulation 
apart  from  that  book,  and  wholly  independent  of  it,  forming  a 
collection  of  Gnostic  Hymns  parallel  to  the  orthodox  Odes  from 
which  they  were  derived'.  We  have  not  been  convinced  by  his 
reasoning,  which  is  incompatible  with  „ what  we  believe  to  be  the 
right  view  of  the  antiquity  of  the  Syriac  text ;  nor  do  we  think 
with  him  that  '  for  several  reasons  it  is  likely  that  the  Pistis  Sophia 
was  composed  in  Greek  and  translated  into  Coptic  as  a  whole '. 
It  is  possible  that  there  may  be  sections  (perhaps  of  Valentinian 
origin)  to  which  this  supposition  of  Greek  origin  will  apply,  but 
we  do  not  think  it  is  true  of  the  Penitences  of  Sophia,  nor  of  the 
Pistis  Sophia  as  a  whole.  Special  cases  of  the  kind  to  which 
Mr.  Worrell  alludes,  and  upon  which  he  builds  his  arguments,  will 
be  found  discussed  in  our  notes  as  they  arise. 

The  question  of  the  relations  between  the  Coptic  and  Syriac 
Odes  would  have  to  be  considered  from  quite  another  point  of 
view  if  it  could  be  maintained  that  the  Syriac  Odes  were  Nitrian 


i«4  INTRODUCTION 

in  origin.  Tondelli,  in  his  excellent  book  Lc  Odi  di  Salonwnc,  has 
tried  to  prove  this,1  first,  by  affirming,  with  Burkitt,  that  the  MSS. 
of  the  Odes  are  Monophysite  in  origin ;  second,  by  a  detailed 
proof  of  the  close  connexion  between  Syrian  and  Egyptian 
monachism  ;  and  third,  by  laying  stress  on  the  fact  that  our  oldest 
MS.  comes  from  Nitria,  and  that  the  Odes  were  certainly  at  home 
in  Egypt  at  a  very  early  period.  But  he  sees  clearly  the  weakness 
of  the  position,  and  admits  that  the  Nitrian  origin  of  the  Syriac  text 
would  have  to  be  abandoned  if  the  dependence  of  Ephrem  upon 
the  Odes,  as  maintained  by  Harris  and  Wensinck,  were  conceded.2 

We  have  given  further  proofs,  not  only  of  the  dependence  of 
Ephrem  on  the  Syriac  Odes,  but,  probably,  also  of  Bardaisan. 
So  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  follow  the  Nitrian  hypothesis  any 
further.  The  Odes  were  extant  in  Greek  and  in  Syriac  before  the 
Nitrian  desert  was  thought  of  as  a  paradise  for  monks,  a  home 
alike  for  learning  and  religion. 

There  is  one  direction  in  which  the  foregoing  reasoning  may 
appear  to  be  invalidated.  We  tested  our  Sahidic  Psalms  where 
they  occurred  in  the  Pistis  Sophia  by  comparing  them  with 
Dr.  Budge's  Psalter,  and  found  the  agreement  to  be  phenomenally 
close,  except  for  five  Psalms  which  occur  on  pp.  86-1 10  of  the 
Pistis.  Rahlfs  had  compared  the  Psalms  with  a  Berlin  MS.  of 
the  Sahidic  Psalter,  and  had  made  the  same  statement.3 

The  question  arises  as  to  how  we  are  to  explain  the  variation  of 
the  text  of  these  five  Psalms,  viz.  Psalms  xxx  (xxxi),  xxxiv  (xxxv), 
li  (Hi),  cviii  (cix),  cxix  (cxx).  Do  they  constitute  with  their  Gnostic 
counterparts  a  separate  document  which  has  been  incorporated 
with  the  Pistis  Sophia?  Or  are  they  a  section  of  the  Pistis  Sophia 
which   has   escaped   revision    or   been    unequally  revised,  by  com- 

1  Loc.  cit.,  p.  $S- 

2  '  L'origine  nitriaca  della  versione  sarebbe  da  negarsi  qualora  si  dovesse 
riconoscere  la  dipendenza  di  S.  Efrem  dalle  Odi,  sostenuta  dall'  Harris,  Ex- 
positor decembre  191 1,  e  Wensinck,  Expositor  febbraio  1912.' 

3  Die  Berliner  Handschrift  des  sahidischen  Psalters,  1901. 


THE    COPTIC    (SAHIDIC)   VERSION  185 

parison  with  the  Sahidic  Psalter?  Let  us  first  of  all  make  the 
matter  clearer  to  our  minds  by  actually  comparing  the  text  of 
the  shortest  Psalm  of  the  group  with  the  Sahidic  Psalter,  Psalm  cxix 
(cxx).  There  are  certainly  variants  in  the  translation,  e.g.  in 
verse  4  the  Pistis  has  tyoXa"  where  the  Psalter  has  thai  ;  and  in 
verse  7  the  Psalter  has  uj^yt  oTfil"  where  the  Pistis  has  uj  vyAiiuje 
nDJu&V,  the  meaning  in  each  case  being  the  same.  The  only 
variation  in  the  underlying  Greek  text  appears  to  be  r\  for  kol'i 
in  verse  3,  a  variant  which  will  be  found  in  the  apparatus  of  the 
LXX.  The  text  of  the  Psalter  keeps  closer  to  the  Greek  in 
rendering  iroWd  in  verse  6  by  ema/re,  than  the  Pistis,  while  the 
Pistis  has  git  oy  xtHHuje  Hjula.  (=  in  miritis  locis). 

In  both  versions  the  last  clause  of  verse  6  is  placed  after  the 
first  clause  of  verse  7,  a  very  striking  agreement.  Even  more 
remarkable  is  the  fact  that  the  very  same  Greek  transliterations 
(\jrvxv,  dvBpaxes,  dprjviKos,  elprjvt]),  occur  in  both  versions.  If  this 
feature  is  consistently  present  throughout  the  group  of  Psalms,  then 
the  two  translations  are  not  independent.  Suppose  we  test  the 
matter  further  in  Psalm  xxx  (xxxi). 

The  translations  differ  as  before  at  certain  points  :  e.g.  in  verse  5 
the  Greek  irayis  is  rendered  by  n^iy  in  the  Pistis,  and  by  a'ops'c 
in  the  Psalter,1  and  there  are  a  good  many  other  differences,  but 
apparently  none  that  imply  a  different  Greek  text.  The  trans- 
literations which  are  common  are  as  follows  :  BiKaioavvi],  irvevfxa, 
Si,  evtypcLLveo-QaL,  ^vyr)  (^er)'  dvdyxai,  6\ifieiv,  KXrjpoL,  datfieis, 
SUaios,  dvofiia.  The  only  variation  in  transliteration  is  that  the 
Pistishas  cr/ceuo?  in  verse  12,  where  the  Psalter  has  a  Sahidic  equiva- 
lent gn^ay  These  coincidences  again  can  hardly  be  accidental :  they 
suggest  that  the  translations  are  not  to  be  considered  as  independent. 

Of  the  two  the  Pistis  appears  to  be  the  earlier  in  the  retention 
of  the  Greek  cr/ceOoy,  which  has  disappeared  in  the  Psalter :  the  two 
versions  are  not,  however,  to  be  regarded  as  different.     It  appears, 

1  The  same  variation  occurs  in  Psalm  xxxiv  (xxxv).  7,  8,  but  in  the  latter  part 
of  verse  8  the  Psalter  and  the  Pistis  reverse  their  translation. 


i«6  INTRODUCTION 

then,  that  a  certain  point  in  the  Pistis?  perhaps  in  a  particular  quire 
or  quires  of  the  original  composition,  the  writer  (or  was  it  his  trans- 
lator?) used  a  second  copy  of  the  Sahidic  Psalter,  of  a  somewhat 
earlier  type,  but  not  fundamentally  different  from  the  one  which  he 
normally  employed.  We  sec  no  reason  for  assuming  discontinuity 
in  the  text  of  the  Pistis,  or  interpolation.  The  argument  of  the 
book  is  continuous,  and  the  text  must  not  be  broken  up. 

It  is  not  necessary  for  our  present  work  to  decide  all  the  un- 
settled questions  with  regard  to  the  Pistis  Sophia.  Schmidt  is  very 
decided  that  it  and  all  the  associated  Gnostic  books  are  translations 
from  the  Greek  :  he  will  not  hear  of  a  possible  Sahidic  original.  We 
suggest  that  the  matter  needs  some  further  elucidation.  If  the 
original  is  Greek,  ^he  Sahidic  Bible  has  been  used  by  the  translator 
in  presenting  the  Psalms  and  other  parts  of  the  Scripture  that  were 
in  his  text.  In  that  case  there  should  be  no  Sahidic  variants  in  the 
Gnostic  portions  of  the  book.  Are  we  quite  sure  of  this?  If  such 
Sahidic  variants  should  be  detected,  could  the  Greek  original  be  any 
longer  maintained  ? 

We  may  be  satisfied  that  the  Odes  of  Solomon  were  extant  both 
in  Greek  and  Sahidic,  and  that  the  Sahidic  (however  it  passed  into 
the  Pistis)  is  based  on  an  original  Gree  k. 

It  should  be  noticed,  in  leaving  this  part  of  the  inquiry,  that 
there  is  reason  to  hope  that  the  Odes  may  some  day  turn  up  in 
a  complete  form  in  Sahidic.  Another  direction  that  seems  hopeful 
for  further  discovery  is  the  literature  of  the  P^thiopic  Church.  The 
Abyssinians  have  a  literary  cult  of  Solomon,  whom  they  regard  as 
the  father  of  their  first  king,  through  the  much-wandered  Queen 
of  Sheba.  For  this  reason  they  assiduously  copied  the  book  of 
Proverbs,  the  Canticles,  and  the  Sapiential  books.  It  is  very  likely 
that  they  paid  attention  to  the  Odes  of  Solomon  also,  though  we 
have  not  yet  found  any  trace  of  them  in  the  Kthiopic  literature. 

1  The  change  occurs  in  the  MS.  of  the  Pistis  between  ff.  79  and  99;  this 
looks  like  quires  9-10  in  a  book  written  in  quires  of  ten  leaves. 


THE    ODES   AND   BAPTISM  187 

CHAPTER   XVI 
The  Odes  and  Baptism. 

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  discussion  of  the  interpretation  made  of 
the  Odes  of  Solomon  by  Dr.  Bernard,  according  to  whom  they  are 
a  series  of  baptismal  hymns  to  be  employed  ritually  in  the  initia- 
tion of  catechumens  in  the  period  that  precedes  the  Easter 
baptisms.  They  are  not  mystical  in  the  sense  of  being  pure 
spiritual  aspirations,  and  expressions  of  personal  experience ;  they 
are  to  be  regarded  as  sacramental  in  intention,  and  almost,  if  not 
quite,  liturgical  in  character.  Even  the  fact  of  their  being  forty- 
two  in  number  is  significant ;  for  they  were  to  be  sung  de  die  in 
diem  during  the  period  that  extends  from  the  first  Sunday  in  Lent 
to  Easter  Eve.  As  they  are  of  a  Palestinian,  or  at  all  events  a 
West-Syrian  origin,  it  is  natural  to  explain  their  occurrence  in  the 
lectures  of  St.  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  to  the  candidates  for  baptism  in 
the  year  a.d.  348.  Bernard  was  able  to  show  that  the  opening 
lecture  of  the  series  was  marked  strongly  by  reminiscence  of  the 
first  Ode  of  Solomon ;  and  on  the  hypothesis  offered  it  was 
significant  that  the  42nd  Ode,  which  deals  with  the  release  of  the 
prisoners  in  Hades,  should  fall  on  the  Saturday  before  Easter. 
Cyril,  indeed,  does  not  give  a  special  lecture  on  the  Descent  into 
Hades  (if  indeed  he  has  the  article  in  his  creed),  and  on  Easter  Eve 
he  is  occupied  with  the  Resurrection  of  the  Body,  the  Catholic 
Church,  and  the  Life  Everlasting}  He  does  discuss  the  subject 
in  his  fourteenth  lecture,  on  the  Resurrection  of  Christ,  and  here,  as 
we  have  already  pointed  out,  there  is  a  distinct  reminiscence  of  the 
42nd  Ode  {vide  supra,  p.  55).     The  acquaintance  of  Cyril  with  the 

1  The  Lectures  were  twenty-four  in  number,  one  of  which  is  introductory, 
and  the  last  five  are  post-baptismal,  and  delivered  after  Easter,  so  that  chrono- 
logical parallelism  between  the  supposed  Lenten  Odes  and  the  Lessons  to 
Candidates  must  not  be  unduly  pressed. 


188  INTRODUCTION 

Odes  must  be  conceded,  as  we  have  shown  in  a  previous  chapter ; 
and  it  is  an  acquaintance  with  the  same  book  of  Odes  that  is  known 
to  ourselves. 

Assuming,  for  a  while,  Dr.  Bernard's  position  and  using  Cyril's 
lectures  as  a  commentary  on  the  Odes,  we  can  readily  find  a 
number  of  striking  parallels,  over  and  above  the  crown  which 
blossoms  and  bears  perfect  fruit  in  the  first  Ode  and  in  the  Intro- 
ductory Lecture. 

In  the  first  lecture  Baptism  is  spoken  of  as  the  '  Seal  of  Salva- 
tion, that  wondrous  seal  at  which  devils  tremble,  and  which  angels 
recognize  '  :  this  suggests  that  we  identify  the  Seal  in  Ode  iv,  which 
is  '  known  to  God's  creation,  and  with  which  the  elect  archangels 
are  clad  ',  with  the  Seal  of  Baptism. 

In  the  same  lecture,  believers  are  spoken  of.  as  '  planted  in  the 
spiritual  Paradise  and  receiving  a  new  name '.  The  {  Paradise  ' 
references  in  the  Odes  are  striking,  especially  Ode  xi,  '  Blessed, 
O  Lord,  are  they  who  are  planted  in  thy  land  and  who  have  a  place 
in  thy  Paradise  ! ' 

The  injunction  of  the  Odes  to  '  keep  my  mystery  '  (Ode  viii.  10)  is 
interpreted  by  Dr.  Bernard  as  being  equivalent  to  7s.Disciplina  Arcani, 
according  to  which  the  initiates  into  mysteries,  whether  Christian  or 
non-Christian,  were  solemnly  forbidden  to  divulge  the  rites  in 
which  they  took  part.  Dr.  Bernard  has  been  criticized  for  this 
interpretation,  as  if  it  were  impossible  that  there  could  have  been 
any  secret  about  Christian  Baptism,  concerning  which  every  one 
was  well-informed,  and  which  the  early  Christians,  like  Justin 
Martyr,  were  not  slow  to  discourse  upon.  The  criticism  was  not 
well-founded.  It  is  certain  that  St.  Cyril,  at  all  events,  in  his 
opening  lecture,  put  the  initiates  on  their  honour  in  the  very 
language  of  the  Odes.  'If',  said  he,  'one  should  ask  what  the 
teachers  have  said,  "  Tell  nothing  to  a  stranger  ;  for  we  deliver 
to  thee  a  mystery,  even  the  hope  of  the  life  to  come  ;  keep  tlic 
mystery  for  Him  who  pays  thee  ".'  If  the  language  seem  somewhat 
Eleusinian,  and  Cyril   poses  as  a  hicrophant,  that  may  very  well 


THE   ODES    AND    BAPTISM  189 

be  the  attitude  of  the  Christian  teacher  in  his  day ;    and  on  this 
point  Dr.  Bernard  interprets  correctly  the  mind  of  St.  Cyril. 

In  the  very  same  introductory  lecture  Cyril  describes  the 
benefits  of  Baptism  in  glowing  language:  it  is  the  'ransom  of 
captives  ;  the  remission  of  offences  ;  the  death  of  sin  ;  the  regenera- 
tion of  the  soul ;  the  garment  of  light ;  the  holy  seal  indissoluble  ; 
the  chariot  (or  perhaps  ship)  to  Heaven;  the  delight  of  Paradise 
the  procuring  of  the  Kingdom ;  the  gift  of  Sonship '.  Special 
attention  should  be  paid  to  those  italicised  terms,  which  are 
susceptible  of  illustration  from  the  Odes. 

These  illustrations  will  suffice  to  show  the  way  in  which  Cyril's 
lectures  may  be  used  to  throw  light  on  the  Odes.  As  we  have 
previously  shown,  his  acquaintance  with  them  must  be  conceded, 
and  his  use  of  them  is  demonstrated.  He  knows  them  well ;  they 
colour  his  language,  and  affect  his  doctrine ;  and  he  has  employed 
them  in  a  number  of  instances  in  the  sacramental  as  well  as  the 
mystical  sense. 

In  the  next  place,  Dr.  Bernard  shows  that  there  are  a  number 
of  baptismal  hymns  extant,  and  attributed  to  Ephrem  the  Syrian, 
a  contemporary  of  Cyril  of  Jerusalem,  in  which  there  are  undoubted 
traces  of  the  use  of  the  Odes.  They  appear  to  have  been  com- 
posed for  the  festival  of  the  Epiphany,  which  marks  them  off  as 
a  distinct  tradition  from  the  Easter  baptisms  at  Jerusalem  upon 
which  Cyril  is  engaged.  Bernard  makes  a  special  study  of  the 
thirteenth  of  these  Hymns  of  the  Epiphany,  and  deduces  a  number 
of  parallels.     The  matter  deserved  a  closer  study. 

We  have  shown  in  a  previous  chapter  the  dependence  of  Ephrem 
upon  the  Odes,  and  his  use  of  the  similitudes  that  are  either 
borrowed  from  the  Odes  or  may  be  brought  into  connexion  with 
them  ;  and  this  dependence  was  not  deduced  from  the  Epiphany 
Hymns :  the  first  passage  which  we  have  identified  was  from 
Ephrem's  Discourses  on  Paradise  ;  in  which  we  detected  a  quotation 
from  the  nth  Ode  of  Solomon.  Again,  among  the  Hymns  on  the 
Church  and  on    Virginity  we  found   Ephrem  carefully  re-editing 


ioo  INTRODUCTION 

and  expanding  the  13th  Ode  of  Solomon  (the  '  mirror'  Ode).  We 
were  able  to  establish  that  he  knew  the  Ode  in  the  form  in  which 
we  have  it : 

'  Behold,  the  Lord  is  our  mirror ' ; 

and  on  comparison  with  the  first  of  the  Epiphany  Hymns,  we  found 
the  same  Ode  employed  with  this  modification  : 

'The  water!  its  nature  is  like  a  mirror.' 

So  it  was  clear  that  Ephrem  had  in  writing  the  Baptismal  Hymns 
for  the  Epiphany  changed  'the  Lord'  U^*>  into  'the  water'  JJL-*>. 
If  then  the  Ode  in  question  was  originally  baptismal,  it  was  now 
become  baptismal  in  a  new  and  indisputable  manner.  There  can 
be  no  doubt  about  Ephrem's  use  of  the  Odes,  nor  about  his  power 
of  adapting  them  to  the  theme  upon  which  he  is  working. 

The  Epiphany  Hymns  are  charged  with  baptismal  allusions, 
borrowed  from  the  Scriptures  and  from  the  Odes  of  Solomon.  The 
question  is  at  once  raised  as  to  whether  this  exegesis  is  valid, 
either  in  the  one  case  or  the  other.  To  take  an  example,  Ephrem 
says  in  the  seventh  of  the  Epiphany  Hymns  that  Moses  appealed 
to  the  children  of  Lot  for  water  (which  was  to  be  paid  for)  and 
a  right  of  way.  He  was  refused  both.  But  under  the  New 
Covenant  we  have  living  water  gratis  and  a  path  that  leads  to 
Eden.  Obviously  Ephrem  has  read  '  water '  to  mean  '  baptism ' 
mystically,  and  'the  path'  to  mean  the  'way  to  Paradise'.  This 
is  illicit  in  exegesis,  but  at  least  it  shows  that  Ephrem  believed 
that  '  baptism  '  and  '  living  water '  in  this  connexion  were  the  same 
thing,  and  that  baptism  was  the  entrance  to  Paradise,  just  as  Cyril 
believed  it  to  be.1  Are  we  justified  in  carrying  this  method  of 
interpretation  back  to  the  time  of  the  composition  of  the  Odes? 
We  can  easily  carry  it  forward  and  find  later  Syriac  writers,  like 
Moses  Bar  Kepha,  who  will  expand  and  dilate  upon  the  baptismal 

1  Ephrem  sometimes  uses  'living  water'  for  the  grace  of  God  :  he  says  that 
Judas  the  traitor  drank  living  water  [Brev.  Chald.  ii,  p.  «a^,). 


THE   ODES   AND   BAPTISM  191 

language  of  the  Scriptures  and  of  the  Odes,  but  how  far  back  did 
this  manner  of  teaching  prevail  ?  It  is  full-fledged  in  Ephrem : 
was  it  nascent  in  the  Odes  ?  It  is  good  for  the  end  of  the  fourth 
century,  did  it  prevail  at  the  beginning  of  the  second  century  or 
the  first? 

Here  is  an  instance  from  the  very  same  hymn  which  is  more 
favourable  to  Dr.  Bernard's  view.  Ephrem  draws  a  baptismal 
illustration  from  the  lapping  of  water  by  Gideon  and  his  men,  and 
infers  that  those  who  go  down  to  the  victorious  waters  will  get  the 
victor's  crown.  Shall  we  make  a  parallel  with  the  ninth  Ode  of 
Solomon  ? 

'  Put  on  the  crown 

All  those  who  have  conquered  shall  be  written  in  His  book, 
For  their  book  is  victory ' 

Evidently  the  Ode  will  not  bear  the  strain  of  such  interpretation. 
But  Ephrem  continues : 

'  Ye  baptized  take  your  torches, 
Like  the  torches  of  the  Gideonites  : 
Conquer  the  darkness  with  your  torches : 
The  stillness  with  your  Hosannas.' 

This,  too,  is  illicit  exegesis,  except  that  for  our  purposes  it  is 
valuable  as  showing  that  the  newly  baptized  carried  torches  in  the 
fourth  century  and  shouted  Hosannas :  but  this  is  the  very  thing 
which  has  been  suggested  as  an  ilium inant  for  the  obscurity  of 
Ode  xxv.  7 : 

'  Thou  didst  set  me  a  torch  at  my  right  hand  and  at  my  left.' 

And  as  the  same  thing  occurred  in  the  mysteries  of  Isis,  why  may 
it  not  have  occurred  in  an  early  Christian  ritual?  To  which  the 
answer  probably  is,  What  do  you  mean  by  early  ?  How  early  ? 
Do  you  mean  the  third  century  or  the  first  ?  The  time  just  before 
the  Nicene  Council,  or  the  time  just  following  the  Council  of 
Jerusalem?  It  must  be  admitted  that  Dr.  Bernard  has  established 
a  number  of  important  coincidences   between  the  Odes  and  the 


igz  INTRODUCTION 

fourth-century  rituals ;  but  almost  all  his  authorities  arc  subse- 
quent, not  merely  to  Apostolic  times,  but  to  sub-apostolic  writings 
and  to  the  early  apologists.  Is  not  Dr.  Bernard  reading  into  the 
Odes  a  liturgical  evolution  of  a  later  period  ?  Or  are  we  wrong  in 
having  carried  the  Odes  so  far  back  into  primitive  times? 

Let  us  look  at  the  matter  from  another  point  of  view.  Suppose 
we  had  discovered,  instead  of  a  Christian  Psalter,  some  Psalms  from 
the  Hebrew  Psalter,  imagined  to  have  been  lost.  Would  it  not 
have  been  just  as  easy  to  read  baptismal  allusions  into  them  as  into 
the  Odes  ?  The  first  Psalm,  for  instance,  would  make  almost  as 
good  a  parallel  for  Cyril,  with  its  trees  planted  by  rivers  of  water, 
and  its  leaves  that  never  fade,  as  is  furnished  by  the  first  Ode. 
And  the  second  Psalm,  with  its  adoption ist  language  ('  Thou  art  my 
Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee')  actually  carried  over  into  the 
Western  text  of  the  Baptism  of  Jesus,  would  be  almost  irrefutable. 

Now  the  supposition  that  we  are  making  is  not  an  idle  one. 
The  first  Psalm  was  actually  handled  in  this  way,  as  being,  accord- 
ing to  Barnabas,  predictive  of  the  '  water  and  the  Cross  '.  He  differs 
from  our  odist  in  the  emphasis  which  he  lays  upon  the  '  cross ',  and 
agrees  with  him  in  the  stress  laid  upon  the  '  water  '.  The  passage 
in  Barnabas  is  very  suggestive  ;  it  runs  as  follows : 

'And  again  he  saith  in  another  prophet:  And  he  that  doeth 
these  things  shall  be  as  the  tree  that  is  planted  by  the  parting 
streams  of  waters^  which  shall  yield  his  fruit  at  his  proper 
season,  and  his  leaf  shall  not  fall  off,  and  all  things  whatsoever 
he  doeth  shall  prosper.  Not  so  are  the  ungodly,  not  so,  but  are 
as  the  dust  which  the  wind  scatter eth  from  the  face  of  the  earth. 
Therefore  ungodly  men  shall  not  stand  in  judgement,  neither 
sinners  in  the  counsel  of  the  righteous,  and  the  way  of  the 
ungodly  shall  perish.  Ye  perceive  how  he  pointed  out  the 
Cross  and  the  water  at  the  same  time.  For  this  is  the 
meaning :  Blessed  are  they  that  set  their  hope  upon  the  Cross, 
and  go  down  into  the  water ;  for  He  speaketh  of  the  reward 
at  His  proper  season;  then,  saith  He,  I  will  repay.  But  now, 
what  saith  lie?  His  leaves  shall  not  fall  off.  He  meaneth 
by  this  that   every  word  which   shall  come  forth  from   your 


THE    ODES   AND    BAPTISM  193 

mouth  in  faith  and  love,  shall  be  for  the  conversion  and  hope 
of  many.' 

This  is  a  very  instructive  case  of  the  way  the  ecclesiastical  and 
allegorical  mind  finds  what  it  looks  for  in  the  Scripture : 

'  quaerit  sua  dogmata  quisque, 
invenit  et  pariter  dogmata  quisque  sua.' 

If  Barnabas  can  do  this  on  the  ancient  Psalter,  why  should  not  the 
like  be  done  on  the  new  Psalter,  which  we  have  seen  to  have  been 
at  an  early  date  attached  to  the  elder  volume,  of  which,  indeed,  it 
is  in  part  a  reflexion  ?  We  conclude,  then,  that  great  caution  is 
necessary  before  we  infer  that  a  book,  which  has  been  treated  to 
a  baptismal  or  liturgical  exposition,  is  itself  baptismal  or  liturgical. 
To  complete  the  proof  we  shall  need  some  much  earlier  evidence 
than  Dr.  Bernard  has  brought  forward,  or  we  shall  have  to  reduce 
the  evidence  for  the  antiquity  of  the  Odes. 

Dr.  Bernard,  naturally,  sees  this  quite  clearly,  and  goes  in  search 
of  the  early  baptismal  rituals.  With  a  correct  instinct  (for  his 
whole  work  is  full  of  just  and  felicitous  intuitions)  he  takes  the 
Liturgy  of  the  Church  of  Antioch,  so  far  as  it  has  been  restored 
from  the  writings  of  Severus  the  patriarch  in  the  sixth  century, 
and  from  the  writings  of  Chrysostom.  In  this  restored  ritual 
Bernard  sees  ecclesiastical  form  and  usage  which  go  back  to  the 
second  century,  and  he  concludes  (p.  64)  that  '  The  Liturgy  of 
Antioch  is,  without  doubt,  much  older  than  the  days  of  Chrysostom, 
and  it  may  well  have  been  in  existence,  in  its  main  features,  in  the 
second  century.  It  is  even  possible  that  the  parallels  which  have 
been  indicated  between  the  phrases  of  the  Prayer  for  the  Catechu- 
mens, and  the  words  of  our  Odist,  show  that  the  writer  of  the 
(eighth)  Ode  composed  his  poem  with  these  phrases  in  his  mind.' 

We  have  no  space  to  discuss  the  parallels  to  which  Dr.  Bernard 

refers,  which  do  not  seem  conclusive  :  the  point  which  we  lay  stress 

on  is  that,  even  if  we  take  the  Antioch  Liturgy  back  to  the  second 

century,  in  the  form  which  we  can  trace  in  the  fourth  century,  or 

11  o 


194  INTRODUCTION 

the  sixth,  we  are  still  very  far  from  the  date  to  which  the  investi- 
gation in  the  present  volume  refers  the  composition'  of  the  Odes. 
Bernard  makes  the  following  judgement  as  to  the  time  and  place 
of  production  of  the  Odes  (p.  42) : 

'  It  is  clear  that  the  Odes  are  of  Syrian,  or  Palestinian  origin. 
The  Baptismal  allusions  which  abound  are  always  to  beliefs 
and  practices  current  in  the  East  ;  with  Western  ceremonial 
they  have  little  affinity.' 

We  agree  that  the  Odes  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  Western 
Church  and  that  they  are  Syrian  or  Palestinian  in  origin. 

'They  can  hardly',  said  Bernard,  '  be  later  than  A. D.  200,  and 
may  be  some  years  earlier  ...  It  is  not  likely  that  the  baptismal 
ritual  was  so  fully  organized  as  it  appears  to  be  in  these  Odes, 
before  the  days  of  Justin  Martyr.  I  incline,  then,  to  a  date  between 
150  and  2co  for  their  origin,  and  preferably  in  tlie  latter  lialf  of  tliat 
period'.  We  note  the  admission  with  regard  to  the  evolution  of  the 
baptismal  ritual. 

There  is  another  direction  in  which  we  have  found  serious 
difficulty,  as  we  have  gone  over  the  ground  of  this  new  edition, 
not  without  some  attraction  to  Dr.  Bernard's  position,  nor  without 
a  sense  of  admiration  at  once  for  the  learning  which  is  involved  in 
his  material  and  the  skill  with  which  he  employs  it. 

We  find  that,  in  a  number  of  directions,  the  Odes  have  suffered 
from  a  want  of  adequate  knowledge  of  the  theology  of  the  time 
in  which  they  were  composed.  It  is  clear  that  they  belong  to  a 
time  when  the  Wisdom-Christology  was  passing  into  the  Logos- 
Christology,  and  had  not  yet  been  practically  effaced  by  it.  We 
have  shown  that  a  number  of  the  original  Sapiential  terms  are  still 
lying  about  in  the  Odes.  The  '  Mirror  '  of  the  13th  Ode  is  certainly 
Christ,  and  Christ  as  Wisdom.  The  situation  is  reflected  for  us  in 
the  Apocryphal  Acts  of  John,  where  Jesus  says: 

'  I  am  a  mirror  to  them  that  know  me.' 

It  is  the  '  unspotted  mirror  of  the  Father '  in  Sap.  Sol.  vii.  26.     For 


THE   ODES    AND   BAPTISM  195 

this  reason  alone  we  are  forbidden  to  take  the  mirror,  as  Ephrem 
and  Moses  Bar  Kepha  do,  in  a  baptismal  sense,  as  if  it  were  a 
water  mirror,  with  the  candidate  for  baptism  standing  before  it  like 
a  new  Narcissus,  to  see  his  old  face  passing  into  his  new.  The 
same  thing  is  true  of  the  drroppoia  or  Efflux  in  Ode  vi.  Here 
again  the  editio  pvinceps  went  wrong  in  its  interpretation,  following 
a  previous  lead  of  Ryle  and  James  in  their  book  on  the  Psalms 
of  Solomon,  in  the  suggestion  that  the  Ode  had  to  do  with  the  river 
in  Ezekiel.  It  was  a  natural  conclusion,  deduced  from  the  growth 
of  the  diroppoia  or  Efflux,  from  brook  to  river.  The  term  belongs 
to  Wisdom,  and  the  Efflux  is  either  the  Holy  Spirit,  or,  in  an 
experimental  sense,  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord.  In  favour  of  the 
identification  with  the  Sapiential  language  we  may  compare  what 
is  said  in  the  opening  verses,  as  to  the  improbability  of  resisting  or 
standing  up  against  the  Lord,  with  what  is  said  of  His  Wisdom  in 
Sap.  Solomon  ;  and  the  growth  of  the  stream  is  anticipated  in  the 
clause  which  tells  us  that  the  Lord  has  multiplied  His  knowledge.1 
This  Knowledge  is  the  Divine  Wisdom,  which  is  here  identified 
with  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  the  writer  says  : 

'  Our  Spirits  praise  His  Holy  Spirit  : 
For  there  went  forth  an  dnoppoia.' 

Thus  there  is  no  reference  at  all  to  baptism :  the  mysticism  of  the 
writer  is  in  a  different  region  ;  and  though  he  makes  his  irresistible 
Wisdom  into  a  stream  of  water,  the  author  of  the  Pislis  Sophia 
knew  that  it  was  really  an  efflux  of  Light,  a  companion  term  to 
aTravyaa-fia.  This  Ode  must  be  removed  from  the  argument ;  and 
the  parallels  which  prove  that  the  waters  in  Ezekiel  are  baptismal 
are  no  longer  valid. 

1  That  the  Efflux  '  filled  everything  '  is  due,  as  Tondelli  points  out,  to  the 
prophecy  that 

'  The  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  Knowledge  of  the  Lord 
As  the  waters  cover  the  sea.' — Isa.  xi.  9. 

or  we  may  compare 

TTvedfia  Kvpiov  7T€Tr\TjpQ>Ke  rrjv  olnovfievrji/. — Sap.  Sol.  i.  J. 
O    2 


ie-6  INTRODUCTION 

One  other  feature  of  the  Odes  deserves  some  attention. 
Dr.  Bernard  agrees  with  ourselves  that  in  a  number  of  Odes 
there  is  a  change  in  the  personality  of  the  speakers  between  the 
Odist  and  Christ.  It  is  difficult  to  mark  the  exact  point  at  which 
the  prophetic  speech  becomes  '  thus  saith  the  Lord  '.  A  great  deal 
depends  on  this  determination  in  Dr.  Bernard's  argument.  For 
instance,  in  the  26th  Ode,  Bernard  puts  the  heading 

'A  song  of  the  baptized  Christian.' 

We  have,  on  the  other  hand,  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the 

'  Luminary,  the  Son  of  God  ' 

in  verse  3,  is  Christ  Himself,  and  that  the  following  stanza  should 
be  translated  : 

1 1  was  the  most  glorified  amongst  the  glorious  ones, 
And  the  greatest  among  the  great  ones.' 

This  being  so,  the  being  who  is  brought  forth  by  the  Spirit  as 
Mother  is  Christ.  Christ  is  the  anointed  of  God,  and  is  spoken  of 
fa  phrase  preserved  in  the  Koran)  as  one  of  the  Divine  Neighbours. 
The  theology  of  the  Ode  is  not  quite  settled  into  orthodox  terms 
and  distinctions,  but  it  is  not  to  be  taken  as  deliberately  unorthodox. 
If  our  view  here  is  right  and  our  translation  correct,  there  is  no 
reference  to  a  baptized  and  illuminated  Christian  in  the  Ode.  It 
becomes  increasingly  clear  that  the  Odes  are  not  dominated  by 
a  single  theme,  as  Dr.  Bernard's  theory  requires.1  When  the 
various  subtractions  are  made  from  that  theory,  which  the  foregoing- 
arguments  require,  it  does  not  follow  that  there  is  nothing  left  of 
the  nature  of  a  baptismal  allusion.  The  editio  frinceps  and  several 
of  the  first  commentators  may  have  overstated  the  matter  in  one 
direction,  just  as  Dr.  Bernard  has  done  in  another. 

The    '  crown ',    however,    is    gone,   and    the    '  efflux '   and    the 

1  Tondelli,  to  whose  excellent  study  of  the  Odes  we  have  already  referred, 
says  of  the  theory  of  a  single  dominant  interpretation  (loc.cit.,  p.  120)  :  '  Non  vi 
potra  mai  essere  una  interpretatione  unica  di  cantici  tanto  variati.' 


THE    ODES   AND   BAPTISM  197 

'torches',  and  the  'coat  of  skin':  perhaps  the  'seal'  remains,  but 
this  '  seal '  is  also  in  the  Psalter  of  Solomon,  and  appears  to  mean 
'  a  mark  of  ownership  '  or  '  talisman  \ 

On  the  whole,  we  must  conclude  that  the  Odes,  taken  en  bloc, 
are  not  baptismal  hymns,  that  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  the 
forty  days  of  Lent,  that  they  do  not  respond  to  the  tests  of  a  highly 
evolved  ritual ;  and  that  such  references  to  baptism  as  may  remain 
are  merely  occasional  and  not  structural. 


CHAPTER   XVII 
Harnack  and  the  Odes. 

We  come  now  to  the  explanation  of  the  genesis  and  structure 
of  the  book  of  the  Odes  of  Solomon,  which  was  put  forward  by 
Harnack,  and  endorsed  by  Spitta,  Diettrich,  Grimme,  and  others, 
viz.  that  they  are  a  collection  of  Jewish  Odes,  which  have  passed, 
as  so  many  other  Jewish  books,  into  early  Christian  hands,  and 
have  been  the  subject  of  Christian  interpolations  and  corrections. 
These  interpolations  Harnack  essays  to  define,  and  in  so  doing  lays 
himself  at  once  open  to  the  counter-criticism  that  what  is  inter- 
polated is  of  the  same  fabric  as  what  is  original.  The  old  cloth 
and  the  new  patch  are  so  exactly  of  the  same  material,  that  one 
naturally  concludes  that  the  coat  was  not  really  torn  nor  mended. 
In  many  cases,  that  is,  our  closer  study  has  removed  the  apparent 
discontinuities  in  the  sequence  of  the  Odes. 

According  to  Harnack,  then,  the  Odes  were  originally  composed 
by  a  Jewish  mystic,  somewhere  in  the  period  between  50  B.C.  and 
a.d.  67,  and  were  re-handled  by  a  Christian  mystic  about  the 
year  a.d.  100.  This  is  very  nearly  the  date  arrived  at  by  our- 
selves for  the  completed  volume.  The  limits  of  time  for  the 
assumed  earlier  Jewish  mystic  are  defined,  (i)  by  the  fact  that  they 
are  later  than  the  Psalter  of  Solomon,  with  which  we  often  find 
them   associated ;    (ii)    by   the    assumption    that    the    Temple   at 


198  INTRODUCTION 

Jerusalem  is  still  supposed  to  be  standing  in  the  time  of  the  first 
writer,  as  is  inferred  from  the  language  of  the  fourth  Ode,  and 
is  an  object  of  his  religious  affection.  On  the  former  of  these 
points  there  can  hardly  be  a  doubt  ;  but  the  question  of  the  Odist's 
references  to  the  Temple  will  require  some  further  study  before 
the  obscurities  that  are  attached  to  it  can  be  said  to  have 
disappeared.     We  may  have  to  admit  that  the  Temple  is  gone. 

Meanwhile  it  must  be  said  over  again  that  the  hypothesis  of 
Harnack  has  many  antecedent  objections.  The  hypothesis  of  a 
Christian,  or  Judaeo-Christian  composer,  who  betrays  (at  first  sight 
at  all  events)  few  of  the  external  signs  of  Christianity,  because 
of  the  elevation  of  his  personal  experience  above  the  levels  of 
ritual  practices  and  dogmatic  definitions,  is  replaced  by  Harnack 
by  the  hypothesis  of  a  Jewish  composer  who  is  as  free  from  definite 
traces  of  Judaism  as  the  assumed  Christian  writer  is  of  the  cor- 
responding elements  of  Christianity.  The  man  who,  as  far  as  his 
language  goes,  had  no  Eucharist  is  replaced  by  a  man  without 
a  Passover.  The  man  without  a  doctrine  of  Penitence  is  replaced 
by  a  man  who  has  no  doctrine  of  sacrifice  and  no  Day  of  Atone- 
ment. The  man  who  moves  so  lightly  among  the  early  Christian 
orders  as  not  to  refer  to  a  bishop,  while  apologizing  for  his  own 
priesthood,  and  apparently  confounding  deacons  with  evangelists, 
has  to  be  replaced  by  a  Jew  who  loves  the  Temple,  but  has  not 
a  word  to  say  of  the  associated  priesthood  and  ritual !  At  first 
sight,  as  we  say,  this  looks  very  unlikely,  and  it  is  made  more 
so  by  the  necessary  deduction  that  the  assumed  non-ritualist, 
undogmatic,  mystical  Jew  suffered  interpolation  at  the  hands  of 
an  equally  non-ritualistic,  undogmatic,  and  mystical  Christian ! 
Probability  is  against  the  conjunction.  The  argument  ma)'  be 
challenged  for  either  of  the  two  contrasted  pictures ;  for  it  has 
been  argued  that  the  Christian  Odes  are  coloured  by  Christian 
cult,  and  it  is  certain  that  they  arc  saturated  by  Christian  theology, 
and  this  modifies  one  side  of  the  contrasted  mysticisms,  at  least 
to   some   extent;    while  the   hypothetical  Jew,   who   occupies   the 


HARNACK   AND   THE   ODES  199 

other  side,  is  still  a  creature  of  the  air,  for  whom  no  historical  or 
literary  corroboration  is  yet  forthcoming.  And  whatever  may 
be  the  personalities  dissected  out  of  the  authorship  of  the  Odes, 
the  crowning  objection  will  probably  be  found  in  the  internal  unity 
of  the  Odes  to  any  theory  of  interpolation. 

Let  us  now  come,  for  a  few  moments,  to  the  Temple  references. 

In  the  fourth  Ode  the  singer  commences  with  a  eulogy  on 
the  unchangeable  and  eternal  Holy  Place  of  the  Most  High,  over 
which  human  hands  have  no  power. 

In  the  sixth  Ode,  the  river  of  life  (whether  it  be  the  Holy 
Spirit,  or  the  Knowledge  of  God,  or  whatever  else)  comes  to  the 
Temple  and  apparently  sweeps  it  away,  and  flows  out  to  cover 
the  face  of  the  whole  earth.  On  the  first  publication  of  the  Odes 
it  was  naturally  supposed  that  we  had  found  a  historical  landmark. 
The  Temple  in  the  sixth  Ode  is  certainly  the  Jewish  temple,  what- 
ever happens  to  it,  be  the  waters  friendly  or  hostile.  Assuming 
that  the  Temple  in  the  fourth  Ode  was  also  the  Temple  of  Solomon, 
it  was  argued  by  Harris  that  it  was  probably  in  recent  ruin,  and 
that  attempts  had  been  made  to  build  it  elsewhere  or  to  find  it 
elsewhere.  Harnack,  however,  while  agreeing  as  to  the  sympathetic 
attitude  of  the  Odist,  thought  the  Temple  was  still  standing.  To 
these  views  there  has  been  a  chorus  of  objection.  It  was  main- 
tained, and  with  much  justice,  that  the  Temple  of  the  fourth  Ode, 
which  could  not  be  replaced  or  displaced,  was  spiritual  and  not 
local,  and  that  it  stood  either  for  the  Christian  believer  or  for  the 
Christian  Church ;  and  if  this  objection  were  valid,  then  the  sup- 
posed historical  landmark  had  disappeared,  at  least  as  far  as  the 
fourth  Ode  is  concerned. 

If,  however,  the  writer  of  the  fourth  Ode  is  looking  away  from 
the  Jewish  temple  in  the  first  verse  of  the  Ode,  he  is  certainly 
casting  sidelong  glances  at  it  in  the  following  stanzas.  His  refer- 
ence to  God's  heart,  as  given  to  believers,  is  based  upon  God's 
promise  to  Solomon,  at  the  Temple  Dedication,  that  his  '  eyes  and 
his  heart  should  be  there  continually'  (2  Chron.  vii.  17).     And  his 


200  INTRODUCTION 

statement  that  '  one  hour  of  thy  Faith  is  more  precious  than  all 
days  and  years ',  is  an  evident  adaptation  of  the  language  of  the 
84th  Psalm  ('a  day  in  thy  courts'),  a  Psalm  whose  motive  of  deep 
affection  is  expressed  in  the  very  first  verse,  '  How  amiable  are  thy 
tabernacles,  O  Lord  of  hosts :  my  soul  longeth,  yea  even  fainteth 
for  the  courts  of  the  Lord '.  Clearly  we  are  entitled  to  say  that 
the  Temple  at  Jerusalem  is  not  out  of  the  field  of  view  of  the  Odist. 
May  we  not  go  further  and  say  that  it  is  an  object  of  intense  affec- 
tion, not  only  for  its  own  sake,  but  because  of  a  disaster  that  has 
befallen  it?  For  the  Odist  who  begins  with  the  theme  of  the 
spiritually  unchangeable  Sanctuary,  comes  in  the  closing  verses  to 
the  question  whether  God  may  have  gone  back  on  His  promises 
to  His  people,  and  ends  his  song  with  the  statement  that  whatever 
happened  was  not  only  in  the  Divine  foreknowledge,  but  also  that 
the  thing  which  happened  had  actually  been  done  by  God  Himself. 
We  translated  the  last  sentence  of  the  Ode  in  the  sense  that 

'  Thou,  O  Lord,  hast  done  it  all.' 

In  this  point  of  view,  the  outward  temple  has  gone  :  its  removal  was 
God's  own  doing.  The  Temple  was,  indeed,  Solomon's,  but  it  was 
Solomon's  in  the  sense  indicated  by  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon  (ix.  8) : 

'Thou  didst  bid  me  build  a  temple  in  thy  Holy  Mountain  : 

An  imitation  of  the  Holy  Tabernacle, 

Which  thou  didst  prepare  from  the  beginning.' 

There  is,  then,  no  need  to  interpret  the  fourth  Ode  as  anything  but 
a  Christian  product  ;  and  it  should  have  been  composed  at  a  later 
date  than  a.d.  70. 

Turn  now  to  the  question  of  the  supposed  interpolations :  here 
is  Ilarnacks  first  list  of  Christian  additions  : 

iii.  7. 

vii.  3b-6,  12,  15. 
viii.  22-fin. 
ix.  3  b. 


HARNACK   AND   THE   ODES  201 

x.  4-fin. 

xvii.  10-fin. 

xix. 

xxiii.  18-fin. 

xxiv.  1. 

xxvii. 

xxix.  6,  7  a. 

xxxi.  3-fin. 

xxxvi.  3,  4. 

xxxix.  11. 

xli.  1-7,  1 1  a,  nb-fin. 

xlii.   1-2  (3-1 1  partially)  12-fin. 

Notice  that  the  28th  Ode  is  not  classed  as  Christian  ;  we  have 
shown  that  it  is  in  great  part  made  up  out  of  the  22nd  Psalm,  and 
used,  as  the  Christian  Fathers  generally  use  it,  in  an  anti-Judaic 
and  Messianic  manner.  Here  is  a  whole  Ode  that  has  been  carried 
off  from  its  proper  owner.  Try  another  Ode.  Harnack  sees  that 
Wisdom  occupies  an  important  place  in  the  theology  of  the  Odes 
(and  so  does  Diettrich)  ;  but  when  Wisdom  speaks  or  is  spoken  of 
in  the  terms  of  Proverbs  viii.  22  ('  the  Lord  possessed  me '  or  '  the 
Lord  created  me'),  the  reference  is  almost  certainly  to  Christ  as 
the  Wisdom  of  God  :  all  such  passages  when  spoken  of  a  particular 
person  are  Christian.  Thus  in  Ode  vii,  while  making  liberal 
excisions,  Harnack  has  left  standing  the  words 

'  He  who  created  Wisdom  ', 
and 

'  He  who  created  me '. 

The  Christology  of  the  sentences  may  be  awkward,  but  it  is  real 
Christology.  Or  take  Ode  xxv,  in  which  Harnack  finds  no 
Christian  insertions  ;  notice  the  suggestion  (it  hardly  amounted  to 
proof)  that  we  have  given  elsewhere,  that  the  name  of  Christ  is 
actually  played  upon  in  the  closing  sentences : 

'  I  became  the  Lord's  by  the  name  of  the  Lord/  &c. 

And  in  the  same  way  we  might  continue  with  other  passages  and 
other  Odes,  and  we  should  end  with  a  feeling  of  uncertainty,  not 


202  INTRODUCTION 

with  regard  to  the  question  whether  there  were  any  Christian 
interpolations  in  the  body  of  the  Jewish  Odes,  but  whether  we  could 
find  any  Jewish  elements  at  all  in  the  body  of  a  Christian  Psalter. 
We  arc  willing  to  reserve  a  small  residual  margin  for  actual  Judaism 
and  future  examination.  It  is  doubtful  if  it  would  be  enough  to 
make  a  historical  antecedent  out  of  for  the  book  of  Odes.  In  that 
sense,  then,  we  put  Harnack  and  Spitta  and  their  colleagues  on  one 
side.     The  position  is  untenable. 

A  brilliant  but  unsuccessful  attempt  to  find  a  middle  ground 
between  Harnack's  view  that  the  Odes  were  Jewish  with  Christian 
interpolations,  and  the  view  that  they  were  Judaeo-Christian  with 
some  later  additions,  was  made  by  the  late  Professor  Menzies,  who 
suggested  that  they  might  be  '  Psalms  of  the  Proselytes ',  i.  e.  of  the 
Gentiles  who  were  proselytes  to  Judaism.  It  is  well  known  that  all 
the  great  cities  of  the  East  had  communities  of  God-Fearers,  who 
had  embraced  Judaism  in  its  more  liberal  forms  of  presentation  ; 
and  such  communities,  often  numbering  amongst  themselves  persons 
of  social  distinction  and  good  education,  would  easily  give  rise  to 
literary  developments,  such  as  the  Odes  before  us,  in  which  there 
is  a  universalism  which  expresses  itself  in  terms  that  are  either 
those  of  a  nascent  Gentile  Church  outside  Judaism,  or  an  absorbed 
Gentile  constituency  within  Judaism. 

Professor  Menzies  thought  that  by  an  intermediate  view  that 
the  Odes  were  the  work  of  Jewish  proselytes,  it  would  be  possible 
to  explain  the  presence  of  Jewish  traits  in  the  Odes  and  the 
affirmed  absence  of  Christian  characteristics.  At  the  same  time  the 
unity  of  the  collection  was  emphasized  and  established. 

It  was  a  brief  but  suggestive  statement  of  a  theory  which  does 
not  need  to  be  refuted  in  detail.  We  do  not  think  that  any  reader 
of  the  present  volume  is  likely  to  conclude  that  there  is  an  absence 
of  Christian  elements  in  the  Odes,  nor  that  the  Christ  who  is 
referred  to  is  simply  the  expectation  of  Judaism.  There  is  too 
large  a  volume  of  Christology  to  be  carried  on  the  back  of 
proselytes  to  Judaism. 


GNOSTICISM    IN    THE   ODES  203 

CHAPTER   XVIII 

Gnosticism  in  the  Odes. 

As  it  has  been  affirmed  in  several  quarters,  and  particularly 
by  Gunkel,  that  the  Odes  are  a  Gnostic  product,  and  as  Preuschen 
has  put  forward  a  more  definite  charge  than  that  of  Gnosticism, 
and  promises  to  show  that  they  are  due  to  the  arch-Gnostic 
Valentinus,  it  may  be  as  well  to  devote  a  little  space  to  the 
consideration  of  this  theme.  In  one  respect  the  course  of  the 
argument  that  sustains  the  hypothesis  is  not  unlike  that  of 
Dr.  Bernard :  one  searches  for  parallels  to  the  Odes  in  Gnostic 
writers,  just  as  Dr.  Bernard  searches  for  them  in  liturgies,  and  then 
the  conclusion  is  drawn  that  the  Odes  have  a  Gnostic  origin  in 
the  one  case,  or  a  liturgical  ancestry  in  the  other.  It  is  not  difficult 
to  find  a  certain  amount  of  coincidence  between  such  Gnostic  writers 
as  are  known  to  us  and  the  Odes.  The  very  fact  that  such  stress 
is  laid  on  the  place  of  Knowledge  by  the  Odist  as  a  factor  in 
redemption  invites  the  parallel  with  Gnosticism,  and  distinct  and 
personal  allusions  may  be  traced — or  imagined. 

Valentinus,  for  example,  was  not  so  far  from  the  Kingdom  of 
God,  or  from  St.  John  as  its  exponent,  that  he  could  not  claim 
a  share  in  the  Johannine  parallels  which  the  Odes  afford  ;  and 
if  the  third  Ode  of  the  series  is  found  to  contain  a  sentence  which 
re-echoes  the  Johannine  doctrine  that  '  we  love,  because  He  first 
loved  us ',  Valentinus  also  taught  that  •  God  the  Father  was  all 
love,  but  love  is  not  love  where  there  is  no  object  of  love.  So 
the  Father  begat  two  emanations,  vovs  and  aXr/dtia.'  And  the 
claims  made  on  behalf  of  Valentinus  may  be  reinforced  by  the 
fact  that  the  Bardesanian  school,  amongst  whom  we  have  found 
traces  of  the  Odes,  is  known  to  have  been  under  his  influence. 
We  suspect,  however,  that  just  as  in  the  baptismal  passages,  where 
such  may  be  established,  there  is  a  tendency  to  make  the  first  last 
and    the   last   first.     As   far   as  our   inquiry  has  gone,  the   Odes 


204  INTRODUCTION 

vindicate  their  antiquity  against  any  Gnostic  School  of  which  we 
have  clear  knowledge.  A  good  example  is  the  Coat  of  Skin,  which 
the  Odist  casts  off  when  he  becomes  a  believer.  This  shedding 
of  the  old  Adam  has  a  very  distinct  commentary  supplied  by  the 
ritual  and  liturgies  of  baptism ;  but  it  also  became  a  highly 
developed  Gnostic  product  amongst  Bardesanians  and  Manichees, 
as  we  know  from  Ephrem.  Is  it  necessary  to  put  a  special  label  on 
the  Odist,  because  he  has  supplied  material  to  the  Church  ritual 
or  the  heretic  speculations  ? 

There  is,  in  the  Odes,  what  looks  very  like  a  Virgin  of  Light, 
such  as  might  serve  again  for  the  speculative  mind,  in  Edessa  and 
farther  East ;  and  Ephrem  takes  his  opportunity  to  rail  at  the 
lady :  but  she  is  orthodox  enough  in  times  when  the  Church  was 
regarded  either  as  a  Virgin  or  as  a  Mother,  or,  perhaps,  as  both. 
And  since  she  is  really,  as  the  poet  Spenser  says,  '  Sapience,  that 
sits  in  the  bosom  of  the  Deity ',  there  is  no  need  artificially  to 
Gnosticize  her. 

If  in  any  special  cases  we  do  find  a  good  Gnostic  parallel  we 
must  examine  it  carefully  and  see  what  it  involves.  The  Gnostics 
have  as  good  a  right  to  use  the  Odes  as  they  have  to  the  rest 
of  the  Scriptures  (Ircnaeus  will  say  they  have  none  at  all :  then 
they  have  as  little  a  right  to  the  use  of  the  Odes  as  to  the  rest 
of  the  Scriptures).  Stolten's  attempts  to  find  such  parallels  are 
a  great  failure :  even  the  Pistis  SopJiia  is  brought  in  to  swell 
the  tale,  as  if  the  Pistis  were  not  itself  quoting  the  Odes !  There 
are,  however,  one  or  two  cases  where  parallel  is  suggestive  and 
might  lead  to  a  recognition  of  an  actual  acquaintance.  Eor  example, 
there  is  the  case  of  Marcus  the  Gnostic.  Ircnacus's  bite  noire,  who 
harried  the  flock  of  Christ  in  Pothinus's  day,  and  provoked  the 
good  man  into  iambic  verse.  He  (Marcus)  tells  us  that  '  the  dis- 
solution of  ignorance  is  the  knowledge  of  the  Father ',  which  is 
very  like  a  verse  in  the  seventh  Ode  of  Solomon  (Ode  vii.  21). 
If  he  quoted  the  Ode,  we  have  one  more  early  second-century 
authority  for  the  existence  of  the  collection,  but  no  authority  for 


GNOSTICISM   IN   THE   ODES  205 

making  a  Gnostic  out  of  the  Odist.  The  same  is  true  if  it  is 
an  independent  parallel.  It  may  be  readily  conceded  that  Know- 
ledge and  Love  have  more  place  in  the  Odes  than  Penitence  and 
Confession  ;  but  that  does  not  make  them  Gnostic  products  :  at  the 
worst  they  are  only  suggestive  of  possible  and  later  developments. 

We  do  not  think  there  is  any  case,  at  present,  for  pressing  the 
claims  of  the  Gnostics  to  the  authorship  of  the  Odes.  Valentinus 
himself  is  not  early  enough  ;  and  we  do  not  think  any  one  is  going 
to  claim  these  lovely  songs  of  the  Spirit  for  Cerdo,  or  Cerinthus,  or 
Simon  Magus. 

In  passing  we  may  say  that  Dr.  Conybeare's  suggestion  that 
the  Odes  are  Montanist  is  also  out  of  court,  on  the  ground  both 
of  date  and  locality ;  we  do  not  wish  to  imply  that  Montanism 
is  a  heresy :  if  the  Montanists  knew  the  Odes  they  would  have 
found  them  congenial  and  sung  them  in  good  faith,  perhaps  in 
contrasted  choirs,  Priscilla  leading  on  one  side,  and  Maximilla  on 
the  other :  but  they  can  hardly  have  composed  them. 


ODES   OF  SOLOMON 
ODE  I 

i     The  Lord  is  upon  my  head  like  a  crown  ;  Ci.  Sap. Sol 

and  Acta  1 
And  I  shall  not  be  without  Him.  p.  o^,. 

2  The  crown  of  truth  was  woven  for  me ; 
And  it  caused  thy  branches  to  bud  in  me ; 

3  For  it  is  not  like  a  withered  crown  that  buddeth  not :  Ps*  '•  3  ;  cf' 

v.  4. 

4  But  thou  livest  upon  my  head  ; 

And  thou  hast  blossomed  upon  my  head  : 

5  Thy  fruits  are  full-grown  and  perfect ; 
They  are  full  of  thy  salvation. 

(Hallelujah.) 

Expository  Notes. 

This  Ode  is  not  found  in  the  Syriac  MS.  which  is  imperfect  at  the 
beginning :  it  has  been  recovered  from  the  Coptic  text,  where  it  is 
introduced  in  the  following  manner : 

1  Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus,  answered  and  said  :  My  Lord,  these  are 
the  words  in  which  your  Power  of  Light  prophesied  aforetime  through 
Solomon  in  his  nineteenth  Ode,  and  said :  The  Lord,'  &c. 

This  must,  then,  be  one  of  the  two  missing  Odes  at  the  beginning  of 
the  collection  ;  and  it  is  a  natural  suggestion  that  it  was  numbered  as  the 
nineteenth,  because  the  collection  of  Psalms  of  Solomon,  eighteen  in 
number,  preceded  the  Odes.     This  is,  therefore,  the  missing  first  Ode. 

We  may  call  it,  if  we  please,  a  Coronation  Ode ;  it  represents  some 
great  experience  in  the  spiritual  life  of  the  writer,  who  has  been  crowned 


208  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [i 

or  garlanded  with  God  in  the  form  of  Truth.  The  same  figure  recurs 
in  Ode  v.  12  in  very  similar  language  : 

'  He  (the  Lord)  is  as  a  garland  upon  my  head, 
And  I  shall  not  be  moved  : 
Even  if  everything  should  be  moved, 
I  stand  firm.' 

We  have  it  also  in  Ode  ix.  8,  9  : 

'A  crown  eternal  is  the  Truth, 
Blessed  are  they  who  put  it  on  their  heads. 

There  's  a  battle  to  fight  ere  the  crown  be  attained.' 

Again,  in  Ode  xvii.  1,  2  : 

'  I  was  crowned  by  my  God  : 
And  my  crown  is  living. 
And  I  was  justified  by  my  Lord  : 
My  salvation  is  incorruptible.' 

Also  in  Ode  xx.  7,  8 : 

'  Put  on  the  grace  of  the  Lord  without  stint : 
And  come  into  His  Paradise  and  make  thee  a  garland  from  His  tree, 
And  put  it  on  thy  head  and  be  glad.' 

It  is  reasonable  to  interpret  all  these  passages  in  a  similar  way. 
Various  lines  of  thought  suggest  themselves  for  the  further  elucidation  of 
the  crown :  the  first  is  that  it  is  the  same  crown  or  wreath  that  is  spoken 
of  in  the  New  Testament :  here  in  two  places  we  have  an  allusion  to  a  lost 
saying  of  Jesus  : 

'The  Crown  of  Life,  which  the  Lord  hath  promised  to  them  that 
love  him.' — James  i.  12. 

'  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death  and  I  will  give  thee  the  Crown  of 
Life.' — Apoc.  ii.  10  ; 

in  both  of  which  cases  the  crown  is  the  victor's  reward  after  trial ;  the 
victor  being  at  the  same  time  thought  of  as  a  lover.  In  the  Epistle  of 
James  the  matter  is  introduced  by  a  reference  to  the  man  who  endures 
trial  (7rapaoyxoV),  stands  the  test  (8o/a/xos  ycvo/tcvos),  and  accordingly  receives 
the  crown  ;  in  the  Apocalypse,  the  Church  at  Smyrna  is  warned  of  the 
impending  trial ;  the  devil  is  going  to  cast  some  of  them  into  prison, 
that  they  may  be  tested  (TrapaaByTc) :  so  they  must  be  faithful  till  death. 


i]  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  209 

It  is  natural  to  interpret  the  crown  in  these  cases  as  the  Victor's 
Crown. 

In  1  Peter  v.  4,  we  have  the  '  unfading  crown  of  glory '  promised  to 
the  faithful  pastors  of  the  Church  ;  the  blessing  is  here  particular  and 
not  general,  as  is  indeed  the  case  with  the  crowns  or  garlands  of  the 
faithful  Smyrneans,  but  it  may  be  regarded  with  the  former  instances 
as  a  crown  or  reward  at  the  end  of  a  faithful  life  or  a  prolonged  struggle  : 
in  other  words,  the  crown  is  prospective.  The  same  thing  is  true  in  the 
Pastoral  Epistles,  where  a  man  gets  his  crown  by  a  properly  fought 
conflict  (he  will  not  get  it  unless  he  fights  fair  and  unless  he  wins  through, 
2  Tim.  ii.  5),  by  finishing  the  course  and  by  keeping  the  faith,  in  which 
case 'there  is  reserved  for  him  the  garland  of  righteousness  (2  Tim.  iv.  8). 
The  New  Testament  doctrine  of  the  Crown  is,  therefore,  consistently 
prospective. 

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  Odes,  the  experience  is  in  the  language  and 
terms  of  the  present  (or  even  of  the  past)  rather  than  the  future.  The 
crown  appears  to  be  the  same  as  Peter's,  one  that  does  not  fade  away,  and 
the  same  as  in  James  and  John,  in  that  it  is  a  living  crown  and  a  lover's 
crown  ;  but  the  writer  already  has  his  amaranth  on  his  head.  It  is  the 
same  crown  of  victory,  but  the  Odist  suggests  that  in  some  sense  the 
battle  is  over  :  for  instance,  in  the  ninth  Ode,  to  which  we  were  referring 
just  now,  with  the  injunction  to  '  put  on  the  crown  in  the  true  covenant  of 
the  Lord ',  we  are  told  that  it  is  the  believer's  by  right : 

10  'Righteousness  hath  taken  it,  and  hath  given  it  to  you  : 

1 1  All  those  who  have  conquered  shall  be  booked  in  his  book.' 

Here  the  crown  is  again  a  crown  of  righteousness,  a  reward  of  victory, 
apparently  regarded  as  an  attainment  in  the  present  life.  In  one  case, 
indeed,  the  Odist  appears  to  regard  his  crown  retrospectively,  as  in  the 
17th  Ode,  with  its  living  crown  that  is  parallel  to  the  divine  justification  : 
('I  was  crowned  by  my  God,  &c.').  The  difference,  then,  between  the 
crown  in  the  Odes  and  the  crown  in  the  New  Testament  is  a  difference 
of  time  and  attitude  :  otherwise  the  language  shows  that  the  crown  spoken 
of  is  the  same. 

The    New   Testament   parallels,  then,    suggest   that   the   crown   is   a 
Corona  Militis,  a  wreath  of  victory,  present  or  prospective.     The  question, 
11  P 


aio  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [i 

however,  arises  whether  there  may  not  be  other  directions  of  explaining  the 
symbolical  language  of  the  Odist,  beside  the  military  conception  which 
prevails  in  the  New  Testament.  Roughly  speaking,  there  are  four  directions 
of  coronation  possible : 

(i)  The  Corona  Militis  already  referred  to. 

(ii)  The  garland  of  the  person  initiated  into  the  Greek  Mystery 
Religions. 

(iii)  The  garland  of  the  newly  married. 

(iv)  The  garland  of  the  newly  baptised. 
It  is  sometimes  difficult  to  distinguish  whether  a  crown  referred  to  should 
be  classified  under  the  first  or  second  head.  For  instance,  in  the  rites  of 
Mithras,  the  worshipper,  when  he  is  introduced  to  the  degree  of  miles  has 
a  crown  offered  to  him,  which  he  repels,  saying  in  language  not  unlike  that 
of  the  Odes,  that  '  Mithras  is  my  Crown  V  Is  that  any  other  than  a 
soldier's  wreath  ?  In  the  mysteries  of  Isis,  as  Tondelli  points  out,2  the 
initiate  is  decorated  with  a  garland  of  palm,  and  clad  in  a  robe  of 
heaven  ;  he  stands  with  a  burning  torch  in  his  hand,  and  is  honoured  as 
an  apotheosis  of  the  Sun-god.3 

The  description,  as  we  shall  see,  has  remarkable  parallels  with  the 
Christian  initiation,  and  we  can  hardly  avoid  the  conclusion  that  the 
neophytes  of  one  religion  have  borrowed  from  the  customs  of  the  other  : 
the  Christian  religion  has  been  coloured  from  the  Greek  Mysteries. 
We  must  examine  whether  the  references  to  the  Crown  in  our  Odes  are 
due  to  an  imitation  of  the  Greek  mysteries.  Is  it  a  real  crown  that  the 
writer  is  speaking  of,  used  as  a  symbol  of  spiritual  truth  and  experience, 
or  is  it,  as  in  the  New  Testament,  a  mere  figure  of  speech  ? 

The  two  other  directions  in  which  coronation  may  be  looked  for  are 
the  marriage  and  baptismal  rites.  There  is  much  to  suggest  marriage 
symbolism  in  the  Odes.  Some  persons  have  not  unnaturally  found  the 
crown  in  the  Canticles  ascribed  to  King  Solomon  : 4 

'The  crown  wherewith  his  mother  crowned  him  in  the  day  of  his 
espousals' — Cant.  iii.  n. 

1  Cumont,  Moiiuments,  i.  318. 

2  Le  Odi,  p.  137. 

3  Reitzenstein,  Die  hellenistischen  Mysterienreligionen,  p.  29. 

4  So  BatirTol  in  Revue  Biblique  for  Jan.  191 1,  p.  36. 


I]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  an 

In  that  case,  the  speaker  in  the  opening  Ode  (and  wherever  the  crown 
is  referred  to),  is  Solomon  himself  or  some  one  posing  as  Solomon :  but 
this  explanation  is,  at  first  sight,  somewhat  unnatural ;  moreover,  some  one 
may  object  that  we  do  not  even  know  for  certain  that  the  ascription  of  the 
Odes  to  Solomon  is  primitive.  The  crown,  in  the  first  Ode,  if  it  is  a 
nuptial  crown,  is  the  bride's  crown.  Any  one  who  has  taken  part  in  a  Greek 
or  Oriental  marriage  ceremony,  will  know  that  an  actual  coronation  is  an 
essential  part  of  it :  for  that  reason,  the  hypothesis  of  the  nuptial  crown  is 
not  to  be  excluded.     In  the  West  Syrian  rite  the  officiating  priest  says  : 

'  A  crown  is  in  thy  hands,  O  Lord  : 
And  it  descends  from  heaven  .... 
On  the  head  of  the  married  pair.'  ,■ 

It  cannot  be  denied  that  the  language  of  the  Odes  is  amatory.  Take, 
for  example,  the  third  Ode ;  here  Christ  is  the  Beloved,  the  believer  is 
the  Lover;  they  have  been  joined  together  and  their  natures  mingled 
(as  was  said  in  the  editio  princeps),  like  water  mingled  with  wine.  When 
that  sentence  was  written,  it  had  not  been  noticed  that  the  illustration 
was  one  of  those  that  are  employed  by  the  Sufis :  and  indeed,  it  would 
be  easy  to  describe  the  whole  of  the  third  Ode  as  a  Sufi  product. 
It  is  high  mystic.  Compare  the  following  rendering  by  Hastings  of  one 
of  the  Songs  of  Jalal-ud-Dln  Rumi : 

'  With  thy  sweet  soul  this  soul  of  mine 
Hath  mixed  as  water  doth  with  wine. 
Who  can  the  Wine  and  Water  part 
Or  me  and  thee  when  we  combine? 
Thou  art  become  my  greater  self; 
Small  bands  no  more  can  me  confine, 
Thou  hast  my  being  taken  on, 
And  shall  not  I  now  take  on  thine  ? ' 

Whatever  Jalal-ud-Dln  may  have  meant  by  his  dangerously  pantheistic 
language,  the  Odes  of  Solomon  go  a  long  way  towards  him.  We  may 
compare  further  Ode  vii.  4  : 

1  He  became  like  me  that  I  might  receive  Him  : 
Like  myself  was  He  reckoned  that  I  might  put  Him  on.' 

As  we  have  said,  this  is  genuine  mysticism,  the  language  of  the  Inward 
and  Upward  life.      The  Christianity  involved  is  experimental  and  it  is 

P  2 


2i2  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [i 

ecstatic.  It  is  not  impossible,  then,  that  the  reference  to  the  Crown 
might  be  borrowed  from  nuptial  rites,  interpreted  mystically. 

The  objection  to  this  point  of  view  is  that  it  does  not  cover  all  the 
passages  referred  to,  and  that  it  appears  to  take  us  further  from  the  New 
Testament  than  any  of  the  alternative  explanations. 

Fortunately,  we  are  able  to  detect  a  remarkable  confirmation  of  this 
view,  which  almost  settles  the  question  of  interpretation  for  us.  We  have 
shown  that  this  first  Ode  is  imitated  in  the  hymn  which  Judas  Thomas 
sings  at  the  royal  wedding-feast,  where  he  definitely  sets  the  espousals  of 
the  Church  over  against  the  nuptials  that  were  proceeding  in  the  palace. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  origin  Gr  interpretation  of  a  hymn  which 
begins  :  {Acts  of  Thomas,  p.  c^o), 

1  My  Church  is  the  daughter  of  light, 
On  her  head  dwelleth  the   King : 
Who  feeds  all  His  inhabitants  below : 
Truth  is  placed  on  her  head.' 

It  is  clear,  then,  that  the  Ode  was  understood  to  be  an  epithalamium  in 
the  earliest  days  of  the  Christian  Church  in  Syria. 

The  Syriac  hymn  quotes  also  from  another  famous  epithalamium,  the 
45th  Psalm,  in  which  the  nuptials  of  Solomon  are  supposed  to  be 
described,  e.g. 

'  Her  garments  are  like  unto  flowers  : 
The  smell  whereof  is  fragrant  and  pleasant ; ' 

which  is  an  imitation  of  'All  thy  garments  smell  of  myrrh,  and  aloes  and 
stacte'.  We  take  it  that  he  made  his  nuptial  song  out  of  existing 
epithalamia  ;  we  see  that  the  crown  is  a  bridal  crown. 

The  fourth  explanation  is  that  of  Diettrich  and  Bernard  and  others, 
who  maintain  that  the  reference  is  to  the  baptismal  circlet,  which  is  still  in 
use  in  the  East :  indeed,  according  to  Bernard,  the  whole  of  the  Odes  are 
Baptismal  Hymns,  and  they  are  meant  to  cover  the  period  of  instruction 
of  catechumens,  who  are  preparing  for  the  Easter  Baptisms  in  the  Earl) 
Church.  We  have  said  that  these  baptismal  circlets  are  still  in  use:  one 
of  the  editors  of  this  volume  has,  in  fact,  baptized  more  than  a  hundred 
children  in  this  way ;  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  it  is  a  part  of  the  ancient 
Syrian  rule  before  the  introduction  of  infant  baptism,  as  well  as  among  the 
Armenians,  Copts,  and  Abyssinians.     So  the  question  is  raised  whether 


ij  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  213 

these  baptismal  customs  can  be  referred  to  a  sufficiently  early  date,  or  the 
time  of  the  composition  of  the  Odes  to  a  sufficiently  late  date,  to  admit  of 
an  interpretation  of  the  language  of  the  Odes  in  terms  of  primitive  Christian 
ritual.1  The  problems  referred  to  have  been  discussed  in  the  Introduction 
to  this  volume,  and  the  arguments  pro  and  con  need  not  be  repeated  here. 
It  seems  clear  that  if  any  one  of  the  garland-Odes  is  baptismal,  the  rest 
may  properly  be  assigned  to  the  same  category :  for  in  this  regard, 
Odes  i,  v,  ix,  xvii,  and  xx  belong  together,  and  we  find  a  common 
interpretation  for  their  common  language. 

In  Ode  ix.  8,  9,  the  crown  is  taken  from  the  21st2  Psalm,  probably 
from  the  Greek  Bible,  as  may  be  seen  from  a  reference  to  our  note  at  that 
point.  The  allusion  is  important  for  the  question  of  the  linguistic  origin 
of  the  Odes,  but  it  is  also  to  be  noted  that  it  is  the  royal  crown  that  is 
spoken  of  in  the  Psalm  :  ('  The  King  shall  rejoice  in  thy  salvation,  &c.'). 
Is  this  Psalm  used  baptismally?  It  is  certainly  a  favourite  with  the  Odist, 
who  quotes  it  again  (Ps.  xxi.  11=  Ode  v.  8)  in  the  fifth  Ode,  where  again 
we  have  reference  to  the  crown  in  verse  12.  This  should  naturally  be  taken 
as  another  loan  from  the  same  Psalm. 

A  remarkable  series  of  parallels  to  this  Ode  are  pointed  out  by  Bernard 
in  the  Procatechism  of  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  :  e.  g. 

'  Already  ye  (catechumens)  are  gathering  the  spiritual  blossoms  for 
the  weaving  of  heavenly  crowns,  ....  for  there  have  now  appeared 
blossoms  on  the  trees;  may  the  fruit  also  he  perfect.' 

Here  is  one  which  looks  in  the  same  direction  from  the  Hymns  of  Ephrem 
for  the  Epiphany  Festival : 

'  Beautiful  are  your  garments  : 
Splendid  your  crowns  : 
Which  the  First-Born  has  woven  for  you  : 

Crowns  which  do  not  wither 

Have  been  set  on  your  heads.' — (ed.  Lamy,  i.  p.  in.) 

Does  not  Ephrem  here  also  take  over  the  language  of  the  first  Ode  and 

1  Diettrich  has  shown  that  the  oldest  Nestorian  Baptismal  Liturgies  knew 
nothing  of  the  crowns,  which  do  not  come  into  the  written  rituals  before  the 
seventh  century.     See  Nest.  Taufliturgie,  pp.  49,  87. 

2  Ps.  xxi.  3  (=  xx.  3  in  the  Greek  version). 


2i4  ODES    OF    SOLOMON  |_i 

not  merely  illustrate  it :  the  reference  to  the  '  weaving  for  you '  a  crown  is 
very  like  the  language  of  the  Odist. 

In  that  case  Ephrem'  has  interpreted  the  language  of  the  Ode 
baptismally,  as  he  did  with  everything  that  he  could  lay  his  hands  on  in 
the  Old  Testament. 

Two  other  points  of  interest  come  up  in  connexion  with  this  first  Ode. 
One  is  the  question  as  to  the  origin  of  the  expression  about  '  the  full  and 
perfect  fruits  of  God '  at  the  close  of  the  hymn.  The  other  is  a  suggestion 
that  a  line,  or  perhaps  a  couple  of  lines,  has  been  dropped  at  the  end  of 
the  Ode,  and  wrongly  restored.  We  are  in  the  region  of  speculation,  but 
not,  we  hope,  aberrant  or  wanton  speculation. 

First  with  regard  to  the  full  and  perfect  fruits.  To  explain  these,  we 
start  from  the  position  that  the  Odist  has  been  imitating  in  some  of  his 
lines  the  first  Psalm  in  the  canonical  Psalter.  The  unfading  leaves  of 
his  crown  are  reminiscent  of 

'  His  leaf  also  shall  not  wither, 
And  whatsoever  he  doeth  shall  prosper.' 

We  suggested  that  he  has  understood  the  second  line  of  the  couplet  to 
refer  to  the  tree,  and  not  to  the  man  who  is  likened  to  a  tree.  That  is 
to  say,  'doeth'  (n~'J>)  means  '  produceth ' ;  (it  is,  in  fact,  the  ordinary 
word  for  bringing  forth  fruit,  and  finds  its  equivalent  in  the  New  Testament 
as  71-oiwj'  K-ap7rovs).     In  what  sense  is  the  word  to  be  understood  that 

'All  the  fruit  it  produces  is  prosperous.' 

The  answer  is  that  the  fruit  is  full  and  perfect. 

Now  turn  to  the  Targum  on  the  Psalms.  We  find  that  the  Targumist 
takes  this  very  view.  For  him,  also,  it  is  the  tree  that  prospers,  and  not 
the  man  ;  and  he  explains  that  it  means, 

'  Every  seed-germ  germinates  and  prospers.' 

This  is  a  striking  and  unexpected  confirmation  of  our  suggestion. 
Moreover,  when  we  turn  to  the  Peshitta  version  of  the  Psalms,  we  find 
a  curious  reminiscence  of  or  parallel  to  the  '  perfect '  fruits  of  the  Ode. 
Here  we  find 

'And  all  that  he  does  (or  makes)  he  perfects  (or  is  perfected)/ 


i-iii]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  215 

Here  again  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  translator  interpreted  the  prosperity 
to  belong  to  the  tree ;  but  the  vocalizers  have  referred  it  to  the  man. 

This,  then,  is  our  tentative  explanation  of  the  closing  sentences  of  the 
Ode.     It  is  an  interpretation  of  the  first  Psalm. 

Now  with  regard  to  the  stray  verse.  In  Ode  iv  the  sequence  of  the 
Hymn  is  broken  by  the  insertion  of  the  fourth  verse : 

3  '  Thou  hast  given  thy  heart,  O  Lord,  to  thy  faithful : 

4  [never  wilt  thou  be  barren  (idle)  nor  be  unfruitful] : 

5  For  a  single  hour  of  thy  faith 

Is  better  than  all  days  and  years.' 

Suppose  we  remove  the  intrusive  matter  (so  as  to  restore  the  sequence  in 
the  fourth  Ode)  and  put  it  at  the  end  of  the  first  Ode. 

'  Thou  livest  upon  my  head, 
And  thou  hast  blossomed  upon  my  head  : 
Never  wilt  thou  be  barren  nor  unfruitful : 
Thy  fruits  are  full  and  perfect: 
Full  of  thy  salvation.' 

We  suggest,  then,  that  the  verse  has  dropped  out  of  the  first  Ode,  and 
having  been  written  on  the  margin  has  been  wrongly  restored  to  the 
fourth  Ode. 

ODE    II 

This  Ode  is  missing. 

ODE    III 

1     I  clothe  (them)  with : 

2  And  (His)  members  are  with  Him, 

And  on  them  do  I  hang ;  and  He  loves  me. 

3  For  I  should  not  have  known  how  to  love  the  Lord,  Cf.  1  John  iv.  19. 
If  He  had  not  loved  me. 

4  For  who  is  able  to  distinguish  love, 
Except  one  that  is  loved  ? 


216  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  fm 

Cf.  John  xiv.  3.  5     I  love  the  Beloved,  and  my  soul  loves  Him. 

And  where  His  rest  is,  there  also  am   I. 

Cf.  Eph.  ii.  19.  6     And   I  shall  be  no  stranger  (there); 

For   with    the    Lord    Most    High    and    Merciful,    there   is   no 
grudging. 

7     I  have  been  united  (to  Him),  for   the    lover   has    found   the 
Beloved  : 

In  order  that  I  may  love  Him  that  is  the  Son,  I  shall  become 
a  son. 

Cf.  1  Cor.  6,  17  and    °"     For  he  that  is  joined  to  Him  that  is  immortal, 
John  xiv.  19.  Wil]  himself  alsQ  bccome  immortal. 

9     And  He  that  hath  pleasure  in  the  Living  One, 
Will  become  living. 

Cf.  Titus  i.  2.  ,0     This  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  which  doth  not  lie, 

Which  teacheth  the  sons  of  men  to  know  His  ways. 

ii      Be  wise  and  understanding  and  vigilant. 
Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  2.  Labourt  proposes  to  change  .0000  'on  them'  into  o»=>o 
'on  him'. 

v.  5.  Labourt  suggests  unnecessarily  cha-o  'his  sign'  for  om**j  'his 
rest '.     See,  however, 

'  They  knew  thy  law  and  they  refused  thy  rest.' 

Ephrem  iii.  454,  R.  E. 
v.  7.    The  word  fc^J^o!./  'I  was  mixed  up',  and  by  extension  possibly 
'  I  was  united  ',  is  of  doubtful  meaning. 


in]  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  217 

The  verb  is  used  also  in  an  absolute  manner  by  Ephrem,  without  any 
complement,  and  its  meaning  cannot  be  clearly  established  : 

'  And  if  thou  joinest,  they  will  count  thee  as  a  deceiver.' — ii.  468,  R.  E. 
In  this  verse  of  the  Odes  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  it  has  the  notion 
of  mixture,  union,  and  participation. . 

In  the  next  line,  the  translation  is  given  by  eliminating  the  dalath 
before  Joo»|?,  as  we  have  suggested  to  be  probable.  In  maintaining  the 
reading  of  the  MS.  we  could  translate  '  Because  I  shall  love  that  Son,  in 
order  that  I  may  be  son  (myself) '. 

v.  9.  The  MS.  has  the  siame-points  over  the  word  U~  living,  which 
implies  that  the  word  is  to  be  understood  in  the  sense  of  'life'.  The 
copyist's  punctuation  seems,  however,  not  to  be  well  adapted  to  parallelism 
with  the  preceding  verse.  To  call  the  Christ  '  the  living  one '  is  one  of  the 
characteristics  of  the  Syrian  Church,  e.  g.  '  O  Living  One,  who  went  down 
to  the  abode  of  the  dead '  {Breviar.  Chald.  ii.  p.  o-V*.).  Cf.  Acta  T/iomae, 
p.  235,  and  see  also  Ephrem  iii.  pp.  33,  135,  149  (E.  E.).  On  the  other 
hand,  in  view  of  some  other  passages  of  the  Odes  (cf.  xxviii.  6,  &c.)  it 
would  be  wiser  not  to  take  the  above  view  as  irrefragable,  and  it  is  even 
possible  that  the  reading  of  the  MS.  may  be  right. 

v.  i  o.    The  dalath  before  )>aXso  is  quite  correct  (against  Frankenberg). 

Expository  Notes. 

The  scope  of  this  Ode  as  a  genuine  mystical  product  has  been  pointed 
out  in  the  notes  to  the  previous  Ode.  In  verse  2,  there  is  confusion  in 
the  MS.  between  '  my  members '  and  '  His  members '.  As  it  is  not  easy 
to  see  how  a  person  can  hang  on  his  own  members,  we  have  adopted 
the  second  reading.  In  that  case,  we  have  a  Pauline  reminiscence  in 
1  Cor.  vi.  15,  &c. 

In  verse  7  the  translation  proposed  by  Flemming,  '  For  the  Lover  has 
found  the  Beloved '  has  been  accepted,  although  it  interferes  somewhat 
with  the  parallelism  of  the  verses,  which  seem  to  require  us  to  take  ?  ^^*> 
in  the  same  sense  in  successive  stanzas.  We  have  suggested  as  an 
alternative  to  read  '  that  I  may  be  found  a  lover  to  the  Beloved '.  After 
the  words  '  I  have  been  united  {or  '  mingled '),  the  necessary  expletive  <*=> 


2i.S  ODES    OF    SOLOMON  [ni-iv 

has  been  added  in  the  translation.     We  may  compare  Acta  Thomae  (ed 
Wright,  p.  JJ»)  'that  with  thy  humanity  he  might  be  mingled  (or  united)'. 

In  verse  9  the  ancient  name  of  Jesus,  'the  Living  One',  has  been 
restored  as  has  been  done  in  the  Revised  Version  of  Apoc.  i.  17  ('The 
Fir^t  and  the  Last  and  the  Living  One ').  For  another  exampU-  we  may 
take  Acta  Thomae  (p.  o»^»).  '  Thou  art  the  Living  One,  the  Son  of  the 
Living  One.''  Note  that  the  expression  can  be  traced  again  in  Ode  viii.  2?.. 
if  we  translate  the  verse 

'  Ye  who  are  kept  abide  in  Him  that  liveth* 
the  Living  One  referred  to  being  clearly  Christ. 

The  strongly  Johannine  cast  of  the  Ode  will  have  been  noted.  The 
Ode  is  a  hymn  written  on  the  theme,  '  We  love  Him  because  He  first 
loved  us'  (1  John  iv.  19),  with  perhaps  a  reference  also  to  the  doctrine 
that  'he  that  is  joined  to  the  Lord  is  one  Spirit'  (1  Cor.  vi.  17).  Whether 
we  are  to  recognize  actual  quotations  or  distinct  references  depends  on  the 
general  decision  as  to  the  priority  of  the  Odes  to  the  Fourth  Gospel  and 
the  Pauline  Lpistles,  or  the  contrary.  These  questions  are  discussed  in 
the  Introduction. 

The  whole  Ode,  like  the  first  Ode,  is  of  the  nature  of  an  epithalamium. 
Bacon  described  it  rightly  (Harvard  Theol.  Rev.  for  19 16,  p.  382)  as 
'  a  sonir  in  the  vein  of  Canticles  '. 


ODE    IV 

1      No  man,  O  my  God.  changeth  thy  holy  place; 

Nor  is  (one  able)  to  change  it,  and  put  it  in  another  place. 

2a    Because  he  hath  no  power  over  it ; 

2h    For  thy  sanctuary  Thou   designedst   before  thou   didst   make 
places  : 

3a    That  which  is  the  elder  shall  not  be  changed   by  those  that 
are  younger  than  itself : 
Cf.  2  Chron.  vii.  16.  3b    Thou  hast  given  thy  heart,  O  Lord,  to  thy  believers. 


iv]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  219 

4  Thou  wilt  never  fail, 

Nor  wilt  Thou  be  without  fruits : 

5  For  one  hour  of  thy  Faith  Cf-  ps.  lxxxiv.  10. 
Is  more  precious  than  all  days  and  years. 

6  For  who  is  there  that  shall  put  on  thy  grace,  and  be  injured? 

7  For  thy  seal  is  known : 

And  thy  creatures  are  known  to  it. 

8  And  the  hosts  possess  it : 

And  the  elect  archangels  are  clad  with  it. 

9  Thou  hast  given  us  thy  fellowship : 

It  was  not  that  thou  wast  in  need  of  us ; 
But  that  we  are  in  need  of  thee. 

10  Distil1  thy  dews  upon  us; 

And    open   thy   rich   fountains   that   pour    forth   to   us    milk 
and  honey. 

1 1  For  there  is  no  repentance  with  thee  :  Cf.  Rom.  xi.  29  and 
That    thou    shouldest    repent    of   anything    that   thou    hast 

promised. 

1 2  And  the  end  was  known 2  to  thee : 

13  For  what  thou  gavest,  thou  gavest  freely: 

So  that  thou  mayest  not  draw  back  and  take  them  again. 

14  For  all  was  known  to  thee  as  God ; 

And  set  in  order  from  the  beginning  before  thee : 

15  And  thou,  O  Lord,  hast  made3  all  things. 

Hallelujah. 

;  Lit.  bedew.  2  Lit.  revealed.  s  Or,  done. 


220  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  |  iv 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  i.  Grammatically,  it  is  more  natural  that  the  Syriac  sentence 
should  mean  '  No  one  changeth  thy  place,  my  holy  God ',  which  paralleled 
with  the  second  member  of  verse  2  would  give,  '  Because  Thou  designedst 
thy  holiness  before  Thou  madest  places '. 

The  linguistic  construction  of  the  second  member  of  this  verse  as 
compared  with  the  first  seems  somewhat  strange.  This  syntactic  anomaly 
is  sometimes  found  in  Syriac,  e.  g. 

v^a*.t  JJ.j?o  )1«*»*.  p?t^\o  aoi^v>>^o  jfi^^so-X  -at'o 
'  He  can  love,  bless,  speak  the  truth,  and  pray  well.' 

Spic.  Syr.  5  (Cureton). 

To  make  the  sentence  run  more  fluently  we  have  suggested  >9>,>wj»  ...tv> 
in  the  first  member;  even  the  simple  addition  of  \^o  or  ,„.. n •  v>  will 
suffice. 

v.  3.  Earth  proposes  [+*+£>  'the  holy5  for  \++*s>  'the  old'.  On  this 
hypothesis  the  note  on  verse  1  to  the  effect  that  the  Syriac  sentence  means 
also  '  my  holy  God '  would  be  confirmed.  In  adopting  this  interpretation 
the  adjective  f-p  which  we  have  translated  by  'younger'  would  have 
the  natural  meaning  of  '  lower,  inferior,  less  perfect ',  because,  linguistically, 
it  seldom  has  the  meaning  of  'younger'.  In  Ephrem  the  word  U-*x>  is 
frequently  used  as  a  title  for  God,  and  as  a  substitute  for  '  the  Lord '. 
Here  is  a  sentence  in  which  both  the  '  Sanctuary  '  and  the  '  Holy  One  '  are 
involved  : 

'  The  shamefulness  which  they  exhibited  towards  the  temple  of  the  Holy.' 

Ephrem  (ed.  Mitchell,  p.  128). 

The  Syriac  of  the  Ode  may  also  be  rendered,  '  He  who  is  the  elder 
shall  not  be  changed  by  those  who  are  inferior  to  himself.  And  instead 
of  the  future  tense,  the  optative  form  may  be  adopted  :  '  Let  that  which 
(or,  the  one  who)  is  elder  not  be  changed  by  those  who  are  inferior  to 
Himself  (or,  itself). 

In  the  next  line  Gressmann's  suggestion  of  ^^ '  thy  side '  for  ^*^ 
1  thy  heart '  is  not  necessary. 


ivj  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  221 

v.  4.  The  language  is  nearly  the  same  as  that  used  to  describe 
Paradise  in  Ode  xi.  23.     We  might,  therefore,  translate 

'  Never  wilt  thou  be  idle  (or  inoperative).' 

v.  6.  Grimme's  suggestion  of  klx*.»  for  JCo*,o  is  possible  but  not 
necessary. 

v.  7.  The  MS.  has  ^.^-.....o  'are  known  to'  for  which  we  have 
suggested  ^^c  '(thy  creatures)  know'.  This  is,  perhaps,  a  daring 
emendation,  since  the  translation  of  the  text  as  it  stands,  '  And  thy 
creatures  are  known  to  it ',  i.  e.  '  and  it  knows  thy  creatures  ',  is  sufficiently 
clear. 

v.  8.  The  MS.  does  not  warrant  -,icui>I**o  'and  thy  hosts'  printed  in 
the  text;  it  is  more  probably  JLc£*I«o  'and  the  hosts'.  Cf.  Ode  xvi.  14. 
In  the  second  member  of  the  verse  the  word  ooo»  which  the  text  gives 
between  parentheses  is  unwarranted  by  the  MS.,  and  is  useless.  Instead 
of  o*^  ^m..-^\,  '  are  clad  with  it ',  Connolly  suggests  ^ao\  '  hold  it ', 
which  is  plausible. 

v.  13.  «3oU  of  the  MS.  probably  stands  for  ooli.  Frankenberg's 
derivation  of  the  word  from  «sl^.j  is  improbable.  Earth  unnecessarily 
suggests  the  eliminating  of  the  waw  before  oaol.  The  objective  pronoun 
^*j/  is  used  by  Synesis  for  woto.*2u»lo,  the  subject  being  \s.-»o. 

Expository  Notes. 

This  Ode  is  the  most  important  in  the  whole  collection  on  account 
of  the  historical  detail  with  which  it  appears  to  commence.  The  natural 
explanation  would  be  that  there  had  been  some  attempt  to  deny  the 
sanctity  of  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem,  or  to  transfer  that  sanctuary  to  some 
other  spot.  The  writer  resists  any  such  attempts  as  impious,  and  is  quite 
sure  that  they  are  outside  the  sphere  of  human  power :  for  God  cannot 
contradict  or  withdraw  His  promises.  His  promises  are  His  predestination. 
The  Sanctuary  was  designed  from  the  beginning  and  known  to  the  Lord 
from  the  first.  Whatever  may  have  happened  in  apparent  contradiction  of 
God's  promises  regarding  His  continual  dwelling  in  the  Sanctuary,  is  itself 
to  be  regarded  as  a  part  of  God's  design,  and  the  writer  concludes  His 
song  by  saying  that  '  God  has  done  it  all '. 

The  sanctuary  itself  has  right  of  prescription  against  all  other  sanctuaries. 


222  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [iv 

It  is  a  pre-existent  creation.     The  proof  of  this  is  on  the  Jewish  side  in 
Pirqe  Aboth,  vi.  10  : 

'Five  possessions  possessed  the  Holy  One,  blessed  is  He,  in  this 
world  ;  and  these  arc  they  :  Thorah,  one  possession ;  Heaven  and 
earth,  one  possession;  Abraham,  one  possession ;  Israel,  one 
possession;  the  Sanctuary,  one  possession  .  .  .  the  Sanctuary,  whence 
is  it  proved?  Because  it  is  written,  7 lie  place,  O  Lord,  which  thou 
hast  made  for  thee  to  dwell  in  ;  the  Sanctuary,  O  Lord,  which  thy 
hands  have  established  (Exod.  xv.  17);  and  it  saith,  and  He  brought 
them  to  the  border  of  His  sanctuary,  and  even  to  this  mountain  which 
His  right  hand  has  possessed.'' — Ps.  lxxviii.  54. 

To  these  proofs,  which  the  Rabbinical  writers  give,  might  be  added 
a  reference  to  Psalm  lxxiii.  (lxxiv.)  2,  '  Remember  thy  congregation  which 
thou  hast  purchased  of  old  ....  This  is  Mount  Zion,  wherein  thou  hast 
dwelt '  (cf.  LXX  r)s  eKrrjcroi  iltt  ap^r/^j 

The  situation  in  this  Psalm  is  exactly  similar  to  that  which  occurred  at 
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus.  The  sanctuary  is  in  ruins  and 
burned  by  fire ;  and  the  similarity  of  the  former  and  the  latter  desolations 
(which  the  Jews  recognized  to  be  even  a  similarity  of  date)  provoked  a 
similarity  of  prayer  and  complaint.  Hence  the  earliest  Psalmist  entreats 
the  Lord  'not  to  withdraw  His  hand'  (Ps.  lxxiii.  n)  and  to  'have  respect 
unto  His  covenant '  (v.  20).  The  later  writer  says,  '  Do  not  withdraw  thy  gifts 
nor  repent  of  thy  promises '.  Thus  the  Temple  as  the  outward  dwelling- 
place  of  God  and  the  symbol  of  His  covenant,  is  before  the  mind  of  the 
Odist,  as  it  was  before  the  Psalmist. 

It  is  clear  that  the  Temple  in  the  Ode  is  a  real  temple,  with  which 
the  Odist  is  in  a  sympathetic  relation.  Neither  here,  nor  in  the  language 
of  the  sixth  Ode,  where  the  Temple  is  spoken  of,  have  we  any  right  to 
explain  it  away.  The  actual  Temple  is  necessary  in  the  explanation  of  the 
fifth  verse  : 

'Thou  hast  given  thy  heart,  O  Lord,  to  thy  believers,' 

where  a  reference  to  God's  message  and  promise  to  Solomon  that 

'  My  eyes  and  heart  shall  be  there  continually.'    (2  Chron.  vii.  16.) 

removes  the  apparent  discontinuity  of  the  Ode,  and  relieves  us  of  the 
resort  to  interpolation  which  Harnack  suggests. 

In  the  fifth  verse  one  could  not  miss  the  reference  to  Psalm  lxxxiv.  10, 


iv]  ODES   OF    SOLOMON  223 

where  '  A  day  in  thy  courts '  is  imitated  by  the  Odist  into  '  An  hour  of  thy 
faith  superior  to  all  days  and  years '.  The  reference  ought  not  to  be  made 
without  observing  that  the  Psalm  imitated  (the  84th  Psalm)  is  from  the 
beginning  a  Temple  Psalm  ;  and  that  the  opening  sentence,  '  How  amiable 
are  thy  tabernacles '  would  acquire  a  sorrowful  and  a  poignant  meaning  in 
the  time  of  a  national  disaster.  We  shall  probably,  then,  be  safe  in  placing 
the  writer  within  sight  of  Jerusalem,  and  of  Jerusalem  in  ruins.  The 
Scriptural  references  which  lie  behind  our  Odes  are  references  to  the  actual 
temple  at  Jerusalem,  the  Salomonic  temple.  Just  as  in  Ode  vi,  where  the 
mighty  stream  that  overflows  everything  has  for  its  goal  the  actual  Temple, 
we  cannot  start  with  allegory :  the  actual  Temple  must  be  there  in  the  first 
instance,  and  it  was  natural  enough  that  the  Salomonic  Odes  should 
contain  reference  to  the  Salomonic  building,  especially  in  the  time  when 
the  foremost  thought  in  many  religious  minds  was  the  question,  what  has 
become  of  the  Temple,  or  what  is  going  to  become  of  it. 

This  state  of  mind  which,  in  our  view,  has  a  chronological  element 
in  it,  is  quite  consistent  with  a  spiritual  interpretation,  either  on  the  part 
of  a  pious  Jew,  that  the  real  Temple  is  the  ideal,  heavenly  structure,  or 
the  interpretation  of  the  Christian  that  it  is  the  Church.1 

Returning  to  our  Ode,  we  see  that  a  series  of  fresh  questions  is  raised 
in  verses  6-10  :  what  is  meant  by  the  grace,  the  seal,  the  fellowship,  the 
dew,  the  milk  and  honey  ?  We  seem  here  to  be  in  another  region  of 
thought  quite  away  from  the  question  of  the  mutability  of  the  Temple 
service.  Two  solutions  have  been  offered  for  the  apparent  discontinuity  : 
one  is  Harnack's,  that  the  Ode  is  a  Jewish  one  interpolated  by  a  Christian 
hand ;  the  other  is  that  of  Bernard  that  the  Ode  must  be  interpreted  in 
the  light  of  the  ritual  of  baptism.  We  have  discussed  these  views  in  our 
Introduction,  and  the  trend  of  our  investigation  is  in  favour  of  the  belief 
that  the  Odes  are  Christian  throughout  and  have  not  been  interpolated. 
Whether  they  are  baptismal  to  the  extent  that  has  been  suggested  appears 
to  us  to  be,  at  least,  doubtful.  For  instance,  in  the  verses  to  which  we 
were  referring,  it  is  difficult  to  see  the  sense  in  which  an  early  Christian 
writer  could  speak  of  the  heavenly  hosts  as  possessing  the  baptismal  sign, 

1  To  take  a  single  reference,  Zahn  says  (p.  753) :  '  Dadurch  wird  klar,  dass 
er  nicht  an  ein  von  Menschenhanden  bereitetes  Gotteshaus  mit  Vorhofen  und 
Altaren  denkt,  wie  der  alte  Psalmist,  sondern  an  ein  geistliches  Haus.' 


224  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  |iv 

■or  the  angels  as  being  clad  with  baptismal  grace.  There  is,  however, 
some  slight  evidence  for  such  a  belief,  and  Dr.  Bernard  has  under- 
estimated it.  Not  only  have  we  the  testimony  of  Clement  of  Alexandria 
that  Theodotus  the  Gnostic  taught  that  '  the  angels  were  baptized  at  the 
beginning  into  the  redemption  of  the  name  of  Him  that  came  down  in 
the  Dove  upon  Jesus  and  redeemed  Him ' '  (and  this  evidence  of  a  gnostic 
interpretation  does  not  exclude  a  correspondingly  Christian  thought\  but 
we  have  the  still  more  surprising  belief  in  Jewish  circles  that  the  angels 
were  circumcised,  and  every  Patristic  student  knows,  and  our  Odes 
themselves  may  be  in  evidence  upon  the  point,  how  keen  the  early 
Christians  were  to  carry  over  the  ideas  attaching  to  circumcision  and 
re-translate  them  into  the  language  of  the  New  Faith.  It  is  not,  then, 
impossible,  that  a  Christian  writer  should  have  restated  the  Jewish  belief 
concerning  angels  in  a  Christian  form. 

The  Tewish  belief  is  found  in  the  Book  of  Jubilees,  c.  15,  as  follows  : 

'  And  every  one  that  is  born,  the  flesh  of  whose  foreskin  is  not 
circumcised  on  the  eighth  day,  belongs  not  to  the  children  of  the 
Covenant  which  the  Lord  made  with  Abraham,  but  to  the  children  of 
destruction  ;  nor  is  there,  moreover,  any  sign  on  him  that  lie  is  the 
Lord's,  but  (he  is  destined)  to  be  destroyed  and  slain  from  the  earth, 
and  to  be  rooted  out  of  the  earth,  for  he  has  broken  the  covenant  of 
the  Lord  our  God.  For  all  the  angels  of  the  presence  and  all  the 
angels  of  the  sanctification  have  been  so  created  from  the  day  of  their 
creation,  and  before  the  angels  of  the  presence  and  the  angels  of 
sanctification  He  hath  sanctified  Israel,  that  they  should  be  with 
Him  and  with  His  holy  angels.'1 

Here,  then,  the  angels  are  represented  as  circumcised.  Dr.  Charles  does 
not  suggest  the  reason  for  this  belief,  nor  point  out  its  polemical  necessity  ; 
but  in  a  foot-note  he  adds  the  important  observation  that  '  our  book  knows 
nothing  of  the  later  traditions  that  the  patriarchs  such  as  Adam,  Seth, 
Enoch,  Noah,  Shem,  Terah,  Jacob,  and  six  others  were  born  circumcised '. 
The  reference  is  important,  because  it  takes  us  into  the  region  of  polemic. 
Every  Patristic  student  knows  that  one  of  the  points  of"  attack  of  the  early 
anti-Judaic  writers  was  precisely  this  question  of  the  uncircumcised  righteous 
of  the  days  before  Abraham.  And  the  obvious  reply  of  the  controversialist 
Jew  on   the  opposite  side  was    to    say    that    the    patriarchs   were   really 

1  Clem.  Alex.  Exc.  ex  Theod.  22. 


iv]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  225 

circumcised.  Why  is  it  not  mentioned?  The  answer  is  that  they  were 
born  so.  To  which  there  is  no  further  reply.  Cadit  Quaestio.  It  is 
natural  to  suppose  further  that  the  circumcised  angels  who  were  born  so  is 
an  exaggeration  of  this  very  defence  of  the  uncircumcised  Just.  They 
were  as  the  angels  in  Heaven.  But  this  opened  up  the  further  challenge, 
'  Quomodo  circumcisi  sunt,  qui  non  habebant  membrum  virile  ? '  If  any  one 
doubts  whether  this  question  was  actually  raised,  let  him  turn  to  the 
Ethiopic  Book  of  the  Secrets  of  Heaven  and  Earth1  where  he  will  find  the 
necessary  detail  as  to  the  virility  of  the  angels  with  Scripture  proof  and 
dimensional  observation. 

It  is  necessary  to  go  into  this  in  some  detail,  because  the  doctrine  of 
the  necessity  of  circumcision,  which  is  emphasized  so  strongly  in  Jubilees, 
is  of  necessity  a  Jewish  doctrine.  And  if  an  early  Gnostic  writer  like 
Theodotus  maintains  that  the  angels  were  baptized,  he  is  converting  Judaic 
arguments  to  anti-Judaic  uses. 

If  it  had  not  been  for  this  curious  preservation  of  the  fragment  of 
Theodotus  by  Clement  of  Alexandria,  we  should  have  said  without 
hesitation  that  the  verses  about  the  angels  in  the  Ode  before  us  were 
definitely  Jewish,  and,  in  that  case,  we  should  have  established  Harnack's 
position  that  we  are  not  dealing  with  a  genuine  Christian  product.  That 
fragment  of  Theodotus  (the  importance  of  which  Dr.  Bernard  did  not 
sufficiently  realize)  calls  for  a  stay  of  judgement  on  the  points  at  issue. 

The  investigation,  so  far  as  it  has  gone,  will  at  least  serve  to  remind  us 
of  the  importance  of  the  right  understanding  of  the  primitive  anti-Judaic 
polemic,  especially  on  its  fundamental  points,  Circumcision,  the  Sabbath, 
and  the  Sanctuary.  The  question  of  Circumcision  was  raised  in  Judaism 
long  before  Christianity  appeared.  It  was  one  of  the  features  of  the 
Hellenistic  movement  before  the  rise  of  Pharisaism,  when  the  Jews  took 
such  pains  to  get  rid  of  the  sign,  and  to  assimilate  themselves  to  Greek 
manners.  It  is,  therefore,  extremely  likely  that  part  of  the  Christian 
polemic  against  Circumcision,  say  the  objection  on  the  score  of  the 
uncircumcised  patriarchs,  is  prae-Christian ;  and  we  need  to  keep  this 
possibility  in  mind  when  discussing  what  is  said  on  the  subject  by  early 

1  Pair.  Or.,  vol.  i,  p.  12.  The  writer  quotes  from  Jubilees,  as  an  authority 
for  the  circumcision  of  the  angels. 

Q 


226  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [iv 

Christian  writers  or  early  Christian  books  of*  Testimony.  The  person  who 
is  not  familiar  with  anti-Judaic  propaganda  may  be  reminded  that  anti- 
Circumcision  is  not  only  in  the  New  Testament,  but  that  it  pervades  the 
first  deposit  of  the  literature.  We  do  not,  indeed,  find  it  argued  in  the 
way  Theodotus  suggests.  Justin  Martyr  is  content  to  say  that  Enoch  and 
the  rest  of  the  Patriarchal  Company  had  the  spiritual  circumcision  like 
ourselves.  He  does  not  say  that  they  were  baptized ;  he  seems  to  avoid 
the  inference,  for  he  says  that  it  is  we,  who  had  been  sinners,  who  receive 
the  covenant  of  circumcision  through  baptism.  The  contrast  should  be 
noted  as  well  as  the  concordance. 

In  the  earliest  known  forms  of  the  Testimony  Book  anti-circumcision  is 
one  of  the  prominent  articles.  In  verse  3  we  have  something  like  an 
imitation  in  Theophilus,  ad  Autolycum,  iii.  15  : 

to.  yap  fxerayevearepa  ov  oWarai  iroulv  to.  aiTwv   Tvpoyiviarepa, 

a  reference  which  may  help  us  to  restore  the  lost  Greek. 
For  the  Baptismal  parallels,  we  may  take : 
Baptism  as  grace  (verse  6).     Basil  {P.  G.  col.  373) : 

X^fHV   A.6y€tv   to   /3a7rTioy/.a   €POS. 

For  baptism  as  seal;  and  as  mark  of  ownership.  Greg.  Naz.  (P.  G.  36, 
36i-4): 

acppay\<;   Sc,   <Ls  (rvvTJjpqcris,   kui  Trjs   8€o-7roT£tas   tov   Kvpiov   (rrj/xelov. 

For  baptism  as  dew  :  Ephrem,  Hymn  V  in  Epiph.,  verse  15  : 

(from  thy  dew  besprinkle  my  lowliness),  &c. 

We  need  not  suppose  that  '  dew '  acquires  a  merely  baptismal  connota- 
tion in  the  Syrian  service  books.  Here  are  a  few  stray  references  from 
a  volume  of  Jacobite  prayers  and  sequences. 

'  Thy  dew  (>*X)^)  of  grace  and  mercy 
Bedew  (xso>)  upon  the  faces  of  thy  worshippers.' 

This  reference  is  important  on  account  of  the  parallelism  with  the  eleventh 
Ode  v.  14  ('  my  face  received  the  dew '),  as  well  as  with  this  fourth  Ode  : 
and  it  is  certainly  not  baptismal. 


IV]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  227 

Again  : 

'Let  thy  dew  (^.Lj,  O  Lord  the  Saviour,  descend  to  Sheol,  and 
bedew  (usaaow)  upon  the  bones  of  the  faithful  departed.' 

Here,  again,  there  is  no  question  of  baptism,  for  the  faithful  dead  are 
assumed  to  have  been  baptised.  Apparently  the  ultimate  origin  of  the 
expression  as  applied  to  the  dead  rests  on  Isa.  xxvi.  19  : 

r/   yap   opocros   rj   irapa.   crov   'lafxa  olvtols   icrnv. 

Note  above  the  repetition  of  the  idea :  '  let  thy  dew  bedew '.  Here  is 
another  sentence  to  be  used  as  a  preface  to  the  35th  Ode  : 

'Bedew,  (j»o»)  O  Lord,  the  dew  (JJ)^)  of  thy  grace  upon  the 
thirsty  minds  of  our  souls,  that  are  dried  up  by  sin.' 

v.  9.  The  thought  in  verse  9  that  God  does  not  need  us,  but  that  we 
need  God,  is  a  common  religious  expression  in  Greek  and  early  Christian 
literature.  It  occurs,  for  instance,  in  the  Apology  of  Aris tides,  c.  1  :  'There 
is  no  deficiency  in  Him,  and  He  stands  in  need  of  nought,  but  everything 
stands  in  need  of  Him.' 

In  the  fourth  book  of  Irenaeus  against  Heresies  the  doctrine  becomes 
a  text  upon  which  Irenaeus  dilates  for  many  pages,  often  in  language 
suggesting  the  use  of  the  Odes,  and  like  the  Odes,  explaining  that  God 
gives  us  His  fellowship,  though  He  does  not  need  us,  nor  our  love,  nor  our 
gifts,  nor  our  sacrifices.     For  example  : 

'  Non  quasi  indigens  Deus  luminis,  plasmavit  Adam.' — Ed. 
Massuet,  p.  243. 

'In  quantum  enim  Deus  nullius  indiget,  in  tantum  homo  indiget 
Dei  communione.' — p.  244. 

'  et  communionem  habere  cum  Deo  :  ipse  quidem  nullius  indigens  ; 
eis  vero  qui  indigent  eius,  suam  praebens  communionem.' — p.  244. 

'  Ipse  quidem  nullius  horum  est  indigens.' — p.  244. 

'Nihil  tamen  indigente  Deo  ab  homine.' — p.  247. 

'  Haec  autem  gloriosum  quidem  faciebant  hominem,  id  quod  deerat 
ei  adimplentia,  id  est  amicitiam  Dei ;  Deo  autem  praestabant  nihil ; 
nee  enim  indigebat  Deus  dilectione  hominis.' — p.  247. 

'  Non  indigens  Deus  servitute  eorum non  indiget  Deus 

oblatione  eorum.' 

0  2 


228  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [iv 

'Sed  et  suis  discipulis  dans  consilium  primitias  Deo  offerre  ex  suis 
creaturis,  non  quasi  indigenti.' — p.  249. 

'  Offerrimus  autem  ei,  non  quasi  indigenti.  sed   gratias   agentes : 

Deus  non  indiget   eorum    qui  a  nobis  sunt,   sic  nos 

indigemus  offerre  aliquid  Deo.' — p.  251. 

The  same  formula  recurs  in  Bardaisan  : 

:  Everything  that  exists  is  in  need  of  the  Lord  of  all.' — Pair.  Syr. 
ii.  548. 

And  in  Ephrem  (perhaps  in  criticism  of  Bardaisan),  we  find  the 
statement : 

'The  Sons  of  Heresy  strove  to  interpret  (or  proclaim)  concerning 
Him,  that  He  is  in  no  need  whatever.' — ed.  Rom.  ii.  522. 

The  formula  turns  up  again  in  the  (late)  Hebrew  Testament  of 
Naphtali : 

'  It  is  not  that  He  hath  need  of  any  creature,  but  that  all  the 
creatures  in  the  world  have  need  of  Him.' — Test.  XII  Patr.,  ed. 
Charles,  p.  237.  6. 

v.  10.  The  reference  in  verse  10  to  'milk  and  honey'  may  be  taken 
allegorically  of  the  experience  of  souls  who  reach  the  spiritual  Land  of 
Promise,  or  symbolically  by  the  sacramental  use  of  milk  and  honey  in  the 
reception  of  newly-baptized  persons,  or  in  the  Eucharist  of  certain  non- 
Catholic  bodies.  There  are  certainly  traces  of  a  milk-and-honey  sacrament 
in  the  early  Church.  For  example,  in  the  Epistle  of  Barnabas,  we  have 
a  question  raised  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  milk  and  honey  in  the  Old 
Testament.  And  after  some  preliminary  allegorising  to  show  that  the 
believers  in  Jesus  are  themselves  the  good  land,  he  asks  '  Why  milk  and 
honey?'  And  the  answer  is  that  'the  young  child  is  first  quickened  with 
honey  and  then  with  milk.' ' 

Probably  this  refers  in  the  first  instance  to  a  folklore  custom  in 
connexion  with  newly-born  children,  but  it  seems  to  have  very  early 
developed  into  a  Christian  sacrament  for  new  converts,  who  had  been  born 
again  into  the  Kingdom  of  God. 

1  Besides  Barnabas,  we  may  refer  to  Tertullian,  De  Corona,  c  3  ('inde 
suscepti  lactis  et  mellis  concordiam  praegustamus '),  adv.  Marc.\.  14.  Clem. 
Alex.  Paed.  i.  6  (p.  128)  and  Coptic  Canons,  ii.  46. 


iv-v]  ODES   OF  SOLOMON  229 

The  baptismal  liturgy  of  the  Ethiopic  Church  will  furnish  a  good 
illustration  of  the  reception  of  the  neophyte  with  milk  and  honey : 

'  Discedentibus  lac  et  mel  datur  et  manu  capiti  imposita  hac 
benedictione  dimittuntur ;  ite  in  pace,  filii  baptismi.' * 

It  is  not,  however,  by  any  means  clear  that  the  c  milk  and  honey ' 
passages  in  the  Odes  will  bear  this  interpretation.  Ephrem  attacks  certain 
heretics  (probably  his  favourite  sport,  the  followers  of  Marcion  and 
Bardaisan),  who  practice  an  actual  Eucharist  in  milk  and  honey. 

'Instead  of  bread,  (figure  of)  the  show-bread,  they  offer  the 
sacrifice  of  honey  and  milk,  but  although  these  are  pure,  they  had  no 
right  to  disturb  by  these  (the  order  of  the  Church).  For  honey  was 
not  sufficient  for  a  sacrifice,  nor  milk  for  aspersion  and  libation.' — 
Ephrem.,  JR.  E.  ii.  543. 

ODE    V 

1  I  will  give  thanks  unto  thee,  O  Lord ; 
Because  I  love  thee : 

2  O  Most  High,  do  not  thou  forsake  me, 
For  thou  art  my  hope. 

3  Freely  I  have  received  thy  grace  ;  Cf.  Matt.  x.  8. 
I  shall  live2  thereby.                                                                            or,  May  I  live. 

4  My  persecutors  will  come  but  let  them  not  see  me.  Cf.  Jer.  xx.  n. 

5  Let  a  cloud  of  darkness  fall  on  their  eyes,  Cf.  Ps.  lix.  13  and 
And  let  an  air  of  thick  gloom  darken  them.  XIX"  23' 

6  And  let  them  have  no  light  to  see, 
That  they  may  take  hold  upon  me. 

7  Let  their  counsel  become  thick  darkness  :  Cf.  Ps.  vii.  16,  17. 
And  what  they  have  cunningly  devised,   let  it  return   upon 

their  own  heads. 

1  See  Trumpff,  Taufliturgie  der  Aeth.Kirche  xnAbhandl.  der  I.  Klasse  der 
K.  Akad.  d.  Wiss.  (1878,  Miinchen),  Bd.  XIV,  Abth.  iii,  S.  153. 

2  Or,  may  I  live. 


2.}o  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [v 

Cf.  Ps.  xxi.  12.  <S     For  they  have  devised  a  counsel, 

And  it  has  come  to  nought. 

Cf.  Copt.  (Powerful  as  they  were,  they  were  overcome). 

9     They  have  prepared  themselves  maliciously, 
And  were  found  to  be  ineffective. 

10     For  my  hope  is  upon  the  Lord; 
And  I  will  not  fear : 

Cf.  Ps.  xxvii.  i.         ii     And  because  the  Lord  is  my  salvation, 
I  will  not  fear. 

12     And  He  is  as  a  garland  on  my  head, 
And   I  shall  not  be  moved ; 

Cf.  Ps.  xxx.  7.  13     Even  if  everything  should  be  shaken, 

I  stand  firm  : 

14  And  if  (all)  things  visible  should  perish, 
I  shall  not  die ; 

15  Because  the  Lord  is  with  me, 
And  I  am  with  Him. 

Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  1.  In  comparing  the  Coptic  and  Syriac  texts  of  this  Ode,  we  are 
struck  at  once  by  the  Coptic  opening  ;  the  natural  translation  of  the  Coptic 
verb  is  '  manifestabo  tibi ' ;  and  we  should  at  first  sight  conclude  that  this 
is  a  misunderstanding  of  the  Syriac  text  by  the  substitution  of  )jJ^»coo  for 
U*»a^5 ;  i.e.  'I  will  make  known'  for  'I  will  give  thanks'.  It  should, 
however,  be  noted  that  if  the  Coptic  is  a  translation  from  the  Greek,  it  is 
certain  that  we  have  here  the  rendering  of  the  Greek  €^o/xoAoy»)o-o/xat 
exactly  as  in  Gen  xxix.  35  and  elsewhere.  There  is,  therefore,  no  difference 
between  the  Coptic  and  the  Syriac. 


v]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  231 

v.  5.  In  the  Syriac  known  to  us,  we  cannot  see  a  good  meaning  for 
the  plural  word  UIoolX  which  we  have  translated  from  the  context  by 
1  thick  darkness '.  This  rendering  is  suggested  by  the  root  Jl^.^,  when 
used  of  '  darkness '  or  '  tumour '.  If  it  is  not  a  word  completely  mutilated 
by  copyists,  it  must  be  registered  in  any  future  Syriac  dictionary.  It  seems 
to  refer  to  a  kind  of  mirage,  hallucination,  or  to  a  defect  in  perception, 
which  notion  is  generally  expressed  in  Syriac  with  a  plural  noun,  cf. 
)  1^*5,^1^.*.,  Ua*~,  Jjji'Oj.  One  might  also  suggest  a  substitute  Jl»«.=>U 
'  to  perdition,  to  nothing ',  which  would  answer  to  the  Coptic  '  inefficax ', 
but  it  is  rather  a  violent  change.  If  one  is  allowed  to  substitute  a  word, 
U^^a.^..,  which  is  used  in  verse  5,  would  be  the  best. 

In  verse  8  the  Coptic  has  the  equivalent  of 
'  nee  factum  est  illis  ', 
which  is  suspiciously  like  good  Syriac. 

Expository  Notes. 

The  interest  of  this  Ode  lies  in  the  fact  that  at  this  point  we  begin  to 
strike  the  coincidences  with  the  Pistis  Sophia.  The  latter  part  of  the  Ode 
from  the  twelfth  verse  was  similar  in  its  language  to  the  first  Ode  of  the 
collection,  and  led  to  a  misunderstanding  on  the  part  of  the  Gnostic 
Commentator,  who  mistook  one  Ode  for  the  other,  and  so,  providentially, 
preserved  for  us  in  his  comments  the  missing  first  Ode  in  the  collection. 
Whether  this  fifth  Ode  is  Christian  or  not  did  not  appear  decisively  at  the 
first  reading.  It  contains  a  somewhat  Jewish  section  in  verses  4-9,  with 
prayer  for  the  discomfiture  of  one's  enemies.  If  there  is  a  definite  Christian 
feature,  it  is,  perhaps,  the  garland  upon  the  singer's  head,  which  occurs  in 
several  Odes,  sometimes  in  a  definitely  Christian  context.  The  close  of 
the  Ode  is  a  noble  expression  of  trust  in  the  Lord,  amidst  adverse 
circumstances,  which  one  instinctively  compares  with  the  close  of  the 
eighth  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans.  We  do  not  doubt,  therefore, 
that  it  is  a  Christian  composition. 

The  writer  is  dependent  upon  the  Davidic  Psalter,  either  directly  or 
through  the  medium  of  a  book  of  extracts.  The  prayers  for  the  confusion 
of  one's  enemies  are  taken  ultimately  from  Psalm  lxviii.  (Ixix.)  22,  &c, 
from  which  Psalm  loans  are  made  in  Romans  xi.  9,  10  (the  anti-Judaic 
section  of  the  Epistle,  chiefly  made  up  out  of  Testimonia).  In  verse  10 
the  model  is  in  Psalm  xxvii.  1  :  '  The  Lord  is  my  light  and  my  salvation, 


232  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [v-vi 

whom  shall  I  fear?  The  Lord  is  the  strength  of  my  life,  of  whom  shall 
I  be  afraid  ? ' 

The  Syriac  is  a  little  nearer  to  the  Hebrew  ('  my  salvation ') ;  the 
Coptic  and  the  Greek,  ('thou  art  my  Saviour'). 

In  verse  2  the  Coptic  has  'O  Lord'  for  the  Syriac,  'O  Most  High'; 
The  Gnostic  Targum  has  in  a  neighbouring  clause,  '  O  light  (i.  e.  God)  of 
the  height '  ;  it  has  been  suggested  that  this  is  a  reflexion  from  the  Syriac 
1  Most  High ' ;  it  is  not  clear,  however,  that  the  clauses  are  parallel. 

In  verse  4  the  relation  between  the  Sahidic  and  Syriac  texts  is  again 
obscure :   the  Sahidic  has  '  fall '  for  the  Syriac  '  come ',  and  the  Gnostic 

Targum  appears  to  know  both  readings  :  for  it  has  '  Let  them  fall 

let  them  come  and  not  see  me '.  But  the  Syriac  also  has  '  fall '  in  verse  5 
for  the  Coptic  'cover'.  It  is  not  safe,  under  such  confusions  in  the  text 
to  draw  any  conclusions  as  to  the  relations  between  the  Gnostic  Targum 
and  the  Text. 

ODE    VI 

1  As  (the  hand)  moves  over  the  harp,  and   the  strings  speak  ; 

2  So  speaks  in  my  members  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord, 
And  I  speak  by  His  love. 

3  For  He  destroys  what  is  foreign, 
And  everything  is  of  the  Lord. 

4  For  thus  He  was  from  the  beginning, 
And  (shall  be)  to  the  end. 

5  That  nothing  should  be  His  adversary, 
And  nothing  should  stand  up  against   Him. 

1  Cor.  ii   12.  6     The  Lord  has  multiplied   His  knowledge; 

And  was   zealous  that  those  things  should  be  known  which 
by  His  grace  have  been  given  to  us. 
7     And  the  praise  of  His  name  He  gave  us:1 
Our  spirits  praise  His  holy  Spirit. 

1  Lit.  And  His  praise  He  gave  us  for  His  name. 


vi]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  233 

8  For  there  went  forth  a  stream,  Cf.  Sap.  Sol.  vii.  25. 
And  became  a  river  great  and  broad :                                           Cf.  Ezek.  xlvii. 

It  swept  away  everything,  and  broke  up  and   carried  away 
the  Temple. 

9  And   the   restraints    (made)    by   men    were    not    able   to    re- 

strain it, 
Nor  the  arts  of  those  whose  (business  it  is  to)  restrain  water. 

10  For  it  spread  over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth,  Cf.  Hab.  ii.  14. 
And  it  filled  everything. 

11  All  the  thirsty  upon  earth  were  given  to  drink  (of  it): 
And  thirst  was  done  away  and  quenched : 

12  For  from  the  Most  High  the  draught  was  given. 

13  Blessed  then  are  the  ministers  of  that  draught, 
Who  have  been  entrusted  with  that  water  of  His :  * 

14  They  have  assuaged  the  dry  lips, 

And  the  will  that  had  fainted  they  have  raised  up : 

15  And  souls  that  were  near  departing 
They  have  held  back  from  death  : 

]  6     And  limbs  that  had  fallen  Cf.  Isa.  xxxv.  3 ; 

Heb.  xii.  12. 
They  have  straightened  and  set  up : 

17  They  gave  strength  to  their  coming 
And  light  to  their  eyes. 

18  For  everyone  knew  them  in  the  Lord,  Cf.  Isa.  lxi.  9 ; 

J  John  iv.  14. 

And  they  lived  by  the  water  an  eternal  life. 
Hallelujah. 

1  Or,  its  water. 


234  DDKS    OF   SOLOMON  [VI 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  i.  )«/  'hand'  is  not  found  in  the  manuscript,  where  a  small  erasure 
has  caused  a  word  to  disappear,  leaving  only  the  final  alaph.  This  alapli 
seems  to  have  a  certain  stroke  joining  it  with  the  preceding  letter ;  in  this 
case  the  word  could  not  have  been  ]«-./  but  perhaps  i*.o»  'spirit'  (so 
Barnes),  or  another  short  vocable  ;  cf.  the  following  : 

)k.=>c&o?   I  —  Jo  w!^-»i    Ui_o     L000.0   )*>♦ 

wO     ;_"*>)     U,»OJ3*     L*0*0     O..SO     J*k~05     ^*30f 

Bar  Penkaye,  p.  147  ;  MS.  in  John  Rylands  Library. 

'  Behold  I  am  like  a  pen  in  the  hand  of  the  writer :  that  is  to  say, 
a  harp,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  sings  in  me.' 

We  have  a  possible  reminiscence  of  the  Odes  in  this  sentence  of  John 
of  Phenek. 

v.  3.  In  view  of  the  rules  dealing  with  the  attributive  adjective 
Schulthess  has  suggested  a  dalath  to  be  added  to  «;aaj  of  the  MS. 
In  poetry,  one  meets  occasionally  with  a  word  before  which  this  dalath 
has  been  omitted.  This  same  dalath  is  eliminated  frequently  after 
ipyjso  as  in 

^»^  wU)cu  w.jo     (Bar  Penkaye,  p.  70.) 

'Something  strange  happened  to  thee.' 
In  the   next  line,   Gressmann's  reading   )*-^o?   'recalcitrant'  instead  of 
ocx  L^»?  'of  the  Lord',  and  Grimme's  suggestion  of  Jj-^so  'bitter',  are 
not  necessary. 

v.  6.  Grimme's  emendation  of  t*^>c*-l.<  for  oomI/  of  the  MS.  is 
grammatically  erroneous.  The  addition  of  a  yodh  to  the  third  pers.  fern. 
plur.  also  frequently  used  by  copyists  is  not  warranted  by  the  Syriac 
Grammar  (cf.  Ode  vii.  20). 

v.  S.  The  translation  which  would  make  y+zc  "^  the  object  of  the 
three  verbs  "Si^,  ■s±~».o,  wfc^-Io,  and  which  would  take  the  lamadh  of 
Jia-cxX  as  dative  as  if  'it  swept  everything,  broke  up  (everything)  and 
brought  (everything)  to  the  temple'  is  the  less  probable,  because  (1)  it 
would  have  been  more  natural  in  Syriac  to  put  000  ^o  at  the  end  of  the 
verbs,  (2)  the  verb  would  be  logically  in  the  wrong  place ;  what  would 
'  break  up  everything  to  the  temple '  mean  in  Syriac  ?  That  the  verb 
wfcs-/  is  used  in  the  Odes  with  the  sense  of  '(waters)  carried'  is  evident 


vi]  ODES    OF.  SOLOMON  235 

from  Ode  xxxix.  1.  The  Coptic  text  is  perplexed  over  this  verb,  and  omits 
the  translation  ;  and,  wrongly  taking  the  Idfnadh  as  a  sign  of  dative 
and  reading  )U  for  «k—/,  exhibits  :  '  Attraxit  eos  omnes  (?)  et  conversa 
est  super  templum.'  Bacon,  quoting  Torrey,  suggests  for  the  last  words 
an  Aramaic  original  which  would  have  been  misunderstood  by  the 
translators ;  the  theory  is  that  the  original  was  a  Biblical  Aramaic, 
K?2t"b  TPX  N/1  '  and  there  was  nobody  to  impede '.  The  negative  X? 
would  have  disappeared  by  loss  or  by  neglect,  and  the  translators  would 
have  taken  the  TVN  as  a  verb  '  to  carry ',  whereas  it  simply  meant  '  there 
was  nobody  to  restrain '.  This  makes  an  excellent  introduction  to  the 
following  verses  about  the  restrainers. 

v.  18.  This  is  the  only  meaning  the  Syriac  sentence  can  have.  In 
adding  a  *  before  \'L*+  we  obtain  the  sense  of  the  Coptic  '  the  water  of  the 
eternal  life '. 

Expository  Notes. 

This  is  the  second  of  the  '  Temple '  Odes,  if  we  do  not  get  rid  of  the 
reference  to  the  Temple  in  the  text :  by  means  of  the  ingenious  suggestion 
made  by  Professor  Torrey  that  the  words  '  and  it  carried  away  the  Temple  ' 
might  be  a  perversion  of  an  original  Aramaic  expression  '  and  there  was 
none  to  restrain '.  We  do  not  propose,  however,  to  alter  the  text  at  this 
point ;  it  is  intelligible  as  it  stands. 

The  Ode  appears,  at  first  sight,  to  exhibit  a  change  of  subject  at  the 
eighth  verse,  where  the  stream  of  living  water  is  introduced.  The 
discontinuity  disappears  on  a  closer  study  of  the  preceding  verses,  in 
which  the  writer  shows,  by  way  of  preface,  that  it  is  impossible  to  resist 
God,  and  that  the  diffusion  of  His  knowledge  is  certain,  in  fact,  it  is 
already  accomplished.  He  has  in  mind  Habakkuk  ii.  14,  'the  earth  shall 
be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  as  the  waters  cover  the 
sea';  and  Psalm  lxxii.  19,  'Blessed  be  his  glorious  name  for  ever,  and  let 
the  whole  earth  be  filled  with  his  glory  V  The  first  of  these  passages  is 
the  key  to  verse  6,  '  The  Lord  has  multiplied  his  knowledge ',  and  to 
verse  10,  'It  spread  over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth  and  it  filled 
everything '.     The  tenth  verse  is  anticipated  in  the  sixth. 

The  passage  in  the  Psalm  is  the  reason  for  the  reference  to  the  praise 

1  Perhaps  also  we  should  refer  to  Sap.  Sol.  i.  7  :  '  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  has 
filled  the  earth.' 


236  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [VI 

of  His  glorious  name  in  verse  6.  We  can  see  the  mind  of  the  writer  at 
work.  He  then  proceeds  to  describe  the  flowing  out  of  the  waters  and 
their  destination.  The  Greek  term  employed  in  the  Coptic  Ode  (out  of 
which  the  writer  of  Pistis  Sophia  makes  such  extraordinary  Gnostic 
developments)  describes  the  flood  as  airoppota.  This  takes  us  to  the 
language  of  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  vii.  25,  where  wisdom  is  described  as 
'  an  effluence  of  the  glory  of  the  Creator '.  Here  again  we  have  the  idea 
of  the  diffusion  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God. 

Further,  the  restrainers  who  build  dykes  to  stop  the  flow  of  the  stream 
are  anticipated  in  verse  5  ('  Nothing  shall  stand  up  against  Him '). 

In  this  Psalm  we  are  again  fortunate  in  having  a  large  part  of  the 
Coptic  text  preserved  to  us ;  and  as  is  common  in  Coptic  texts,  Greek 
words  are  exhibited  in  it.  It  was  the  occurrence  of  the  Greek  word 
a-rroppoia,  and  the  use  of  it  by  the  Gnostic  writer  Pistis  Sophia,  which  led 
Ryle  and  James  to  suggest,  with  some  hesitation,  that  the  Odes  are 
Gnostic,  in  which  supposition  they  were  followed  for  a  time  by  Harnack 
(Hist,  of  Dogma,  i.  207,  note).  Ryle  and  James  were,  however,  careful  to 
say  that  '  We  cannot  see  that  there  is  anything  unmistakably  Gnostic  in 
the  doctrine ' ;  and  Harnack  has  also,  since  the  publication  of  the  complete 
Odes,  withdrawn  the  suggestion. 

The  comparison  of  the  Syriac  and  Coptic  texts  in  this  Ode  is  very 
instructive.  In  verse  9  the  Coptic  has  a  text  which  involves  a  Syriac 
JoIxr>  ('buildings')  in  place  of  JjINo  ('restraints').  Clearly  the  latter  is 
the  right  form,  and  corresponds  to  the  presence  of  «o»ojio  and  ».\o. 

In  verse  14  the  Coptic  has  converterunt,  which  suggests  a  Syriac 
text  o^xs/  or  o-o—/  instead  of  a***j/,  which  is  clearly  the  right  reading. 
In  the  latter  half  of  the  verse  the  translation  of  the  Coptic  text  is  in  error 
and  there  are  two  letters  missing  in  the  text  itself:  'accipiebant  gaudium 
cordis  qui  soluti  erant ',  should  be  corrected  to  'propositum  cordis',  which 
would  answer  to  the  Syriac ;  and  instead  of  accipiebant  the  addition  of 
the  letters  ce '  to  the  verb  give  us  elevabant  which  answers  to  the  Syriac 

More  difficult  is  the  variation  in  verse  17,  where  we  have  apparently 
■n-apovaia  underlying  the  Syriac,  and  wappqaia  underlying  the  Coptic.  The 
parallelism   between   the  second   clauses   of  the    14th   and    16th   verses 

1  A-yxice  for  e/yxi. 


VI]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  237 

should  be  noted  (clsc.*.©/),  and  it  is  natural  to  infer  that  to  the  paralysed 
will  we  should  affirm  paralysed  limbs.  But  this  takes  us,  as  suggested  in 
the  margin,  into  Isaiah  xxxv  (to.  irapa\e\vp.4va  yovaTa),  and  makes  it 
increasingly  likely  that  for  irapova-ia  we  should  read  some  word  expressing 
'  paralysis '. 

We  cannot,  however,  regard  the  question  of  the  reading  as  satisfactorily 
settled.  There  is  something  to  be  said  for  the  Coptic  -n-app-qo-La.  It  is 
a  word  which  had  almost  an  esoteric  meaning  in  early  Christian  circles, 
and  in  the  New  Testament  it  describes  the  Christian  attitude  before  the 
judges  of  earth  and  the  Judge  of  Heaven.  It  may  turn  out  to  be  the  right 
word ;  in  that  case  the  Syriac  is  simply  a  misreading  of  an  original  or 
transliterated  Greek  from  irapprjcrLa  to  -rrapova-La.  No  other  satisfactory 
suggestions  have  been  made.  Gressmann  1  suggests  appiaa-ria,  which  is 
a  long  way  off  either  the  Syriac  or  the  Sahidic.  It  would  make  excellent 
sense,  and  a  perfect  parallel. 

The  last  verse  of  the  Ode  is  obscure.  What  does  it  mean  that  '  every 
one  knew  them  in  the  Lord  '  ?  Is  it  any  clearer  if  we  translate  '  They  all 
recognized  one  another  in  the  Lord '  ? 

Perhaps  the  Odist  is  drawing  upon  Isaiah  lxi.  9  :  'all  that  see  them 
shall  acknowledge  them ',  but  then  an  additional  clause  is  required.  We 
may  imagine  a  sentence 

'  Every  one  acknowledged  them 
(That  they  are  the  Israel  of  God) ' ; 

and  the  concluding  half-verse  might  then  be  an  imitation  of 

'  Israel  shall  be  saved  in  the  Lord  with  an  everlasting  salvation ' : 
for  '  to  live  an  eternal  life '  is,  in  Syriac,  a  good  translation  for  '  to  be  saved 
with  an  eternal  salvation '  (Isa.  xlv.  1 7).  We  leave  it  as  an  unsolved  problem. 
This  Ode  is  one  of  those  that  furnish  the  strongest  ground  for  the 
belief  in  a  Greek  original.  The  a-n-oppoia  of  which  the  Ode  speaks  has 
been  shown  to  be  a  characteristic  term,  of  the  Wisdom-Christology  ;  and 
it  has  also  been  pointed  out  that  the  Odes  are  strongly  marked  in  other 
places  by  the  doctrine  of  the  Divine  Wisdom  which  the  Christians  identified 
with  Jesus  Christ. 

As,  however,  there  is  a  good  deal  of  evidence  in  favour  of  the  belief 

1  Deutsche  LZ.,  191 1,  No.  46. 


23S  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [vi 

that  the  Odes  were  originally  written  in  Aramaic  and  not  in  Greek,  it 
becomes  proper  to  inquire  what  re-statement  or  alternative  interpretation 
ought  in  that  case  to  be  made  of  the  Ode  before  us. 

It  will  still  be  true  that  the  flowing  stream  is  the  stream  of  the  Divine 
Knowledge  which  covers  the  whole  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea,  and 
which  is  identified  by  the  sequence  of  the  Ode  with  the  Holy  Spirit ;  but 
ought  we  any  longer  to  lay  stress  on  the  term  diroppoia  if  that  term  only 
comes  in  by  way  of  a  translation  ?  Is  there  any  alternative  origin  for  the  river  ? 
In  this  connexion  we  may  observe  that  amongst  the  titles  given  to 
Christ  in  the  Testimony  Books,  we  not  only  find  that  Christ  is  identified 
with  Sophia,  but  we  find  traces  of  the  description  of  Him  under  the  title 
of  River. 

Eusebius  in  his  treatise  against  Marcellus  enumerates  a  number  of  titles 
of  Christ  with  appropriate  proof-texts,  nearly  all  of  which  are  traditional 
Testimonial.     Amongst  them  we  find 

1  And  he  was  called  River  by  the  one  who  said,  The  rushings  of  the 
river  make  glad  the  City  of  God  :    (Ps.  xlvi.  4).'— Euseb.  c.  Marcel. 
i,  p.  97. 
So  the  suggestion  arises  whether  this  passage  in  the  Psalm  may  be  the 
theme  of  our  Odist.     The  passage  turns  up  again  in  the  Demonstrate 
Evangelica  of  Eusebius,  in  sequence  with  the  25th  chapter  of  Isaiah,  and 
Eusebius,  having  quoted  the  Psalm,  proceeds  to  say  that  'this   passage 
indicates  the  unremittent  flow  (i-nippoijv)  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  which  has  its 
source  from  above  and  waters  the  City  of  God '.     We  notice  how  near 
Eusebius  came  to  calling  the  river  in  the  Psalm  an  air6ppoia.     Augustine, 
too,  in  commenting  upon  the  Psalm,  asks  the  question  : 
'Qui  sunt  isti  impetus  fluminis?' 
and  replies, 

'  Inundatio  ilia  Spiritus  sancti,  de  quo  Dominus  dicebat,'  &c 
Now  let  us  see  whether,  on  the  hypothesis  that  the  46th  Psalm  has  been 
used  by  the  Odist,  we  can  find  any  linguistic  agreement  between  the  Ode 
and  the  Psalm  in  Syriac  or  in  the  Aramaic  of  the  Targum. 

The  verse  which  we  have  to  discuss  is  translated  in  English,  following 
the  Hebrew,  as  follows  : 

'  There  is  a  river,  the  streams  whereof  make  glad  the  City  of  God, 
the  holy  place  of  the  Tabernacles  of  the  Most  High.' 


vi]  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  239 

The  Syriac,  however,  and  the  Targum  do  not  translate  like  this ;  they 
begin  with  '  Streams  of  rivers ',  and  we  notice  that  the  word  for  '  stream  '  is 
precisely  the  word  Ji9i  in  the  Ode.  Here,  then,  we  may,  perhaps  find  the 
origin  of  the  '  brook  '  or  '  stream  '  that  became  a  '  river '. 

In  the  next  place  we  notice  that  the  river  is  to  irrigate  the  City  of  God, 
and  in  particular  the  sanctuary.  Here,  then,  we  have  the  suggestion  that  the 
river  which  sweeps  everything  away  and  brings  to  the  Temple  (Jla-c*^  »*&-»( ) 
does  precisely  what  the  Psalm  says  it  ought  to  do :  there  is,  perhaps,  no 
need  to  alter  the  text  at  all,  even  by  the  insertion  of  an  object.  If,  however, 
we  like  to  make  a  free  emendation,  it  would  be  possible  to  read 
JL*-©^  w~-  'it  made  glad  the  Temple';  but  this  is  not  quite  fair  to  the 
existing  text.     Why  should  it  not  simply  come  to  the  Temple  ? 

The  Targum  on  the  Psalm  has  a  curious  interpretation  of  the  streams 
and  the  City  ;  it  says  : 

'  The  peoples  are  like  rivers  and  their  fountains :  they  come  and 
make  glad  the  City  of  God  ;  and  they  pray  in  the  Holy  House  of  God, 
in  the  tabernacle  of  the  Most  High.' 

This  brings  out  again  the  connexion  between  the  streams  and  the 
Temple  :  they  are  streams  of  proselytes,  according  to  the  Targum.  There 
is,  however,  not  much  linguistic  parallel  between  the  Targum  and  the  Ode. 
On  the  whole,  it  appears  to  be  possible  that  the  Odist  has  the  46th  Psalm 
in  mind,  especially  since  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  the  '  river '  in  that 
Psalm  was  an  ancient  Christian  testimony. 

A  further  alternative  interpretation  may  be  offered.  The  question 
arises  whether  this  stream,  which  we  have  identified  with  the  Knowledge 
of  the  Lord,  which  is  to  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea,  is  not 
immediately  derived  from  the  24th  chapter  of  Sirach,  where  Wisdom 
enunciates  her  own  praises.  In  v.  30  she  says  '  I came  out  as  a  stream  from 
a  river ',  and  in  v.  31  with  a  change  in  the  metaphor, 

'  My  stream  became  a  river,  and  my  river  became  a  sea  ! ' 
The  parallel  with  the   Ode  is  very  close  and  suggestive.     We  may  also 
compare  v.  25 

[The  Most  High]  maketh  wisdom  abundant  as  Phison  and  as  Tigris, 
with  the  language  of  the  Ode, 

The  Lord  has  multiplied  the  knowledge  of  himself. 
Unfortunately  the  Syriac  version  of  Sirach  does  not  help  us  here. 


24° 


ODES   OF   SOLOMON 


[VII 


ODE    VII 


Euseb.  D.  E.  vi.  9. 
Cf.  John  i.  12. 


Cf.  John  i.  I. 

Cf.  Prov.  viii.  22 
(LXX). 


1  As  is  the  motion  of  anger  over  evil. 

So  is  the  motion  of  joy  over  the  Beloved, 
And  brings  in  of  its  fruits  without  restraint. 

2  My  joy  is  the  Lord,  and  my  motion  is  towards  Him  : 
This  path  of  mine  is  excellent. 

3  For  I  have  a  Helper,  to  the  Lord. 

He   hath   shown    Himself  to    me    without    grudging    in    His 

simplicity ; 
Because  His  kindness  has  minished   His  greatness. 

4  He  became  like  me  that  I  might  receive  Him. 

In  similitude    was    He  reckoned   like  me,  that    I   might    put 
Him  on. 

5  And  I  trembled  not  when  I  saw  Him ; 
Because  He  was  gracious  to  me. 

6  Like  my  nature  He  became,  that  I  might  learn  Him. 
And  like  my  form,  that  I  might  not  turn  back  from  Him. 

7  The  Father  of  Knowledge 
Is  the  Word  of  Knowledge : 

8  He  who  created  Wisdom 
Is  wiser  than  His  works : 

9  And  He  who  created  me  when  yet  I  was  not 
Knew x  what  I  should  do  when  I  came  into  being : 

1  MS.  'knows'. 


vn]  ODES   OF  SOLOMON  241 

10  Wherefore  He  pitied  me  in  His  abundant  grace 

And  granted  me  to  ask  from  Him  and  to  receive  from  His 
sacrifice ; 

1 1  For  He  it  is  that  is  incorrupt ; 

The  perfection  of  the  worlds  and  the  Father  of  them.  Cf.  Isa.  ix.  6  (Heb  )• 

12  He  hath  given  Him  to  appear  to  them  that  are  His;  Cf.  John  i.  11. 
That  they  may  recognize  Him  that  made  them  ; 

And  that  they  might  not  suppose  that  they  came  of  themselves.  Cf.  Ps.  c.  3. 

13  For  it  is  to  Knowledge  He  hath  appointed  His  way;  Cf.  Prov.  viii.  22. 
He  hath  widened  it  and   extended  it  and  brought  it  to  all 

perfection. 

14  And  He  set  over  it  the  traces  of  His  light ; 

And  it  proceeded  therein  even  from  the  beginning  to  the  end.  Cf.  Sap.  Sol.  viii.  1. 

15  For  by  Him  He  was  served, 

And  He  was  pleased  with  the  Son;  Cf.  Mark  i.  1 1, &c. 

16  And   because    of  His   salvation    He  will   take  possession  of  Cf-  Matt.  xi.  27. 

everything ; 
And  the  Most  High  shall  be  known  in  His  saints  : 

17  To  announce  to  those  that  have  songs  of  the  coming  of  the 

Lord 
That  they  may  go  forth  to  meet  Him  and  may  sing  to  Him,  Cf.  Matt.  xxv.  6. 
With  joy  and  with  the  harp  of  many  tones. 

18  The  Seers  shall  go  before  Him, 
And  they  shall  be  seen  before  Him ; 

19  And  they  shall  praise  the  Lord  in  His  love ; 
Because  He  is  near  and  seeth ; 

11  R 


242  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [vn 

20  And  hatred  shall  be  taken  from  the  earth  ; 
And  along  with  jealousy  it  shall  be  drowned : 

21  For  ignorance  hath  been  destroyed; 

Because  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  hath  arrived. 

22  Let  the  Singers  sing  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Most  High; 
And  let  them  bring  their  songs; 

»         23a   And  let  their  heart  be  like  the  day, 

And    like    the    excellent    beauty    of    the    Lord,    their    har- 
monies ; 

Cf.  1  Cor.  xiv.  7, 10.  23b   And  let  there  be  nothing  without  life, 
Nor  without  knowledge,  nor  dumb. 

24  For  (the  Lord)  hath  given  a  mouth  to  His  creation, 

To  open  the  voice  of  the  mouth  towards  Him  ;  and  to  praise 
Him  ; 

25  Confess  l  ye  His  power ; 
And  show  forth  His  grace. 

Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  1.  We  could  take  the  verb  ,V^so  in  both  meanings  (a)  'He 
causes  to  enter,  introduces '  from  UN  v  ;  (i>)  '  He  gives,  yields  fruits ' 
(Ar.  J-c\)  from  )k.^,b>.v.     The  second  meaning  is  more  appropriate. 

v.  3.  We  have  suggested  in  the  text  that  this  sentence  might  be 
regarded  as  an  attempt  to  translate  (3orj0bv  yap  Zxw  tov  Kv'piov,  but  in  taking 
the  lamadh  of  U^ftN.  as  meaning  direction  to,  we  should  have  the  good 
literal  meaning  '  Because  I  have  a  helper  to  the  Lord ',  as  Labourt  rightly 
suggests.     In  the  preceding  verse,  there  is  a  mention  of  the  way  of  the 

1  Perhaps  'Manifest'. 


vii]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  243 

Odist  to  his  Lord ;  his  way  is  easy  and  good,  and  he  is  joyful  in  walking 
in  it  towards  God  because  he  has  the  Christ  as  a  companion  and  helper 
who,  in  his  own  words,  'showed  Himself  (or  His  soul)  to  me,  'without 
grudging  in  His  simplicity'.  That  this  is  probably  the  meaning  of  the 
sentence  is  also  attested  by  the  fact  that  it  is  the  Odist  who  is  speaking 
here,  and  not  the  Lord  Christ  who  showed  Himself  to  him.  The  Father 
of  the  Lord  comes  in  verses  12,  15,  16,  where,  especially  in  this  last  verse, 
He  is  called  bo-*:*)  'The  Most  High'.  It  is  worth  noticing  that  in 
Ode  viii,  verses  6,  8  where  the  word  Juiooo  '  helper'  occurs,  there  is  also 
the  same  occurrence  of  both  J-iso  and  Joo-»i.'so;  in  Ode  xxi.  2,  this 
'helper'  who  is  the  Lord  is  again  assisting  the  Odist.  In  Ode  xxv.  2, 
God  is  again  the  '  helper '  of  the  Odist. 

The  expression  )oflm~  JJ?  equivalent  to  acjiOovws  is  frequently  used 
in  Syriac  literature,  e.  g. 

rim..   JJ?   ^.is^otcuio    K-VS.*.   U.'Sa    L*^    Jjoo 

'  In   this   propitious   month   Thy   bounty   overflowed    abundantly 
upon  all.' — Ephr.  ed.  Lamy,  II,  773. 

Cf.  also  in  the  Roman  edition  II,  453 ;  III,  72,  88  and  in  Spic.  Syr.,  p.  o». 
Cf.  also 

Bar  Penkaye,  p.  99  (MS.  in  John  Rylands  Library),  ibid.,  p.  2. 
'  They  give  without  grudging  as  it  was  given  to  them.' 

The  use  of  the  expression  does  not  necessarily  imply  translation. 

In  the  next  line,  Connolly  has  argued  that  o»Ici^aa3  might  be  a 
translation  of  a-n-XoTrjs,  'liberality'  and  'simplicity'.  If  this  surmise  is 
considered  as  possible,  it  holds  good  in  Syriac  also,  where  the  word  has 
the  more  appropriate  meaning  of  '  kindness ',  '  gentleness ',  '  meekness ' ; 
see  Vocabulaire  chaldeen-arabe,  and  Dictionnaire  de  la  langae  chaldeenne. 
One  might  also  compare  the  sense  of  the  word  in  Odes  xxvii.  3 ;  xlii.  2, 
in  the  sense  of  '  outstretching  [of  hands] ',  '  extension ',  and  possibly 
'  crucifixion ' 

In  the  third  line  the  opinion  expressed  by  Labourt  that  instead  of 
o»Lo^fiL*jtts  we  might  read  )iovunr>-^  is  improbable  without  changing  the 
verb  ii^j/  as  well. 

R  2 


244  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [vn 

v.  6.  Frankenberg  unnecessarily  suggests  that  for  the  meaningless  (!) 
waa^\If  we  should  read  wo»o.*aj^|».  The  Syriac  word  is  the  aorist  of 
the  verb  A^II  and  is  lexicographically  and  grammatically  correct. 

v.  7.  In  this  verse,  the  word  Knowledge  is  used  as  an  equivalent  of 
Truth  and  Wisdom,  as  appears  from  the  next  verse  which  is  a  reflection 
of  the  great  Wisdom  passage  in  Proverbs  (viii.  22): 

'The  Lord  created  me  (Wisdom)  the  beginning  of  His  ways,' 

to  which  verse  the  writer  returns  in  verse  13  : 

'  He  hath  appointed  Knowledge  as  His  way.' 

That  the  writer  has  the  Wisdom  passages  in  his  mind  appears  again  from 
verse  14,  where  Knowledge  is  said  to  'proceed  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end ',  which  appears  to  be  Sap.  Sol.  viii.  1  : 

'  She  (Wisdom)  extendeth  from  end  unto  end  mightily.' 

v.  10.  Nestle  has  suggested  that  the  original  was  the  Greek  ov<rla 
which  the  Syriac  translator  read  Ovcria.  This  is  a  possible  but  somewhat 
daring  hypothesis.  For  a  right  understanding  of  the  Syriac  word  which 
means  also  'favour',  'gift',  the  following  sentence  of  Ephrem  may  be 
quoted  : 

^vUj  ]k>j-.3?  Af  t^sorJ  l^-1*-  &U  low  Jos  ))>  v0^,*3 

'  He  [Christ]  was  not  ashamed  of  sleeping  and  of  soliciting  benefactions.' 

II,  514  (£.  E.) 

Connolly  suggests  that  the  word  might  have  been  alasj  'His  greatness', 
or  o»Lq-sc>  'His  likeness'.  With  less  probability  Bruston  substitutes 
c*kw*^r>v,  Grimme  c*b^»^  ^se,  and  Brockelmann  o»fc^>».  Taking  the 
word  in  the  sense  of  'gift',  'munificence',  'favour',  which,  as  we  have 
seen,  it  possesses  in  Syriac,  the  sentence  would  read  '  And  granted  me  to 
ask  from  Him  and  to  receive  from  His  largesse '. 

v.  12.  Wellhausen,  followed  by  Kittel,  considers  <*X  as  a  reflexive 
pronoun  and  translates  '  Er  lasst  sich  schauen  von  den  Seinen '.  We 
consider  this  to  be  improbable  in  Syriac;  further,  in  verse  10  of  the  Ode, 
and  in  many  other  verses,  the  verb  oom  is  always  used  with  the  pronouns 
in  the  sense  of  '  to  give  to '. 

v.  13.     It  is  possible  to  translate  as  above  '  For  knowledge  He  hath 


VII]  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  .      245 

set  as  His  way '  (so  also  Connolly).  The  Synac  wording,  however,  would 
be  somewhat  weak.  Ode  xviii.  7,  contains  a  similar  phrase,  and  in  view 
of  the  uncertainty  of  the  real  meaning  of  the  sentence,  we  have  left  in  the 
translation  a  rendering  which  is  more  in  harmony  with  the  ordinary  course 
of  a  Syriac  way  of  expression. 

Frankenberg  suggests  the  elimination  of  the  fern.  He  from  opaxe. 
This  is  good  but  not  necessary.  When  emphasis  is  intended  in  a  sentence 
the  suffixes  may  be  used  redundantly. 

v.  14.  One  could  also  translate  Uino  'and  I  walked'.  We  have 
retained  the  reading  of  the  MS.  which,  by  exhibiting  a  dot  over  the 
taw,  induces  us  to  translate  '  it  proceeded ',  referring  by  it  to  '  way '. 
Gressmann  proposes  to  read  )k.a^o»o  '  steps ',  and  Frankenberg  ^00. 

The  expression  '  the  traces  of  the  light '  (J.\vq  tov  qWos)  is  obscure ; 
it  occurs  again  in  Ode  xv.  6,  and  evidently  has  a  special  meaning :  the 
Ixvq  are  footprints  which  one  follows  :  the  context  suggests  walking. 

v.  15.  Instead  of  >..*,N<>  'He  was  served'  or  'wrought'  of  the  MS., 
we  have  suggested  the  slight  emendation  of  — ^».  '  He  was  sent '. 

We  cannot  say  '  By  it  (knowledge)  He  was  served ',  on  account  of  the 
feminine  suffix  required  in  that  case ;  so  we  render  '  By  Him '  and  refer 
back  to  verse  12. 

In  the  last  clause  of  the  verse  a  similar  difficulty  arises :  we  have 
rendered  it  as  '  the  Father  pleased  in  the  Son '  rather  than  '  Wisdom  (the 
Mother) '. 

It  is  possible  that  we  have  here  an  allusion  to  God's  delight  in  Wisdom 
as  his  chief  workman  (Prov.  viii.  30),  the  '  Son '  having  displaced  the 
original  Wisdom-idea.  In  that  case  we  should  have  read  ojJ-so  for  o*J-ao 
(the  mere  addition  of  a  single  dot). 

v.  1 7.  Frankenberg's  suggestion  that  we  should  eliminate  the  ddlath 
of  otfcs-ljoas?  and  consider  the  word  as  a  direct  complement  to  oomNTtN 
is  not  necessary,  in  spite  of  the  plausible  meaning  which  the  sentence 
would  have  :   To  announce  the  coming  of  the  Lord  to  .  .  . 

Bruston  proposes  to  read  o;^ao  pb*  l  announce  well '.  This  emendation 
is,  however,  improbable,  inasmuch  as  an  expletive  particle  is  commonly 
placed  after  the  verb;  further,  it  is  obviously  erroneous  to  use  here  the 
particle  yvik  in  the  sense  of  '  well '. 

v.  18.     The  suggestion  made  by  Gressmann  and  followed  by  Kittel 


246  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [vn 

that  Ujl.  can  be  taken  as  a  past  participle  UWj  is  not  very  good  as  far  as 
the  Syriac  is  concerned.     The  paronomasia  in  the  text  should  be  noted. 

v.  19.  Gressmann  unnecessarily  proposes  Jj—o  'and  He  is  seen'  for 
Jl-o  'and  He  sees'  of  the  MS. 

v.  20.  Cod  H  has  u^a^U.  A  yodh  is  frequently  added  by  the 
copyist  at  the  end  of  the  3rd  pers.  fern.  sing,  of  the  aorist.  Its  insertion  is 
more  frequent  in  modern  than  in  ancient  manuscripts,  and  in  the  case  of 
the  two  MSS.  of  the  Odes,  it  is  much  less  used  by  B  than  by  H. 
Grammatically  this^*?^  is  erroneous.     See  Mingana,  Syr.  Gram.,  No.  204. 

v.  23.  Gressmann  proposes  unnecessarily  yoo»fcooAj  'their  breath' 
for  .cotl^.viij  'their  harmonies'.  Grimme,  favoured  by  Kittel,  considers 
U^j?  to  be  a  mistake  for  U-aj?  '  etwas  Widerstrebendes '.  This  emendation 
does  not  seem,  however,  to  be  in  harmony  with  the  verse.  Probably 
a  JJ»  which  appears  twice  in  the  following  member  of  the  verse,  has  by 
inadvertence  been  omitted  by  the  scribe.  The  meaning  it  gives  is  obvious 
and  appropriate.     Connolly's  suggestion  *.[si  becomes  unnecessary. 

v.  24.  Gressmann  unnecessarily  proposes  bca.30  Jl_o  'voice  and 
mouth'  instead  of  J^sas?  Jlo  '  the  voice  of  the  mouth '  of  the  MS. 

v.  25.  In  the  text  we  have  printed  Jlajkbk*~  and  added  the  following 
note,  '  Perhaps  o»!gj1^>.*~  '.  As  it  happens,  this  is  actually  the  reading 
of  the  MS. ! 

Expository  Notes. 

There  are  a  number  of  obscurities  in  this  Ode,  both  in  the  text  and  in 
the  translation.  We  have  not  succeeded  in  resolving  them  all.  It  is 
clear  that  the  Odist  is  occupied  in  the  first  instance  with  the  Incarnation, 
considered  as  a  diminution  of  Deity  for  the  sake  of  the  human  race,  who  are 
thus  made  capable  of  an  elevation  that  should  correspond  with  the  Divine 
descent.  Salvation  consists  in  the  right  understanding  of  this  mystery  ;  it 
is  a  case  of  Salvation  by  Knowledge,  so  that  on  the  surface  it  might  seem 
as  if  the  Hymn  were  Gnostic :  but  not  all  that  affects  Gnosis  is  Gnostic. 

The  word  which  we  have  translated  '  impulse '  in  verse  1  is  literally 
'  running '.  The  suggestion  arises  as  to  whether  the  language  may  not  be 
based  upon  Cant.  i.  3,  '  Draw  me,  we  will  run  after  thee ',  where  the 
person  addressed  is  the  Beloved.  Thus  the  identification  of  the  Beloved 
leads  to  the  identification  of  Canticles  as  the  source  of  the  'running'.  It 
is  a  'chase  of  joy',  because  the  text  in  Canticles  goes  on  with  'we  will 


vii]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  247 

rejoice  and  exult  in  thee '.     The  '  helper '  in  v.  3  of  the  Ode  may,  perhaps, 
be  involved  in  ' draw  me,  we  will  run'. 

If  the  foregoing  identification  of  the  sources  of  the  Odist  is  correct, 
we  need  have  no  doubt  that  the  title  Odes  of  Solomon  is  primitive,  and 
that  the  Odes  have  been  attached  to  the  group  of  Salomonic  writings. 

Dr.  Abbott  has  made  a  similar  suggestion  of  dependence  upon 
Canticles  (see  139  ff.). 

We  had  the  advantage  for  the  interpretation  of  this  Ode  in  the 
discovery  of  quotations  made  from  it  by  certain  early  Fathers.  The  most 
important  was  a  passage  in  Eusebius,  Demonstratio  Evangelica  (vi.  9, 
p.  267),  to  which  we  have  drawn  attention  in  a  previous  chapter.  We 
showed  that  Eusebius,  commenting  on  the  144th  Psalm,  explains  that  the 
Word  of  God,  out  of  His  kindness  to  men  and  His  knowledge  of  them, 
minished  Himself  of  His  proper  greatness,  in  order  to  make  the  human 
race  worthy  of  His  own  knowledge.  The  coincidence  in  the  language  and 
in  the  thought  with  the  expressions  and  ideas  of  the  Ode  enabled  us  to  say 
that  Eusebius  had  the  Ode  in  his  mind  and  was  using  it.  We  were  able 
to  show  that  the  Ode  had  also  been  used  in  Syriac  by  the  Acts  of  Thomas, 
(ed.  Wright,  p.  ^-w),  a  reference  which  was  valuable,  in  view  of  the 
known  antiquity  of  these  Acts  and  their  Gnostic  character. 

The  argument  of  the  Odist  that  the  Word  became  like  us  in  order  that 
we  might  become  like  him,  may  be  illustrated  from  Ephrem's  Carmina 
Nisibena  (No.  3,  p.  79) : 

'  He   Himself  in   His  goodness  put  on  the  human  form,   that   He 

might  gather  us  together  and  make  us  like  to  Himself. These 

things  were  done  to  our  advantage,  because  that  nature  (///.  substance) 
became  like  to  us,  in  order  that  we  might  become  like  to  it.' 

It  is  quite  possible  that  Ephrem  is  working  from  our  Ode  as  a  base. 

The  same  thing  is  true  of  the  fourth  of  the  Epiphany  Hymns,  where 
the  language  is  used  of  the  putting  on  of  Christ  in  the  act  of  baptism,  by 
those  who  have  previously  put  off  the  old  man  symbolically  by  a  change  of 
raiment.     Thus  we  are  told  : 

iv.  n.  'How  did  the  great  one,  who  in  His  love  was  minished 
(low  j~^!»)  become  persecuted  by  those  who  denied  Him,  and  was 
adored  by  the  watching  (angels) ' ! 

12.  'Let  us  become  like  Him  who  made  Himself  less  than  all  and 
who  being  thus  minished  made  all  men  great.' 
(See  also  Ephrem.  R.  E.  iii.  55,  58,  132). 


248  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [vil 

The  Incarnation  is  regarded  as  the  Incarnation  of  the  pre-existent 
Logos,  who  is  here  spoken  of  under  the  term  Wisdom,  in  harmony  with 
the  language  of  Prov.  viii.  22  ('  the  Lord  created  me  ').  It  is  important  to 
note  that  the  verse  of  Proverbs  is  here  used  in  the  language  of  the  LXX  : 
Krpios  Iktutc  /xe'  Elsewhere  the  Odist  uses  the  same  passage  in  the 
Hebrew  form,  '  the  Lord  possessed  me ' ;  see  Ode  xli.  Thus,  if  the  unity 
of  the  Odes  be  conceded,  the  author  was  acquainted  with  both  forms  of 
the  text,  which  is  more  than  can  be  said  of  the  Christian  teachers  for  the 
next  two  centuries,  who  systematically  bombard  the  Jew  with  the  text 
of  the  LXX. 

As  the  Incarnation  is  the  incarnation  of  the  Divine  Wisdom,  it  was 
natural  that  salvation  should  consist  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  and 
that  we  should  have  an  article  in  the  creed  on  the  Abolition  of  Ignorance 
corresponding  to  the  conventional  one  on  the  Forgiveness  of  Sins.  The 
writer  says  so  positively,  verse  13  : 

'To  Knowledge  He  hath  appointed  His  way:'1 

(which  is  a  variation  on  Prov.  viii.  22,  'The  Lord  created  me  His  way'); 
and  yerse  27  : 

'  Ignorance  hath  been  destroyed  because  the  Knowledge  of  the 
Lord  has  arrived.' 
We  have  shown  in  a  previous  chapter  that  traces  of  this  formula  are  to  be 
found  in  the  letters  of  Ignatius : 

r)<f>avi£(TO   KaKtas  dyvota"   KaOyptiTO  7raAaia  /Jucri/Wu. 

the  new  Kingdom  is  inferred  to  be  the  Knowledge  of  the  Lord.  We  see 
now  that  our  position  in  regard  to  the  airoppoia  (of  Wisdom)  in  Ode  vi, 
that  it  represents  the  Knowledge  of  the  Lord  which  covers  the  earth,  was 
a  correct  one. 

Ignatius  continues  his  reference  to  the  abolition  of  ignorance  with  the 
words  '  When  God  was  manifested  as  man  for  the  renewal  of  eternal  life '; 
the  abolition  was  the  result  of  the  incarnation,  exactly  as  in  the  Odes. 
And  we  have  shown  in  a  previous  chapter  that  Marcus  the  Gnostic  also 
taught  that  the  '  abolition  of  ignorance  became  the  knowledge  of  Jesus '. 


1  Batiffol  suggests  a  slight  emendation  : 

'  II  a  dirige  ma  voie  vers  la  science. 


vii]  ODES   OF  SOLOMON  249 

We  can  now  see  why  the  Odist  says  at  the  close  of  his  song  that  '  there 
shall  be  nothing  without  life  or  without  knowledge ',  for  from  his  point  of 
view  eternal  life  consists  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord.  We  have  something 
to  the  same  effect  in  the  Gospel  of  John  (xvii.  3) : 

'This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee and 

Jesus  Christ.' 

There  is  nothing  necessarily  Gnostic  about  it  in  a  heretical  sense ;  but  it 
might  easily  become  a  point  of  departure  for  Gnostic  teaching. 

The  term  Jfc^**  J)  should  be  the  exact  equivalent  of  ayvoio. ;  but  it  is 
good  Syriac  and  not  merely  a  translation.     Cf.    Ephrem   (ed.   Mitchell, 

P-  i73): 

Jool  Jfco*.-.   JJ   otl^»* 

Stolten  has  pointed  out  that  Marcus  the  Gnostic,  of  whom  Irenaeus 
has  so  much  to  say,  has  an  expression  very  like  that  in  the  Odes. 
Amongst  other  silly  sports,  in  some  of  which  early  orthodox  people  also 
joined,  he  amused  himself  with  Gematria  over  the  name  of  Christ  and  the 
name  of  Jesus.  The  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  according  to  Marcus,  was 
the  knowledge  of  His  name,  and  the  letters  and  numbers  thereof.  When 
the  name  of  Jesus  with  its  six  sacred  letters  was  disclosed,  then  '  those 
who  knew  him  ceased  from  ignorance,  and  mounted  from  death  to  life ; 
the  Name  itself  became  to  them  the  Way  to  the  Father  of  Truth.  For 
the  Father  of  the  universe  willed  the  abolition  of  ignorance  and  the 
destruction  of  death.  But  the  abolition  of  ignorance  became  the  know- 
ledge of  Him '.     (Iren.  ed.  Mass.  76.) 

This  is  very  close  to  the  language  of  the  Ode.  It  is  capable  of  an 
orthodox  interpretation,  and  it  is  possible  that  Marcus  was  only  stupid 
and  not  exactly  heretical  at  this  point.  He  was  proving  an  orthodox  truth 
in  a  foolish  manner :  the  truth  itself  was  in  the  Ode.  We  may,  perhaps, 
take  this  as  an  instance  of  the  ill-luck  that  the  Odes  had  in  falling  into 
the  hands  of  the  Valentinian  Gnostics,  of  whom  Marcus  appears  to  have 
been  one.  We  cannot  with  Stolten  call  it  a  case  of  Gnostic  parallel.  It  is 
a  quotation,  a  Biblical  text. 

The  expression  about  the  singers  and  seers  who  are  to  come  before  Him 
and  to  appear  before  Him,  is  obscure  as  to  the  seers  :  but  the  sentence 
itself  imitates,  in  a  Targumist  manner,  the  language  of  Psalm  xlii.  2  : 
'  When  shall  I  come  and  appear  before  God  ? ' 


250  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [vn 

The  Peshitta  says,  'When  shall  I  come  to  see  thy  face?'  The  Targum 
has  a  circumlocution,  and  talks  of  '  seeing  the  Majesty ' :  evidently  the 
Syriac  Psalter  came  too  near  to  saying  that  God  could  be  seen,  and  various 
ways  were  found  of  avoiding  such  an  expression.  The  repetition  of  '  before 
Him  '  and  the  introduction  of  the  passive  '  shall  be  seen  '  instead  of  '  see ' 
is  in  the  manner  of  the  Targums.  In  order  to  understand  the  situation 
more  clearly  we  need  to  recall  to  our  minds  the  offensiveness  to  the 
monotheistic  thinker  of  such  expressions  as  imply  an  actual  vision  of  God. 
For  instance,  Philo  has  to  explain  away  the  passage  in  Exodus  (xxiv.  10) 
where  the  elders  of  Israel 

'Ate  and  drank  and  saw  God  also.' 

His  solution  is : 

'They  saw  the  place  of  God.' — De  Somniis,  i.  n. 

A  severer  theology  would  even  have  taken  exception  to  such  an  expression 
as  the  '  place  of  God '. 

Another  instance,  which  shows  how  carefully  the  thought  of  an  actual 
vision  of  God  was  avoided,  will  be  found  in  the  Ascension  of  Isaiah,  where 
it  is  a  capital  charge  against  the  prophet  that  he  said  he  had  seen  the 
Lord.  We  remember  how  this  is  softened  in  the  Fourth  Gospel,  after 
the  manner  of  the  Targumist,  by  saying  that  '  Isaiah  said  these  things 
when  he  saw  His  glory '.  Here  the  '  Glory '  is  one  of  the  Divine  Attributes 
substituted  for  God. 

This  then  is  the  religious  atmosphere  in  which  the  Odist  finds  himself. 
His  answer  to  the  question  of  the  Syriac  Psalter, 

'  When  shall  I  come  and  see  God  ? ' 

is  that  the  seers  will,  indeed,  come,  they  will  come  before  God  (as  the 
Targumist  speech  constantly  puts  it),  and  they  will  not  see  God,  but  they 
will  be  seen  before  Him.  The  Authorized  Version  has  drifted  into  something 
of  the  same  circumlocutory  speech. 

In  tracing  the  Biblical  affinities  of  this  Ode,  special  attention  should  be 
paid  to  the  passage  (v.  12)  that  is  in  dependence  upon  the  100th  Psalm : 

'  He  hath  given  Him  {or  Himself)  to  be  seen  of  them  that  are  His : 
In  order  that  they  might  recognize  Him  that  made  them, 
And  that  they  might  not  suppose  that  they  came  of  themselves.' 


vn]  ODES   OF  SOLOMON  251 

It  was  evident  at  a  glance  that  the  passage  was  under  the  influence  of  the 
1  ooth  Psalm : 

'  It  is  He  that  made  us, 
Not  we  ourselves.' 

The  late  Professor  Menzies  remarked  acutely  on  this  identification,  that 
the  influence  of  the  Psalm  went  further :  for  the  Revisers  of  the  Old 
Testament  have  altered  the  conventional  '  not  we  ourselves '  to  '  and  we 
are  His '.     And  this  emended  reading  is  reflected  in  the  Ode  in  the  form 

'  to  be  seen  of  them  that  are  His' 

At  the  same  time,  it  is  clear  that  the  displaced  reading  is  also  in  the 
Ode,  in  the  words, 

'that  they  might  not  suppose  that  they  came  (or  were)  of  themselves.' 

What  then  is  the  origin  of  this  new  rendering  which  turns  up  so  un- 
expectedly ?     It  is  in  the  Hebrew  Bible  itself,  which  advises  us  to  read  for 

UrUM  *6l  ('and  not  we') 
WUK  fa  ('and  to  Him  are  we'). 

The  Keri,  as  it  is  called,  which  the  reader  is  advised  to  substitute  for 
the  written  text,  is  also  found  in  the  Targum,  or  popular  exposition  of  the 
text.     The  Targum  says  very  clearly  : 

kjtok  pi^m  wn*  nay 

'  He  made  us,  and  His  we  are? 
The  Peshitta  text  takes  the  other  reading. 

From  the  fact  that  the  Odist  knows  and  uses  both  readings,  we  are 
again  confirmed  in  our  opinion  of  his  close  and  careful  scholarship. 
Remembering,  too,  his  habit  of  picking  up  the  sequence  of  his  thoughts 
from  the  text  on  which  he  is  working,  we  see  that  we  must  go  back  to 
the  words 

'  Know  that  the  Lord,  He  is  God,' 

for  the  motive  of  the  Odist's  remark  about 

'  Recognizing  Him  that  made  them,' 
and  the  consequent  statement  that 

'  It  is  to  knowledge  that  He  hath  appointed  His  way.' 


252  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [vn 

The  continuity  of  the  Ode  is  not  on  the  surface,  but  it  is  not  so  far 
underground  that  it  cannot  be  traced.  The  Odist  often  turns  back  to 
strike  over  again  the  note  of  a  previous  verse :  thus  in  the  passage  which 
we  have  been  discussing, 

1  He  hath  given  Him  to  be  seen  of  them  that  are  His,' 

he  has  turned  back  to  the  previous  verse,  '  I  trembled  not  when  I  saw 
Him ',  sc.  the  Christ  who  has  assumed  human  nature. 

We  have  not  yet  exhausted  the  influence  of  the  iooth  Psalm;  for  the 
Odist  has  worked  in  the  opening  sentence  of  the  Psalm  : 

'  Make  a  joyful  noise  unto  the  Lord,  all  ye  lands : 
Serve  the  Lord  with  gladness, 
Come  before  His  presence  with  singing.' 

Here  we  have  the  clue  to  the  introduction  of 

1  Those  that  have  songs  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord ; 
That  they  may  go  forth  to  meet  Him  and  may  sing  to  Him  with  joy,' 

and  to  the  reference  to  the  question,  which  we  have  already  discussed,  in 
the  42nd  Psalm, 

'  When  shall  I  come  and  appear  before  God  ? ' 

The  transition  from  the  Knowledge  of  God  to  the  Song  of  God,  which 
at  first  sight  is  discontinuous,  finds  its  explanation  in  the  closer  study 
of  the  1  ooth  Psalm.  We  shall  probably  be  justified  in  maintaining  that 
the  Odist,  whom  we  know  to  have  been  acquainted  with  the  Targum, 
has  taken  from  thence  the  reading,  which  was  suggested  above  by  the 
Keri  of  the  Hebrew  text. 

Professor  Menzies,  to  whom  we  have  referred,  thought  that  the  use  of 
the  1  ooth  Psalm  with  its  obvious  Gentile  leanings  was  an  indication  that 
the  Odes  were  what  he  calls  '  Psalms  of  the  Proselytes ',  viz.  of  proselytes 
to  Judaism  in  the  first  century.  We  have  referred  to  this  theory  in  our 
Introduction. 

In  this  Ode  and  in  Ode  x  there  is  an  expression  that  occurs  twice 
over,  which  we  have  translated  by 

*  The  traces  of  the  Light '. 

The  expression  is  a  curious  one,  and  by  its  recurrence  suggests  that  it  has 
been  introduced  into  the  Odes  ab  extra.     But  where  shall  we  find  any 


vii-viii]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  253 

such  expression?  Is  it  Biblical  or  Mystical  or  Gnostic?  In  Ode  vii 
we  are  told  that  '  to  Knowledge  He  has  appointed  His  way  .  .  .  and  set 
over  it  the  traces  of  His  light,  and  /  walked  {or  it  proceeded)  therein  from 
the  beginning  to  the  end '.  The  language  suggests  that  '  traces '  are  really 
'  footprints '.  In  Ode  x,  the  Odist  says  of  the  redeemed  Gentiles  that 
'  they  confessed  me  in  high  places  ;  and  the  traces  of  the  light  were  set  upon 
their  hearts ;  and  they  walked  in  my  life',  where  again  there  is  a  con- 
nexion between  the  '  footprints '  and  the  '  walk '. 

The   nearest   Biblical  passage   that  shows   any   parallelism   with    the 
expression  in  the  Odes  is  Sirach  1.  29  : 

[/.OLKapios  bs  tv  tovtois   avao-TpacjirjcreTai, 

Kal   0els  aura  €7rt   KapSiav  avTov  cro<^>tcrp?ycrerat" 

lav  yap  avTa  TroLrjcrr),  7r/30S  iravTa   lo~xyu~ei, 
on  </>ws   K.vpLov  to   i^i'os   avrov. 

This  is  not  very  easy  to  translate ;  the  English  revisers  present  us  with 

Blessed  is  he  that  shall  be  exercised  in  these  things ; 
And  he  that  layeth  them  up  in  his  heart  shall  become  wise ; 
For  if  he  do  them,  he  shall  be  strong  for  all  things, 
For  the  light  of  the  Lord  is  his  guide : 

(marg.  footstep.) 

The  connexion  in  Sirach  between  the  underlined  words  and  the  language 
of  the  Odes  should  be  noted.     Further  illumination  seems  necessary. 


ODE    VIII 

1  Open  ye,  open  ye  your  hearts  to  the  exultation  of  the  Lord  : 

And  let  your  love  abound  from  the  heart,  and  even  to  the  lips :  Cf.  Hos.  xiv.  2, 

Heb.  xiii.  15. 

2  To  bring  forth  fruits  to  the  Lord,  a  holy  life, 

And  to  talk  watchfully  in  His  light. 

3  Rise  up  and  stand  erect, 

Ye  who  were  sometimes  brought  low ; 

4  Ye  who  were  in  silence,  speak  out, 
(Now)  that  your  mouth  hath  been  opened. 


254  ODES   OF  SOLOMON  [vm 

5  Ye  who  were  despised,  be  lifted  up; 

Now  that  your  righteousness  has  been  lifted  up; 

6  For  the  right  hand  of  the  Lord  is  with  you  ; 
And  He  will  be  your  helper. 

7  And  peace  hath  been  prepared  for  you, 
Before  ever  your  war  happened. 

(Christ  speaks.) 

8  Hear  the  word  of  truth, 

And  receive  the  knowledge  of  the  Most  High 

9  Your  flesh  does  not  know  what  I  am  saying  to  you  ; 
Nor  your  raiment J  what  I  am  showing  to  you ; 

Cf.  Clem.  Horn.        io     Keep  my  secret,  ye  who  are  kept  by  it; 
xix.  20. 

ii     Keep  my  faith,  ye  who  are  kept  by  it. 

12  And  understand  my  knowledge, 
Ye  who  know  me  in  truth : 

13  Love  me  with  affection, 
Ye  who  love : 

14  For  I  do  not  turn  away  my  face  from  them  that  are  mine  ; 
For  I  know  them. 

15  Before  they  came  into  being, 
I  took  knowledge  of  them, 

And  on  their  faces  I  set  my  seal. 

16  I  fashioned  their  members; 

My  own  breasts  I  prepared  for  them  ; 

That  they  might  drink  my  holy  milk  and  live  thereby. 

1  So  MS. 


vni]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  255 

17  I  took  pleasure  in  them, 

And  I  am  not  ashamed  of  them. 

18  For  my  workmanship  are  they, 
And  the  strength  of  my  thoughts: 

19  Who  then  shall  stand  up  against  my  handywork? 
Or  who  is  there  that  is  not  subject  to  them  ? 

20  I  willed,  and  fashioned  mind  and  heart;, 

And  they  are  mine.  Cf.  Ode  xlii.  fin. 

And  by  my  own  right  hand  I  set  my  elect  ones. 

21  And  my  righteousness  goeth  before  them  ;  Cf  jsa_  jvjjj  g# 
And  they  shall  not  be  detached  from  my  name: 

For  it  is  with  them. 

(The  Odist.) 

22  Pray  and  abide  continually  in  the  love  of  the  Lord  ; 
Ye  beloved  ones,  in  the  Beloved ; 

And  ye  who  are  kept,  in  Him  that  lived  (again) ; 
And  ye  that  are  saved,  in  Him  that  was  saved. 

23  And  ye  shall  be  found  incorrupt  in  all  ages, 
To  the  name  of  your  Father. 

Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  1.  Gressmann  suggests  the  possible  Ua^o  'let  it  gush  forth' 
instead  of  L^ojo  'let  it  be  multiplied'.  Cf.  Odes  xvi.  2,  xxxvi.  7, 
xl.  2  (dis).  Although  J^oa^  is  generally  used  transitively,  it  is  sometimes 
also  used  intransitively. 

v.  2.  Schulthess  has  suggested  a  dalath  before  Ju*»  'of  the  life'. 
This,  however,  is  not  probable ;  the  '  holy  life '  is  a  permutative  term  ( J jj) 


256  ODES   OF  SOLOMON  [vnr 

to  'fruits';  and  Barth's  hypothesis  that  we  must  read  U*aso  U».  'the 
Living  and  the  Holy '  is  inadmissible  in  Syriac.  Flemming's  reading 
J 1  a.. ;.. ;_!>«;=>  'savagery',  'rudeness',  instead  of  'with  watchfulness',  'with 
diligence  ',  '  with  fervency  ',  is  not  good.  Likewise  in  the  case  of  a\\^v>\ 
'  to  speak '  which  Schulthess  proposes  to  change  into  qa\o>>n\,  '  to  walk '. 
In  verses  i  and  4  mention  is  made  of  speech  and  not  of  walk.  To  change 
the  text  so  as  to  give  meaning  of  '  Pour  apporter  des  fruits  au  Seigneur, 
vivants,  saints,  et  pour  remplir  la  stupidite  de  sa  lumiere  '  (Bruston)  is 
impossible  in  Syriac. 

v.  9.  The  MS.  has  .aa». o.,a^.  'your  raiment'.  We  have  suggested 
in  the  text  t&aici^X  '  your  hearts '.  This  is  possibly  a  daring  suggestion 
in  view  of  the  mention  of  '  your  body '  in  the  preceding  line,  and  of  the 
emphasis  laid  on  the  '  coats  of  skin  '  in  Ode  xxv.  8. 

v.  12.  Influenced  by  verse  14,  Gressmann  proposes  the  possible 
emendation  ^  **-^»~  'are  known  to  me'  to  u^  ^*-^w  'know  me'  of 
the  MS. 

v.  20.  Barth's  suggestion  that  for  wJ*^^  we  should  read  .-^Ji^k  is 
useless ;  both  forms  are  equally  used  in  Syriac.  His  hypothesis  that  we 
should,  perhaps,  read  ^^I^^^  or  w^\.r>^\,  (my  fashioned  ones)  in 
accordance  with  the  verb  previously  used,  is  unnecessary. 

v.  2i.  Instead  of  yo*- oI^aj  it  would  be  better  Syriac  to  read 
•  oi*.ol^*j  without  the  slightest  change  to  the  meaning. 

v.  22.  In  the  text  we  have  placed  the  erroneous  note  'Cod.  o^co/ '. 
The  MS.  actually  bears  the  reading  of  the  printed  text.  We  translate 
'  pray  and  abide  continually '  rather  than  '  pray  continually  and  abide '. 
A  parallel  for  the  existence  of  the  o  between  a^o/  and  ooja  may  be  seen 
in  Philoxenus,  Discourses,  i,  p.  215: 

and  Aphrahat  (vol.  ii,  p.  140)  '• 

Bruston  believes  that  oiks  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  substantive,  quaestio : 
(e'cartez  Investigation).     This  is  quite  improbable. 

Expository  Notes. 

This  is  the  first  of  the  Odes  that  is  clearly  marked  with  a  dual 
personality,  the  Odist  becoming  at  a  certain  point  in  the  song  the  Lord 


viii]  ODES  OF  SOLOMON  257 

Himself.  A  number  of  Odes  show  the  same  peculiarity,  which  is  common 
in  the  canonical  Psalter  :  cf.  for  example,  the  change  in  the  second  Psalm, 
where  the  Psalmist  makes  way  for  the  Father  in  verse  8  and  for  the  Son  in 
verse  9.  The  difficulty  will  lie  in  the  delimitation  of  the  speakers.  In  the 
present  Ode  the  change  occurs  at  the  eighth  verse ;  it  has  been  prepared 
for  by  an  oracular  appeal  to  c  hear  the  Word  of  Truth '.  Perhaps  the  poet 
re-appears  in  verse  22  :  all  the  intervening  verses  are  ex  ore  Christi. 

This  is  the  Ode  in  which  Dr.  Bernard  suspected  allusion  to  the 
disciplina  arcani,  in  the  words,  '  Keep  my  secret,  ye  who  are  kept  by  it ' ; 
and  we  have  shown  that  there  is  a  striking  parallel  in  the  baptismal  lectures 
of  Cyril  of  Jerusalem.  But  here  again  we  have  the  difficulty  to  meet  that 
the  formula  is  an  ancient  one,  and  is  probably  taken  from  a  saying  of 
Jesus  in  an  uncanonical  Gospel,  and  goes  back  ultimately  to  the  prophet 
Isaiah  (see  Isa.  xxiv.  16  in  the  Hexapla).  The  saying  of  Jesus  will  be 
found  in  Clem.  Alex.  Strom,  v.  10 : 

ov  yap  <f)0ovu)v,  <f>r}crL,  TraprjyyeiXev  6  KvpLOS  ev  tlvl  euayyeAio),  Mvo-rrjpiov 
ifxol  Kal  rots  viols  rov  o'Lkov  /xov. 

and  in  Clem.  Horn.  xix.  20  : 

Me/jiv?7//.e#a  rov  Kvpiov  yjfxihv  Kal  SiSacrKaXov,  ws  evTeA.Ao/x.evos  rjjxlv  enrev 
Ta  fAvo-Trjpia  i/xol  koI  tois  viol's  p.ov  cjiv\a$are. 

Such  a  saying  cannot  have  had  a  baptismal  reference  in  the  first  instance, 
however  much  it  may  have  lent  itself  to  such  use  in  later  days. 

We  may  also  compare  Lactantius,  Instit.  vii.  26,  which  has  much 
similarity  with  the  language  of  the  Ode  : 

'  Nos  defendere  banc(doctrinam)  publice  atqueasserere  non  solemus, 
Deo  iubente,  ut  quieti  ac  silentes  arcanum  eius  in  abdito  atque  intra 

nostram   conscientiam  teneamus, abscondi   enim   tegique 

mysterium  quam  fidelissime  oportet,  maxime  a  nobis,  qui  nomen  fidei 
gerimus.' 

Wensinck,  in  his  recent  translation  of  the  Dove  of  Bar  Hebraeus,  has 
some  excellent  remarks  upon  mystical  reticence,  but  does  not  see  that  in 
the  following  passage  Bar  Hebraeus  is  quoting  from  Isaiah  : 

'  The   Holy  Scripture  says  concerning  them ;   there  is  a  secrecy 
between  me  and  my  house-mates  ;  and  it  warns  them  not  to  publish 

11  S 


258  ODES  OF  SOLOMON  [vm 

these  things,  but  to  conceal  them,  and  it  does  not  allow  the  house- 
mates to  scrutinize  them,  save  only  in  oral  discussion.'1 
An  acquaintance  with  mystical  language  and  esoteric  teaching  makes 
it  clear  that  the  injunction  in  the  Odes  has  nothing  to  do  with  baptismal 
ritual. 

It  is  to  be  noted,  however,  that  in  Pistis  Sophia  377  the  rule  is  applied 
to  baptism  :  e.g. 

'  Occulite  hoc  fxvaWjpLov,  ne  date  id  homini  cuivis,  d  p?/rt  facturo 
res  omnes,  quas  dixi  vobis  in  meis  evroXais.  Hoc  01V  est  /xvo-tt^jiov 
d\?y^£ta9  fiairricTfjLaTos  horum  qui  remittent  eorum  peccata.' 

Here  the  actual  reference,  and  the  allusion  to  Matt,  xxviii,  show  that 
baptism  is  the  mystery  that  is  to  be  concealed. 

In  this  Ode  and  in  the  next  there  is  an  allusion  to  a  state  of  War  from 
which  the  saints  either  have  been  delivered  or  may  expect  to  be.  We  put 
the  two  passages  side  by  side  for  comparison  : 

Ode  viii.  7.  Ode  ix.  6. 

Peace  hath  been  prepared  for  you,      For  I  announce  peace  to  you  His 
Before  ever  your  war  happened.  saints  ; 

That  none  of  those  who  hear  may 
fall  in  war. 

It  is  hard  to  say  what  the  war  and  the  peace  are  to  which  the  Odist 
refers.  It  is  very  difficult  to  limit  the  language  to  purely  spiritual 
conflicts,  or  to  assume  that  it  only  means  that  the  saints  shall  get  the 
victory :  but  at  the  end  of  the  ninth  Ode  he  seems  to  say  that  '  Victory  is 
yours ',  and  that  this  victory  is  due  to  the  inscription  of  the  names  of  the 
faithful  in  a  book  of  life. 

In  the  eighth  Ode  the  saints  have  gone  through  a  variety  of  conflicts  : 
they  have  been  brought  low,  put  to  silence,  despised.  Some  struggle  has 
evidently  gone  on,  which  is  not  covered  by  the  individual  conflict  for 
inward  illumination  and  liberty.  But  what  the  battle  is  we  have  no  means 
of  determining,  nor  with  whom. 

As  the  Odist  goes  on  in  verse  9  to  describe  a  crown  of  precious  stones 
about  which  wars  have  arisen,  we  must  probably  refer  these  wars  to  the 
one  mentioned  in  verse  7.  The  crown,  however,  is  the  Truth,  just  as  it  is 
in  Ode  i,  where  no  wars  are  mentioned.  This  suggests  that  after  all  the 
reference  is  to  spiritual  conflicts.  The  statement  that  'righteousness  has 
1  Wensinck,  l.c,  p.  xxviii. 


viii-ix]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  259 

taken  it  and  given  it  to  you',  would  mean,  'the  crown  is  yours  as  the 
Victor's  right '.  There  is,  however,  still  much  that  is  obscure  in  the  Odist's 
language. 

Reviewing  the  whole  Ode  we  see  very  definite  traces  of  Syriac 
influence.  The  assonances  in  verse  12  ('understand  my  knowledge',  &c.) 
should  be  noted,  also  the  reference  in  verse  21  to  Isa.  lviii.  8,  which  is 
quoted  again  in  Ode  xx,  where  see  the  argument  that  the  prophet  is  being 
quoted  from  the  Syriac.     The  sentence 

'  They  shall  not  be  deprived  of  my  Name, 
For  it  is  with  them,' 

is  to  be  understood  as  a  Targum  substitution  of  the  Name  for  the  Person, 
so  that  it  really  means, 

'  They  shall  not  be  without  me, 
For  I  am  with  them.' 

This  is  the  Odist's  way  of  working  over  Isa.  lviii.  9  : 

'  Thou  shalt  cry, 
And  He  shall  say,  Here  I  am.' 


ODE    IX 

Open  your  ears ; 

And  I  will  speak  to  you. 

Give  me  your  souls  ; 

That  I  may  also  give  you  my  soul. 

The  Word  of  the  Lord  and  His  good  pleasures, 

The  holy  thought  that  He  has  thought  concerning  His  Messiah. 

For  in  the  will  of  the  Lord  is  your  life ; 
And  His  intention  is  (your)  everlasting  life ; 
And  your  end  1  is  incorruptible. 

1  Or,  your  perfection. 

S  2 


26o 


ODES   OF    SOLOMON 


[IX 


Cf.  John  iii.  16. 
Cf.  Isa.  xxviii.  16. 


Ps.  xx.  (xxi.)  4. 


Ps.  xx.  (xxi.)  4 
fLXX). 


t5a    Be  enriched  in  God  the  Father, 

And  receive  the  intention  of  the  Most  High  ; 
5b    Be  strong  and  be  redeemed  by  His  grace. 

6  For  I  announce  peace,  to  you  His  saints; 
That  none  of  those  who  hear  may  fall  in  war. 

7  And  that  those  who  have  known  Him  may  not  perish, 
And  that  those  who  receive  (Him)  may  not  be  ashamed. 

(S     An  everlasting  crown  is  Truth ; 

Blessed  are  they  who  set  it  on  their  heads : 

9     A  stone  of  great  price  (it  is) ; 

And  the  wars  were  on  account  of  the  crown. 

10  And  righteousness  hath  taken  it, 
And  hath  given  it  to  you. 

1 1  Put  on  the  crown  in  the  true  covenant  of  the  Lord  ; 

And  all    those  who  have   conquered    shall   be   inscribed l    in 
His  book. 

12  For  their  inscription2  is  the  victory,  which  is  yours; 

And  she  (Victory)   sees  you  before  her,  and  wills  that  you 
shall  be  saved. 

Hallelujah. 


Critical  Notes. 

v.  7.  Gressmann  suggests  ^au)  for  .ars^nj*.  The  meaning  of  both 
is  identical  and  the  change  is  possible  but  not  necessary.  The  case  would 
be  similar  if  we  proposed  to  substitute  for  it  the  verb  ^o ;  ->  nn  1 9  as 
Wellhausen  has  done.     Cf.  Ode  xix.  5,  &c. 


1  Lit.  booked. 


2  Lit.  book. 


ix]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  261 

v.  11.  Flemming's  suggestion  of  Jii*,  'truth'  for  J^i*,  'true',  'firm', 
the  adjective  referring  to  covenant,  is  not  sound. 

v.  12.  It  is  possible  to  read  with  Frankenberg  ^ca\.»  'your'  for 
v^al»  '  to  you  '. 

The  important  verses  in  this  Ode  from  a  critical  point  of  view  are 
verses  8-1 1,  in  which  Truth  is  spoken  of  as  an  everlasting  crown  and 
a  crown  of  victory  to  be  placed  on  the  head  of  the  believer.  The  Odist 
makes  an  apparent  discontinuity  of  expression  by  saying  (1)  that  Truth  is 
a  crown  ;  (2)  that  this  crown  is  a  stone  of  great  price.  The  discontinuity 
disappears  when  we  observe  the  source  from  which  the  writer  is  working : 
it  is  the  LXX  rendering  of  Ps.  xx.  (xxi.)  4 : 

Wr)Ka<;  €7rt  tt/v  Ke<f)a\r}v  avrov  arecftavov   €K  XlOov  Tifitov. 

Here  the  'precious  stone'  is  an  attempt  to  translate  the  perplexing  T3 
of  the  Hebrew,  which  in  the  English  Bible  appears  as  '  pure  gold '.  Our 
Odist  has  in  his  presentation  of  the  Hebrew  treated  '  the  precious  stone ' 
as  an  apposition  to  the  *  crown '.  In  his  translation  by  '  precious  stone ' 
he  follows  the  LXX  very  closely,  and  it  is  to  be  observed  that  this  is  not 
the  reading  of  the  Peshitta,  which  says  '  a  glorious  crown '.  This  is  the 
more  curious,  because  the  Peshitta  when  it  translates  21  TDDl  3HT  \n  in 
Psalm  xviii.  (xix.)  10  renders  by  }iss^,  Msjo  ^00  Jo©»?  ^ao  ('of  gold  and 
precious  stones ').  We  cannot,  therefore,  be  sure  that  there  is  no  influence 
from  the  Peshitta  on  the  Ode. 


Expository  Notes. 

We  referred  in  the  previous  Ode  to  the  prevalence  or  possibility  of 
a  state  of  war  that  may  affect  the  saints,  and  which  occurs  in  this  Ode 
also.  The  Ode  is  spoken  by  the  poet  as  prophet  or  orator.  The  reference 
to  'those  who  hear'  (i.e.  'you  who  hear')  depends  on  verse  1,  'open 
your  ears '. 

This  Ode  is  one  of  the  group  of  coronation  Odes  mentioned  under 
the  first  Ode.  It  is  a  royal  crown  in  one  point  of  view,  for  the  language 
is  borrowed  from  Ps.  xx.  (xxi.),  in  which  it  is  said  in  the  opening  verse : 
'  the  King  shall  joy  in  thy  strength,  O  God '.  The  crown  is,  then,  the 
King's,  and  apparently  the  Odist  regards  the  Psalm  as  Messianic,  with 


262  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  |  ix 

Christ  for  King  ;  it  can  thus  be  described  as  'the  holy  thought  which  God 
has  thought  concerning  his  Christ '.  The  Odist  also  describes  the  Crown 
as  a  Victor's  crown,  so  that  this  Ode  does  not  come  under  the  description 
of  epithalamium.  It  certainly  is  not  the  baptismal  circlet  which  is  described 
in  these  terms. 

The  reference  to  the  20th  Psalm  will  help  us  to  explain  not  only  the 
'  crown  '  and  the  '  King  Messiah ',  but  the  apparently  irrelevant  verse  4  : 

1  The  Lord's  intention  is  everlasting  life, 
Your  end  is  incorruption.' 

For  this  Psalm  was  in  very  early  times  taken  as  predictive  of  immortality, 
not  only  of  the  King,  who  asks  life  and  gets  it,  but  also  of  the  believer. 
Irenaeus  has  a  special  section,  in  which  he  discusses  the  question  how 
souls,  which  admittedly  have  a  beginning,  can  become  incorruptible  : 

quomodo  a?iimae  aim  sint  generabiles  in  fitturiun  incorruptibiles  persevera?it. 

Amongst  the  considerations  which  he  adduces  are  the  following  : 

Ps.  xx.  (xxi.)  4.  Et  iterum  de  salvando  homine  sic  ait ;  Vitam 
petit  a  te  et  tribuisti  ei  longitudinem  die  rum  in  saecuhim  saeculi. — 
Iren.  (ed.  Mass.  169). 

Here  then  the  Psalm  in  question  is  applied  to  man  generally ;  and  to 
establish  the  doctrine  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  But  this  is  not 
all  that  we  learn  from  Irenaeus.  He  not  only  proves  immortality  of 
the  soul  from  the  Scripture,  but  he  argues  it  as  follows.  Immortality 
is  not  natural :  it  is  the  gift  of  the  Father  and  the  gift  of  grace : 

'  Tanquam  Patre  omnium  donante  et  in  saeculum  saeculi  perse- 
verantiam  his  qui  salvi  fiunt;  non  enim  in  nobis,  neque  ex  nostra 
natura  vita  est ;  sed  secundum  Dei  gratiam  datur.' 

This  is  exactly  what  the  Odist  has  been  saying ;  the  obscurity  of  whose 
sentences  and  sequences  disappears  when  we  put  the  passage  of  Irenaeus 
alongside  with  them.  Both  of  them  are  trying  to  say  on  the  basis  of 
the  20th  (21st)  Psalm  that  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life:  the  immortality 
of  the  soul  is  in  the  will  of  the  Father  by  His  grace. 

It  appears,  then,  that  the  ninth  Ode  of  Solomon  is  based  on  the 
20th  Psalm  of  David.  From  this  Psalm  comes  the  Christ,  the  gift  of 
immortality,   and  the  crown    of  precious   stones.      The  discovery  is  an 


ix-x]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  263 

important  one,  for  we  had  already  shown  that  the  first  Ode  was  a  pendant 
to  the  first  Psaim ;  now  we  say  that  the  ninth  Ode  is  a  pendant  to  the 
21st  Psalm.  We  shall  come  across  more  cases  presently  of  the  dependence 
of  the  Odist  upon  the  Psalter:  the  28th  Ode,  for  example,  will  require 
the  22nd  Psalm  for  its  key;  and  so,  no  doubt,  in  other  cases.  We 
may  not  be  able  to  generalize  the  dependence  into  a  formula :  but  it  is 
at  least  conceivable  that  just  as  Bardaisan  made  a  Psalter  of  150  Psalms  in 
imitation  of  the  Davidic  collection,  so  we  have  a  similar  practice  on  the 
part  of  the  Odist,  though  we  may  not  know  how  far  the  imitation  goes. 

The  identification  of  the  underlying  Psalm  may  help  us  to  a  con- 
jectural solution  of  the  wars  that  issue  in  peace  to  which  we  alluded 
above.  Is  it  not  possible  that  the  writer  is  simply  affirming  the  doctrine 
of  the  perseverance  of  the  saints,  who  will  attain  peace  after  the  wars 
of  this  life  ?     This  would  explain  the  sequence  : 

'  that  none  of  those  who  hear  may  fall  in  the  war : 
And  that  those  who  have  known  Him  may  not  perish, 
And  that  those  who  receive  Him  may  not  be  ashamed.' 


ODE    X 

The  Lord  hath  directed  my  mouth  by  His  Word ; 
And  He  hath  opened  my  heart  by  His  Light. 

And  He  hath  caused  to  dwell  in  me  His  deathless  life ; 
And  gave  me  to  speak  the  fruit  of  His  peace : 

To  convert  the  souls  of  those  who  are  willing   to  come  to  ~f  Ps- lxvii-  (lxviii.) 

&  18. 

Him  ; 

And  to  lead  captive  a  good  captivity  for  freedom. 

(Christ  speaks.) 

I  was  strengthened  and  made  mighty  and    took   the   world 

captive ; 
And  (the  captivity)  became  to  me  for  the  praise  of  the  Most 

High  and  of  God  my  Father. 


a64  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [x 

5  And    the    Gentiles    were    gathered    together  who    had    been 

scattered  abroad : 
And  I  was  unpolluted  by  my  love  (for  them), 
Because  they  confessed 1  me  in  high  places. 

6  And  the  traces  of  the  light  were  set  upon  their  hearts ; 
And  they  walked  in  my  life  and  were  saved, 

And  they  became  my  people  for  ever  and  ever. 
Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  r.  Instead  of  '  hath  directed'  we  may  also  translate  'hath  rectified'. 
The  verb  «»l  has  always  more  the  meaning  of  'rectification'  than  of 
'  direction '. 

v.  5.  The  MS.  has  the  two  dots  of  the  plural  on  w^cus  '  by  my  love ', 
and  this  gives  '  by  my  sins ',  which  may  be  found  in  harmony  with  the 
preceding  verb,  '  I  was  un-polluted  \  The  application  of  this  meaning 
to  Christ  does  not  seem  to  be  very  suitable,  and  consequently  we  have 
suggested  the  elimination  of  the  siame  points,  and  translated  'by  my 
love'.  We  might,  in  accordance  with  Ode  viii.  22,  read  wi»a»s  'in 
my  beloved  ones ',  but  this  is  a  violent  emendation.  Barnes  suggests 
Noo*Ir>Q—.2>  'by  their  sins'.  In  the  following  line,  Gunkel  proposes  without 
necessity  JjojaojLaa^  for  ^o;xi->. 

v.  6.  The  word  o*^  v.  might  be  translated  '  my  people '  from  Jccx, 
and  might  also  be  taken  as  the  preposition  «^x  and  be  translated  '  with  me  , 
'  and  they  became  with  me  for  ever  and  ever '. 

Expository  Notes. 

In  this  Ode  again  the  writer,  after  a  short  preface  in  which  he  declares 
himself  an  evangelist  of  the  new  faith,  begins  to  speak  in  the  Person  of 
Christ  and  so  continues  to  the  end  of  the  Ode. 

The  chief  point  to  be  noticed  in  this  little  Ode  is  the  allusion  to  the 
conversion  of  the  Gentiles.  The  language  is  apologetic.  Their  presence 
in  the  Church  has  not  polluted  the  Christ,  whose  love  had  won  them. 
The  sympathy  with  the  Gentiles  is  touched  with  irony  of  a  delicate  kind 

1  Or,  gave  thanks  to. 


x-xi]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  265 

towards  those  who  thought  them  a  pollution.  The  Gentiles  are  still 
somewhat  on  sufferance,  shall  we  say  at  Antioch  ?  The  language  does  not 
seem  to  belong  to  a  late  period  of  ecclesiastical  growth ;  the  Scriptures, 
too,  which  underlie  the  statements  of  the  Odist  are  either  Old  Testament 
passages  which  are  already  in  use  in  the  New,  or,  which  is  much  the  same 
thing,  extracted  from  early  collections  of  Testimonia.  The  'leading 
captive  captivity'  is  Ps.  lxvii.  (lxviii.)  18,  and  is  in  use  in  Eph.  iv.  8. 
The  Gentiles  who  confess  Christ  should  be  understood  in  the  sense 
of  i£ofjLo\oyovvTaL  (as  in  Ode  v.  1);  and  the  underlying  Scripture  is 
Ps.  xvii.  (xviii.)  50,  where  the  Psalmist,  speaking  in  his  own  person  at  the 
end  of  the  Psalm  says 

i$ofxoXoyi]crofxaL   <tol   iv  Wvzcriv,   Ki'pie* 
The  testimony  is  known  to  us  from  Rom.  xv.  9,  where  it  is  introduced  as 
follows  : 

'  And  that  the  Gentiles  should  glorify  God  for  His  mercy,  as  it  is 
written,  I  will  give  thanks  to  thee  among  the  Gentiles  and  will  sing 
Psalms  in  thy  name.' 

Here  St.  Paul  treats  the  ancient  Psalmist  as  a  representative  Gentile. 
That  the  Gentiles  should  become  '  my  people '  is  from  Hosea  (ii.  23) : 
KaXiaoy  tov  ov-Xaov-fxov  Xaov-jxov'   kgu  ttjv  ovK-rjyaTrr]fJi€vr]v  y]yaTry]fx.ivr]v. 

a  testimony  which  appears  in  Rom.  ix.  25  and  in  1  Pet.  ii.   10,  and  in 
Testimonies  against  the  Jews  (e.  g.  Cyp.  Test.  i.  19). 

For  the  '  traces '  or  '  footprints '  of  the  Light,  see  Ode  vii. 


ODE    XI 

My  heart  was  cloven  and  its  flower  appeared  ; 

And  grace  sprang  up  in  it ; 

And  it  brought  forth  fruit  to  the  Lord. 

For  the  Most  High  clave  (my  heart)  by  His  Holy  Spirit, 
And  exposed  towards  Him  my  affection.1 
And  filled  me  with  His  love. 

1  Lit.  reins. 


266  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xi 

3  And  His  cleaving  of  (my  heart)   became  my  salvation, 
And  I  ran  in  the  way,  in  His  peace, 

In  the  way  of  truth. 

4  From  the  beginning  and  even  to  the  end 
I  received  His  knowledge. 

Cf.  Aphrahat  i.  416.    5     And  I  was  established  upon  the  rock  of  truth, 
Where  He  had  set  me  up. 

6  And  speaking  waters  drew  near  my  lips 
From  the  fountain  of  the  Lord  plenteously. 

7  And   I  drank  and  was  inebriated 

With  the  living  water  that  doth  not  die  ; 
Cf.  E  hes.  v.  17, 18.    tfa   And  my  inebriation  was  not  one  without  knowledge, 

8b    But  I   forsook  vanity : 

9     And  I  turned  to  the  Most  High  my  God, 
And  I  was  enriched  by  His  bounty  ; 

10     And  I  forsook  the  folly  cast  away  over  the  earth  ; 
And  I  stripped  it  off  and  cast  it  from  me. 

Cf.  Ps.  civ.  (ciii.)  2.  II     And  the  Lord  renewed  me  in  His  raiment, 
And  possessed  me  by  His  light ; 

12  And  from  above  He  gave  me  rest  without  corruption; 

And  I  became  like  the  land  which  blossoms  and  rejoices  in 
its  fruits  : 

13  And  the  Lord  (was)  like  the  sun  (shining)  upon  the  face  of 

the  land  ; 

14  My  eyes  were  enlightened, 
And  my  face  received  the  dew  : 


xi]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  267 

15  And  my  nostrils  had  the  pleasure 
Of  the  pleasant  odour  of  the  Lord. 

16  And  He  carried  me  into  His  Paradise, 

Where  is  the  abundance  of  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord ; 

17  And  I  worshipped  the  Lord  on  account  of  His  glory; 

18  And  I  said,  Blessed,  O  Lord,  are  they 
That  are  planted  in  thy  land, 

And  that  have  a  place  in  thy  Paradise, 

19  And  that  grow  in  the  growth  of  thy  trees;  Cf.  Ps.  Sol  xiv.  2. 
And  have  changed  from  darkness  to  light. 

20  Behold  !  all  thy  servants  are  fair, 
They  who  do  good  works, 

And  turn  away  from  wickedness  to  thy  pleasantness. 

21  And  they  have  turned  away  from  themselves  the  bitterness  of  Cf.  Ephr.  (R.E.  iii. 

♦t,     /  588)- 

the  trees, 

When  they  were  planted  in  thy  land. 

22  And  everything  became  like  a  remembrance  of  thyself, 
And  a  memorial  for  ever  of  thy  faithful  servants. 

23  For  there  is  abundant  room  in  thy  Paradise ; 

And  nothing  is  useless  therein :  Ephr.  (R.E.  iii. 

But  everything  is  filled  with  fruit ;  ^f4£  Pet_  j  ^ 

24  Glory    be    to    thee,    O    Lord,    the    delight    of  Paradise    for 

ever. 

Hallelujah. 


268  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [xi 

Critical  Xotes. 

vv.  1-2.  The  verb  which  we  have  translated  by  'to  cleave'  is  used 
generally  by  Syrian  writers  in  the  sense  of  '  to  circumcise '.  Perhaps  this 
'  double  entente '  was  in  the  writer's  or  translator's  mind.  It  would  lower 
the  Ode  to  try  to  reproduce  such  a  nuance  in  English.  The  circumcision 
of  heart,  spoken  of  in  the  Old  Testament  is  found  even  in  the  Kur'an, 
ii.  82,  iv.  154,  and  is  frequent  in  Syriac  literature  in  general:  (e.g.  Ephr. 
R.E.  iii.  188). 

v.  2.  Tondelli's  suggestion  that  instead  of  the  primitive  form  Jl^  we 
should  read  .-X^is  possible  but  not  necessary. 

v.  6.  Bruston's  hypothesis  that  instead  of  )I.N^o  we  should  resort  to 
an  adjective  formed  of  the  verb  JLso  '  to  fill '  is  not  probable. 

v.  11.  Frankenberg  proposes  to  read  oi^o  'and  He  pitied  me' 
for  wdxoo. 

v.  14.  The  verb  ic*j(  may  be  taken  transitively,  i.e.  (God)  'illuminated 
my  eyes ',  or  intransitively, '  my  eyes  were  enlightened,  illuminated '.  (Cf.iv.  4.) 

v.  16.  Grimme  unnecessarily  suggests  that  the  word  l-i.20?  of  this  verse 
and  the  word  L»»o)o  of  verse  3  are  a  dittographical  error  of  the  copyist. 

v.  23.     The  passage,  as  has  been  pointed  out  in  the  Introduction,  has 
been  quoted  by  Ephrem  {Opp.,  ed.  Rom.  iii.  584)  as  follows : 
oot   JL^.=>?    ^sol   f«Jso   %~1    i^^  Jl 
'  for  there  is  nothing  there  that  is  vain  {or  useless) ' ; 
he  was  speaking  of  Paradise,  and  the  quotation  is  unmistakable. 

As  it  stands  we  must  translate : 

'Glory  to  thee,  O  God,  the  delight  of  Paradise  for  ever.' 
If,  however,  we  imagine  ^la^.  to  have  dropped  after  )o^i  we  have : 

'  Glory  to  thee,  O  God ;  with  thee  is  the  delight  of  Paradise  for  ever.* 
This  is  very  near  to  the  Targum  of  Psalm  xvi.  n  : 

'  In  thy  right  hand  is  delight  for  ever.' 
The  Targum  is  like  the  Odist  in  his  fondness  for  introducing  the  delight 
of  Paradise.    In  the  90th  Psalm,  at  the  end,  he  paraphrases  the  expression 

'  Let  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  be  upon  us ', 
and  says  : 

'  Let  the  delight  of  the  Garden  of  Eden  be  upon  us  before  the  Lord.' 


xi]  ODES  OF  SOLOMON  269 

Expository  Notes. 

This  lovely  Psalm  was  known  to  Ephrem,  as  we  have  shown  in  one  of 
our  introductory  chapters,  and  perhaps  also  to  Ignatius  and  Barnabas. 
For  the  inebriation  which  is  caused  by  the  living  water  we  may  compare 
Cyril  of  Jerusalem : 

'  They  are  drunken,  yet  sober  ...  a  drunkenness  contrary  to  that 
of  the  body;  for  this  last  even  causes  forgetfulness  of  what  was 
known.' — Cyril,  Cat.  xvii.  19. 

Cyril  is  speaking  of  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  from  the  day  of  Pentecost 
onwards,  but  he  discloses  the  origin  of  his  own  language  as  to  the 
God-intoxicated  folk,  and  incidentally  the  origin  of  the  language  of  the 
Odist ;  for  he  refers  to  Psalm  xxxv  (xxxvi) : 

fjL£$vcr6ricrovTai  arrb  ttiottjtos  tov  o'lkov  o~ov' 

kcu  tov  )(€i[xappovv  tt}s  rpv(f>rj<;   crov  7TOTiets  avrovs' 
on  irapa  crol  7rr]yrj  £«?}?.     (Targ.  '  drops  of  living  water '.) 

Ps.  xxxv.  (xxxvi.)  9,  10. 

Here  we  have  clearly  the  key  to  the  Odist's  expressions ;  here  is  the 
fountain  of  the  Lord  of  which  the  believer  drinks  plenteously,  and  here 
is  the  divine  intoxication. 

We  should  compare  the  Odist's  treatment  of  the  Psalm  with  a  similar 
passage  in  the  28th  Ode.     Here  we  have  as  follows  : 

'  I  have  been  set  on  his  immortal  pinions  ; 
And  deathless  life  embraced  me 
And  gave  me  to  drink; 
And  from  that  life  is  the  spirit  within  me, 
And  it  cannot  die,  for  it  lives.' 

Here  again  we  are  in  dependence  on  the  Psalm,  and  the  previous  verse 
has  been  imitated, 

01   oe   viol  twv  ai'0pw7T(i>v  iv  <TK€7rrj  tw  irrepvywv  o~ov   i\.Tnov<Tiv. 

We  have  restored  in  the  comparison  the  reading  of  the  editio  princeps ; 
'gave  me  to  drink'  corresponds  to  7roTieis  olvtov<;  of  the  Psalm.  Both  of 
the  Odes  in  question  then  go  back  to  the  same  Psalm. 


2jc  ODES  OF  SOLOMON  [xi 

In  verses  4,  5  the  Odist  has  been  imitating  Sap.  Sol.  vi.  22  : 

'  I  will  trace  her  fsc.  Wisdom]  from  the  beginning  of  Creation, 
And  bring  tlie  Knowledge  of  her  into  clear  light ; 
And   I   will  not  pass  by  the  truth.' 

v.  13.  The  comparison  of  the  Lord  to  the  Sun  and  its  shining, 
although  altogether  Biblical,  appears  to  have  been  resented  by  Ephrem, 
who  attacked  Bardaisan  for  comparing  God  the  Father  to  the  Sun,  e.  g. 

(oil  ^fc^o  U>o«-> 
('He  compared  the  Father  to  the  Sun'). — Eph.  R.E.  ii.  558. 

This  eleventh  Ode  has  in  it  elements  that  lend  some  support  to 
Dr.  Bernard.  Here  are  traces  of  the  garment  of  light,  of  the  dew  of  the 
Lord,  and  the  delight  of  Paradise,  as  well  as,  perhaps,  an  allusion  to  the 
new  circumcision.  It  is  difficult,  however,  to  bring  a  spiritual  Ode  like 
this  within  the  terms  of  ritual.  Even  if  some  of  the  terms  are  baptismal, 
the  Odist  is  not  detained  by  them.  The  language  is  ecstatic,  and  the 
writer  confesses  to  spiritual  intoxication.  At  the  close  he  finds  God 
everywhere,  and  exults  in  the  discovery.  Here  we  may  add  a  couple  of 
modern  statements  that  come  near  to  the  thought  of  the  Odist :  the  first  is 
from  Charles  Kingsley : 

'  Everything  seems  to  be  full  of  God's  reflex,  if  we  could  but  see  it. 
Oh !  how  I  have  prayed  to  have  the  mystery  unfolded  at  least 
hereafter :  to  see,  if  but  for  a  moment,  the  whole  harmony  of  the 
great  system.' — Letters,  p.  28. 

The  other  is  from  a  little-known  Quaker  Journal,  the  writing  of  Thomas 
Story  : 

'  Come  sing  with  me,  O  ye  Valleys,  and  Flowers  of  the  Plain,  let  us 
clap  our  hands  with  Joy  :  for  the  King  of  the  East  hath  visited  us, 
and  smiled  on  our  Beauty :  for  He  sees  His  Holy  Name  on  every 
Flower,  and  glorious  Image  on  every  lovely  Plain.' — Story,  Journal, 
p.   18. 

It  will  be  convenient  to  add  at  this  point  the  references  to  the  '  talking 
water '  of  Daphne,  which  Lightfoot  depreciated,  in  his  desire  to  find 
a  quotation  from  the  Fourth  Gospel  in  the  Ignatian  Epistles.  Lightfoot 
quotes  from  Jortin  {Eccl.  Hist.  i.  356)  the  reference  to  Anacreon  n  (13): 

Ba(f)i'f](f)6poLO  <$>oif3ov  Xd\ov   7ri'oj'T€S   v8wp' 
for  the  expression  'talking  water',  and  for  the  prophetic  inspiration  that 


xi]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  271 

was  supposed  to  be  produced  by  drinking  it :  but  objects  to  Jortin's 
inference  that,  as  there  was  one  of  these  '  speaking '  fountains  at  Daphne, 
the  famous  suburb  of  Antioch,  Ignatius  may  have  borrowed  his  image 
from  thence.  Lightfoot  thinks  the  reference  doubtful,  even  if  the  text  of 
Ignatius  ad  Rom.  7  vSap  ^Sv  ko.1  XaXovv  were  correct.  Lightfoot  was 
quoting  Jortin  by  way  of  Jacobson.  A  reference  to  Jortin  himself  shows 
that  Lightfoot  has  not  done  justice  to  Jortin,  whose  statement  of  the 
case  for  XaXovv  and  against  aXX6/xevov  is  admirable. 
Jortin  says : 

'  The  expression  vSvp  XaXovv  resembles  the  vocales  undae  which 
inspired  the  poets  and  prophets,  e.  g. 

Et  de  Pieriis  vocalem  fontibus  undam. — Statius,  Silv.  i.  2.  6. 

An  oracle  of  Apollo  Delphicus  given  to  Julian,  and  preserved  in 
Cedrenus, 

Et7raT€  tw  /JacriAet,   %ap.al  Tricre   Sai'SaAos  avAa" 
ovKiTt  $ot/3os  (\€L  *aAv/?av,   ov  /xavTiSa  Sdcpvrjv, 
ov  7rayav  XaXeovaav,   d7reo-/3eTO  Kal  XdXov  v8oip 

In  these  verses,  which,  to  do  them  justice,  are  elegant,  Apollo,  to 
raise  Julian's  compassion,  deplores  the  silence  of  his  oracles  and 
speaking  streams.     In  the  first  line  read  fiao-iXfji. 

Anacreon  xiii. 

Ot  $e  KAdpou  Trap    o^#cus 
8acj)vrjcfi6poio  <$>olJ3ov 
XdXov  7ridvTts  v8u)p 

/X€/«7VOT€5    /3owO"lV.' 

Jortin  then  proceeds  to  discuss  the  passage  in  Ignatius  and  its  variant 
readings ;  he  shows  that  the  Greek  Menaeum  had  both  readings,  and 
goes  on  to  say  against  Le  Clerc  that  '  the  XaXovv  vSwp  must  not  be  altered  ; 
it  is  sufficiently  confirmed  by  the  quotations  of  Cotelier  in  this  very  note 
where  he  is  inclined  to  reject  it,  and  it  is  more  elegant  and  proper  than 
Le  Clerc  imagined '.     References  to  Antioch  and  Daphne  follow. 

It  is  important,  both  for  the  criticism  of  the  Ignatian  Epistles  and 
of  the  Odes,  that  the  misleading  argument  of  Lightfoot  should  be  set 
on  one  side.  When  this  is  done,  we  have  an  important  clue  for  locating 
the  Odes  as  well  as  the  Ignatian  Epistles  in  contact  or  connexion  with 
Antioch. 


272  ODES    OF    SOLOMON  [xn 

ODE    XII 

i     He  hath  filled  me  with  words  of  truth, 
That  I  may  speak  the  same. 

2     And  like  the  flow  of  waters,  flows  truth  from  my  mouth, 
And  my  lips  showed  forth  its  fruits. 

Cf  Sir  xxiv  ~  3     And  ^  nas  causcd  its  knowledge  to  abound  in  me, 

Because  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  is  the  true  Word, 
And  the  door  of  His  light ; 

4     And  the  Most  High  hath  given  Him  to  His  Worlds. 
(Worlds)  which  are  the  interpreters  of  His  own  beaut}-. 
And  the  repeaters  of  His  praise, 
And  the  confessors  of  His  thought, 
And  the  heralds  of  His  mind, 
And  the  instructors  of  His  works. 

Cf.  Sap.  Sol.  vii.  24.    5     For  the  swiftness  of  the  Word  is  inexpressible  (?) 
Cf.  Heb.  iv.  12.  And    like    His     expression  (?)     is     His    swiftness     and     His 

sharpness  : 
And  His  course  has  no  limit. 

6  Never  (doth  the  Word)  fall,  but  ever  it  standeth  ; 
Cf.  Isa.  liii.  8.  His  descent  and  His  way  are  incomprehensible. 

7  For  as  His  work  is,  so  is  His  limit ; 

Cf.  John  i.  9.  For  He  is  the  light  and  the  dawn  of  thought. 

8  And  by  Him  the  worlds  spake  one  to  the  other  : 
Cf.Ps.xvni.(xix)3,4.  And  thosc  that  were  siient  aCqUired  speech. 

9  And  from  Him  came  love  and  concord  ; 

And  they  spake  one  to  the  other  what  they  had  (to  tell). 


xn]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  273 

10     And  they  were  stimulated  by  the  Word, 
And  they  knew  Him  that  made  them, 
Because  they  came  into  concord. 

it     For  the  mouth  of  the  Most  High  spake  to  them  ; 

And  the  interpretation  of  Himself  had  its  course  by  Him.      Cf-  J°hn  '•  l8- 

12  For  the  dwelling-place  of  the  Word  is  man,  Cf.  John  i.  14. 
And  His  truth  is  love. 

13  Blessed    are    they    who    by    it    have    comprehended    every- 

thing, 
And  who  have  known  the  Lord  by  His  truth. 
Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  1.  Newbold  suggests  the  elimination  of  the  siame  points  from 
jc*i^»s  and  that  we  translate,  '  The  Word  of  Truth  hath  filled  me  that 
I  may  proclaim  Him  (or  it) '.  This  is  grammatically  more  correct,  because 
it  provides  a  subject  for  the  first  sentence,  and  for  the  second  member 
of  verse  2  (w<*o»)*3  His  [or  its]  fruits).  Cf.  also  v.  3.  Further,  all  the  Ode 
deals  with  '  the  Word '.  The  copyist  was  possibly  puzzled,  as  every  other 
Syrian  Christian  would  be,  with  the  fact  that  \6yo<s  was  expressed  by  the 
inadequate  vocable  jLaa.^k-3,  and  put  the  plural  dots  over  it,  signifying 
that  it  meant  '  words  '  in  concreto. 

v.  2.  The  MS.  has  the  present  tense,  'flows';  instead  of  Ju»»  of 
the  MS.  we  have  punctuated  U?> ;  both  punctuations  are  used,  although 
that  of  the  MS.  is  more  frequent,  in  the  sense  of  'flow',  and  the  other 
is  more  generally  said  of  a  '  river ',  '  stream '. 

v.  4.  We  have  punctuated  the  text  ^oto»s>.v?  'of  His  servants'. 
The  MS.  by  putting  three  dots  over  the  word  instead  of  two,  has  wojo^i^t 
' of  His  works ',  which,  joined  with  the  preceding  wo>c\^\\\  gives 
a  better  sense. 

Frankenberg  unnecessarily  suggests  to  read  jo^o^t&oo  in  singular  with 
11  T 


274  ODES    OF  SOLOMON  [xn 

reference  to  Aoyos.    In  the  first  line  Bruston  proposes  to  read  wacscL^j^ 
'to  His  young  men'  for  wod.'A^^.^.     This,  however,  is  not  probable. 

v.  5.  Barth  and  Connolly  have  rightly  pointed  out  that  the  translation 
of  LjoI  JJ*  by  'inexpressible'  or  'indescribable'  was  not  warranted  in 
Syriac,  but  that  it  meant,  according  to  the  first  scholar,  '  ohne  Erzahlung ' 
(Ps.  xix.  4).  If  •  inexpressible '  or  '  indescribable '  was  intended,  we 
should'  have  had  Jk-a*jlkoo  JJ  or  simply  J*jtfcoo  JJ.  The  text  of  this 
verse  is  certainly  corrupt,  because  (1)  it  is  said  that  the  'swiftness'  of 
the  Word  is  without  JoooL,  and,  immediately  after,  'swiftness  '  is  compared 
with  that  UjoI  :  because  (2)  the  term  of  comparison,  which  is  the  word 
jlo^kxXo  '  His  swiftness  '  is  repeated  again  in  the  enumeration  of  the  two 
things  with  which  it  is  compared,  which  are  'swiftness'  and  'sharpness'. 
The  copyist  himself  was  so  bewildered  with  an  incomprehensible  text  that 
he  puts  the  dots  of  the  feminine  over  the  suffixes1  of  all  the  words,  and  as 
we  shall  see  in  the  note  to  verse  7,  he  was  even  undecided  between  L^>a.x» 
and  ia-cu».  Our  resort  to  a  Greek  dvt/cStr/y^Tos  as  an  original  of  ).*jel  1J» 
cannot  (any  more  than  the  Syriac  text)  account  for  these  difficulties. 

The  only  way  of  escape  would,  perhaps,  be  to  resort  to  the  probable 
hypothesis  that  a  dittographical  error  from  the  copyists  has  crept  into  the 
text  of  the  second  line  ;  on  this  hypothesis  the  text  and  the  translation 
would  run  : 

^.jo    *.  o^lSw. /  J^ol  JJ>  Joo^^a?  i—"-^  ©tla^*i*j5 

'  The  swiftness  of  the  Word  is  without  record  ; 
And  like  His  swiftness  so  also  is  His  sharpness, 
And  His  walk  (course)  is  without  limit.' 

To  establish  the  parallelism  the  words  J-ool  JJ  might  be  changed 
into  the  natural  Jij*>a».L  JJ  'without  circumscription',  so  that  the  verse 
should  be  :  '  The  swiftness  of  the  Word  is  without  circumscription '. 

In  the  second  line  Gressmann  suggests  that  we  should  read  [ul  y+( 
for  J~joL  <**lo,  as  rendering  the  dryuts  of  Sap.  Sol.  vii.  25.  The  term  dr^ii'? 
is  not  infrequently  used  of  the  Logos  in  the  early  patristic  writings, 
which  is  identified  with  the  Sophia  of  the  seventh  chapter  of  the  Wisdom 
of  Solomon.  The  influence  of  the  chapter  in  question  upon  our  Ode 
appears  to  be  very  decided  :  here  we  find  the  epithet  o£v  for  the  'sharpness 
of  the  Word',   while   its   'swiftness'  and  its  'illimitable  course'  are   a 


xii]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  275 

reflection  from  the  Wisdom  that  '  moves  more  rapidly  than  any  motion, 
and  passes  and  penetrates  through  all  things '  {Sap.  Sol.  vii.  24),  so  that  an 
allusion  to  the  olt/jlls  in  verse  25  would  be  quite  appropriate. 

v.  6.  We  have  suggested  in  a  note  to  read  o»~fcoo  ('His  breadth'); 
but  there  is  no  need  to  make  the  change  :  k*w  is  used  of  the  Logos  in 
Incarnation  several  times  in  the  Odes  ;  so  we  read  '  His  descent  \ 

For  similar  reasons  there  is  no  need  to  emend  o»a»o/  ('  His  length ') 
for  om»»o/  ('  His  way '). 

v.  7.  The  MS.  seems  to  have  o»*oa*ao.  Possibly  the  copyist  was 
perplexed  between  o^oaao  'His  expectation'  and  cna-aao  'His  limit'; 
or  possibly  he  was  writing  c*oaao  and  under  the  influence  of  the  above 
)^.cu»  another  yodh  slipped  in  before  the  waw. 

v.  8.    Our  rendering  is  the  only  meaning  the  Syriac  sentence  can  have. 

v.  10.  We  have  suggested  in  the  text  oo»?jjo  for  ol^>>)|o  ;  'and  they 
were  justified '  for  '  and  they  were  stimulated ',  '  goaded ' ;  this  is  possibly 
a  daring  emendation  in  view  of  the  fact  that  in  the  previous  lines  mention 
is  made  of  the  'sharpness'  of  the  word.  Labourt's  opinion  that  ok-o?j|o 
'  est  une  observation  marginale  qui  se  rapportait  primitivement  a  l'etat 
du  ms. '  is  improbable. 

v.  11.  'its  course  (///.  it  proceeded)  by  Him' ;  perhaps  we  have  here 
the  translation  of  the  Greek  iv  exeivw,  sc.  t<3  Aoyw. 

Expository  Notes. 

This  Ode  is  a  Hymn  concerning  the  Divine  Logos,  or  the  Divine 
Wisdom  which  becomes  the  Logos.  It  is  not  an  easy  Ode  to  translate 
nor  to  understand.  It  comes  very  close  in  one  sentence  to  the  Gospel  of 
John,  '  the  dwelling-place  of  the  Word  is  Man '.  This  is  very  near  to  the 
statement  that  the  '  Logos  dwelt  among  us ',  but  does  not  involve  the 
personal  incarnation  nor  the  assumption  of  flesh.  It  may  be  related  to 
the  doctrine  in  the  Wisdom  of  Sirach  that  the  Divine  Wisdom  found 
her  dwelling  place  in  Jacob  and  at  Jerusalem.  This  same  chapter  (Sap. 
Sirach,  xxiv)  helps  to  explain  the  opening  sentences  about  the  'Mouth 
of  the  Lord,  the  true  Word',  for  here  Wisdom  is  made  to  say  that  she 
'  came  forth  from  the  mouth  of  the  Most  High '. 

The  writer  appears  also  to  be  drawing  on  a  number  of  Sapiential 
terms  which  occur  in  the  seventh  chapter  of  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon, 

T  2 


2-jt  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xii-xm 

where  the  sharpness,  force,  and  swiftness  of  the  Word  are  described. 
Certainly  the  Ode  must  be  grouped  with  the  rest  of  the  Wisdom  Odes ; 
when  taken  together  they  will  do  much  to  furnish  us  with  the  theology 
of  the  writer. 

In  verse  6  there  is  some  obscurity  in  the  statement  that  '  His  descent 
and  His  way  are  incomprehensible '.  If  the  writer  means  to  describe 
in  these  words  the  appearance  of  the  Logos  among  men,  we  have 
probably  a  reaction  from  the  verse  in  Isaiah  liii,  '  Who  shall  declare 
His  generation?'  a  passage  commonly  used  by  the  early  Fathers  to  show 
that  the  Birth  of  Christ  is  dveKSa^ros. 

In  verses  3,11  we  have  allusions  to  Wisdom  as  being  the  Mouth  of 
the  Lord,  or  the  Mouth  of  the  Most  High,  which  are  parallel  to  the  language 
of  Sirach  xxiv.  3  sqq.     We  compare  Ode  xii.  3  : 

)~m    oo*    pa^ISS    Li.20?    o*^oo3*  "^>^oo 
and  Ode  xii.  1  r  : 

Lso_.;_ao»   oooa.3    ^oo*X  "^sXso*  ^^-so 
with  Sirach  xxiv.  3  : 

eyoj   a7To  oro/xaTO?  'Y4/icrrov  i$r)\$ov' 

The  Peshitta  of  Sirach  has  ^..NVf,  where  again  we  see  the  Odist  to 
be  independent  of  the  Peshiita.  The  whole  of  Ode  XII  is  a  Wisdom 
composition,  showing  striking  parallelism  with  the  /^raises  of  Wisdom  in 
Sirach  xxiv. 


ODE    XIII 

Cf.Sap.S0l.vii.26.    l     Behold!    the  Lord  is  our  mirror: 

Cf.  Ephr.  Hymn,  in  Open  your  eyes  and  see  them  in  Him. 

Fest.  Epiph.  i.  93 

also RJL. u. 511-13-    2     Ariel  learn  the  manner  of  your  face; 

And  tell  forth  praises  to  His  Spirit: 

3  And  wipe  off  the  filth  from  your  face ; 

Ecclesia'm  iv^cr  *"  ^nd  ^ove  ^*s  holiness  and  clothe  yourselves  therewith 

Cf.  Sap.  Sol.  vii.  26.  .  ....  .,  .  ,.  .  ,     TT. 

4  And  you  will  be  without  stain  at  all  times  with  Him. 

Hallelujah. 


Xlii]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  277 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  1.  Frankenberg  and  Preuschen  have  made  the  suggestion  that 
we  should  translate  '  see  yourselves  in  Him ',  on  the  supposition  that 
a  primitive  Greek  iavrovs  or  avrovs  has  been  misunderstood  by  the 
translator,  who  took  the  word  to  refer  to  the  '  eyes '  and  not  to  the 
persons  who  were  using  the  eyes.  The  point  deserves  a  careful  con- 
sideration ;  in  Ode  xv.  3  special  importance  is  attached  to  eyes. 

v.  2.  Gressmann  unnecessarily  changes  o»-c;l  'to  His  Spirit' into 
©»~oJ^  'to  His  Herrlichkeit '. 

v.  3.  The  MS.  seems  to  have  the  meaningless  Ji~..  Its  correction 
into  )bs*Zl  is  almost  certain.  The  root  being  «u  with  a  guttural  hamza, 
phonetically  it  is  more  correct  to  read  jk— 1«,  but  it  is  a  well-known  fact  that 
the  sound  hamza  is  frequently  softened  into  a  weak  letter. 

Expository  Notes. 

This  little  Ode,  like  the  preceding  one,  is  Sapiential  in  character : 
the  '  mirror '  which  the  Lord  is  declared  to  be,  is  the  '  unspotted  mirror 
of  the  operation  of  God '  in  the  seventh  chapter  of  the  Wisdom  of 
Solomon.  We  have  shown  in  the  introductory  chapters  how  familiar 
Ephrem  was  with  this  Ode.,  and  how  he  manipulated  it  into  liturgical 
language.  If  we  keep  the  Sapiential  language  before  our  mind,  we  shall 
see  the  meaning  of  the  close  of  the  Ode  as  well  as  its  opening :  the 
believer,  who  clothes  himself  with  the  Divine  Holiness,  becomes  also 
a  spotless  person  (dK^AuWos),  and  is  enjoined  to  be  '  without  stain '  at  all 
time  before  Him. 

In  the  Acts  of  John  there  is  a  curious  hymn  sung  by  the  Apostle  to  his 
disciples  before  his  apprehension  ;  at  the  close  of  the  hymn,  which  seems 
to  belong  to  Christ  speaking  in  him,  we  read 

'  I  am  a  Lamp  to  him  that  sees  me : 
I  am  a  Mirror  to  him  that  considers  me  : 
I  am  a  Door  to  him  that  knocks  to  me  : 
I  am  a  Way  to  thee  the  passer  by.' 

Here  the  '  Mirror '  is  accepted  as  one  of  the  titles  of  Jesus ;  so  it  seems 
that  this  Ode  also  passed  into  Gnostic  hands,  in  the  form  in  which  we 


2;<S  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xiii-xi 

know  it.     It  would  be  a  great  mistake  to  call  the  Ode  itself  Gnostic  :  it  is 
a  clear  and  beautiful  call  to  a  redeemed  and  Christ-like  life.1 

Another  parallel  to  the  Lord  being  our  mirror  is  /.  Ep.  Clem.  c.  36  : 
•  Through  Him  let  us  look  intently  on  the  Heavenly  Heights  ;  through 
Him  we  behold  as  in  a  mirror  that  unblemished  and  most  lofty  visage  of 
His ;  through  Him  the  eyes  of  our  heart  were  opened.'  Here  the 
parallelism  is  very  pronounced  with  Ode  xiii ;  'the  Lord  is  tlie  mirror ;  by 
Him  the  eyes  are  opened;  an  unblemished  form  is  perceived. 

ODE    XIV 

Cf.  Ps.  cxxiii.  2.  1     As  the  eyes  of  a  son  to  his  father, 

So  are  my  eyes  at  all  time  towards  thee,  O  Lord. 

2  For  with  thee  are  my  consolations 2  and  my  delights. 

3  Turn  not  away  thy  mercy  from  me,  O  Lord : 
And  take  not  thy  kindness  from  me. 

Cf.  Ps.  xlviii.  15.         4     Stretch  out  to  me,  my  Lord,  at  all  times,  thy  right  hand; 
Cf.  Ps.  xxx.  (xxxi.)4.  And  be  my  guide  even  to  the  end,  according   to  thy  good 

pleasure. 

Matt.  vi.  13.  5     Let  me  be  well-pleasing  before   thee,  because  of  thy  glory  : 

And  because  of  thy  name  let  me  be  saved  from  the  Evil  One. 

6  And  let  thy  gentleness,  O  Lord,  abide  with  me, 
And  the  fruits  of  thy  love. 

7  Teach  me  the  Odes  of  thy  truth 
That  I  may  bring  forth  fruit  in  thee. 

8  And  open  to  me  the  harp  of  thy  Holy  Spirit, 
That  with  all  (its)  notes  I  may  praise  thee,  O  Lord. 

1  The  passage  in  the  Acts  of  John  will  be  found  in  Bonnet's  ed.,  p.  198.     We 
owe  the  reference  to  Stolten.  2  lit.  my  breasts. 


xiv]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  279 

9     And  according  to  the  multitude  of  thy  mercies 
So  shalt  thou  give  to  me : 
And  hasten  to  grant  our  petitions. 

10     And  thou  art  able  for  all  our  needs.  Cf.  Phil.  iv.  19. 

Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  5.  The  Syriac  word  ju**r>  in  the  text  is  commonly  used  in  Syriac 
literature  to  render  '  the  Evil  One ' ;  '  evil '  being,  on  the  other  hand, 
expressed  by  the  neutral  (fern.)  Jk»**s.     See  also  Ode  xxxiii.  4. 

v.  6.     Frankenberg  proposes  to  eliminate  the  warn  of  <*1«w*.jo. 

v.  10.  Labourt  suggests  hJ\i  '  because  thou'  instead  of  kJJo  'and 
thou '.     It  is  a  possible  but  quite  unnecessary  hypothesis. 

Expository  Notes. 

This  Ode  and  the  two  which  follow  are  grouped  together  by  the 
similarity  of  their  opening  verses,  which  are  in  each  case  of  the  nature 
of  a  similitude.  In  the  Ode  before  us,  the  motive  is  found  in  an 
imitation  of  the  122nd  (123rd)  Psalm  in  the  canonical  Psalter: 

'  as  the  eyes  of  servants  .  .  . 
as  the  eyes  of  a  maid  .  .  . ' 

The  writer  has  also  borrowed  in  verse  4  the  language  of  another  Psalm, 
Ps.  xlvii.  (xlviii.) : 

'  Our  God  for  ever  and  ever, 
He  will  be  our  guide  even  unto  death.' 

This  is  one  of  the  Odes  in  which  the  similitude  of  the  harp  is  intro- 
duced :  e.  g.  in  Ode  vi,  the  Odist  is  the  harp,  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
speaks  in  his  members :  in  Ode  vii  the  singers  go  forth  to  welcome  the 
Lord  at  His  coming  with  the  harp  of  many  tones  (iuOdpa  7roAv<£wvos),  &c. 
The  figure  is  one  that  was  used  by  Syriac  writers  both  orthodox  and 
heretical.  Ephrem  says  of  the  teaching  of  Bardaisan  and  Mani  that 
'  they  saw  that  there  is  in  the  heart  an  instrument  for  the  impulses  of 
the  soul,  and  that  there  is  in  the  tongue  a  harp  (lua)  of  speech'  (ed. 
Mitchell,  p.  xc). 


280  ODES   OF    SOLOMON  [xiv-xv 

Cf.  also  (p.  ciii) : 

1  By  the  mouth  of  the  body  the  soul  preaches  truth  in  the  world  ; 
and  it  is  a  pure  harp  for  it,  by  means  of  which  it  sounds  forth  truth 
in  creation.' 

In  verses  4,  5  we  have  distinct  traces  of  the  influence  of  Ps.  xlvii. 
(xlviii.)  15  and  Ps.  xxx.  (xxxi.)  4.  The  Odist  prays  that  the  Lord  may  be 
his  guide  even  to  the  end  ;  he  has  substituted  '  the  end  '  for  '  death  ',  but 
agrees  with  the  Hebrew  and  its  dependent  Peshitta  in  the  use  of  the  verb 
;.=>»  ('  to  guide '),  while  the  LXX  has  the  more  remote  iroi/juavel.  After  the 
manner  of  the  Odist,  we  have  in  the  next  verse  the  influence  of  Ps.  xxx. 
(xxxi.),  ' For  thy  name's  sake  lead  me  and  guide  me  ',  where  the  Peshitta 
does  not  mention  the  idea  of  guidance,  which  is  involved  in  the  Hebrew 
and  the  LXX.  Here  again  the  Odist  shows  independence  of  the  Peshitta 
tradition. 

In  verse  10  the  Odist  concludes  with  the  sentiment  that  'God  is  able 
for  all  our  needs ',  which  is  nearly  parallel  to  Phil.  iv.  20,  '  My  God  shall 
supply  every  need  of  yours'.  'Need'  (xpeia)  is  in  the  Ode  ]k»  *»»..,  in  the 
Peshitta  Jlaja*n».  Further,  the  Peshitta  follows  the  Greek  in  rendering 
TrA/jpojo-ci  ('  shall  fulfil ')  literally,  which  the  Odist  explains  in  the  sense  of 
Divine  ability  ()»•»)• 


ODE    XV 

1  As  the  sun  is  the  joy  to  them  that  seek  for  its  daybreak 
So  is  my  joy  the  Lord  : 

2  Because  He  is  my  Sun,  and  His  rays  have  lifted  me  up  ; 
And  His  light  hath  dispelled  all  darkness  from  my  face. 

3  In  Him  I  have  acquired  eyes, 
And  have  seen   His  holy  day : 

4  Ears  I  have  acquired, 

And  I  have  heard  His  truth. 


xv]  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  281 

5  The  thought  of  knowledge  I  have  acquired, 
And  I  have  been  delighted  by  Him. 

6  The  way  of  error  I  have  left  and  I  went  towards  Him, 
And  I  have  received  Salvation  from  Him  abundantly. 

7  And  according  to  His  bounty  He  hath  given  to  me  : 
And  according  to  His  excellent  beauty  He  hath  made  me. 

8  I  have  put  on  incorruption  through  His  name,  1  Cor.  xv.  54. 
And  I  have  put  off  corruption  by  His  grace. 

9  Death  hath  been  destroyed  before  my  face; 

And  Sheol  hath  been  abolished  by  my  word.  1  Cor.  xv.  55. 

10     And  there  hath  gone  up  deathless  life  in  the  Lord's  land; 
And  it  hath  been  made  known  to  His  faithful  ones ; 
And    hath  been  given  without    stint   to   all   those  that   trust 
in  Him. 

Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  5.  The  MS.  has  l^aisllo  'I  was  delighted'.  In  view  of  the  next 
verse  where  mention  is  made  of  salvation  we  have  suggested  the  probable 
kusisljo  'and  I  was  saved'.  The  opinion  of  Labourt  who  thinks  that 
o»j-.)o  '  by  His  hand '  is  to  be  attached  to  the  following  verse,  becomes 
unnecessary.  ♦ 

v.  10.  Schulthess  suggests  oioNrm  (pi.) ;  this  is  very  good,  but  not 
necessary ;  we  have  maintained  the  reading  of  the  MS.  (cf.  xxxv.  3). 

Expository  Notes. 

It  was  suggested  in  the  editio  princeps  that  the  Odist  in  his  opening 
sentences  strikes  the  note  of  Psalm  cxxix.  (cxxx.)  6,  and  this  is  probably 
the  case :  but  if  so,  he  is  not  using  the  LXX  text,  which  says,  '  from  the 
morning  watch  till  night  my  soul  hopes  in  the  Lord'.  Moreover,  he 
has  given  the  Psalm  quite  a  different  turn,  changing  the  painful  and 
prolonged  sense  of  waiting  for  the  dawn  into  a  song  after  sunrise,  out 
of  which  all  sadness  has  disappeared. 


282  ODES    OF    SOLOMON  [xy-xyi 

Kieinert l  suggested  that  the  Ode  was  composed  for  the  Sunday,  as 
being  the  day  of  the  Sun,  and  remarked  that  the  Mandaeans  reported 
the  Sunday  as  holier  (because  older)  than  the  Sabbath.  He  need  not 
have  gone  so  far  as  the  Mandaeans,  for  Ignatius  advises  the  Christians 
of  his  day  not  any  longer  to  Sabbatize,  but  to  live  according  to  the 
Lord's  day.  Probably  Kieinert  was  trying  to  explain  the  term  '  His 
holy  day '  in  verse  3.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  any  explanation  is 
really  necessary. 

It  is  probable  that  the  acquaintance  of  Syriac  writers  with  the  Odes 
of  Solomon  can  be  traced  through  many  centuries.  Here,  for  example, 
is  a  passage  which  is  suggestive  of  dependence  upon  the  Odes  in  the 
Preface  to  the  Marganitha  or  '  Pearl '  of  'Abdisho'.  The  writer  prays 
'  That  we  may  be  lifted  up  to  the  Holy  of  Holies,  the  dwelling-place  of  the 
Divine  mysteries,  and  may  be  transformed  into  that  likeness  which  is 
above  all  likeness  ;  and  that  through  the  rays  of  thy  essential  light  we 
may  shine  forth  for  ever,  afid  be  rejuvenated,  and  may  become  the  com- 
panions of  those  who  are  near  to  thy  greatness  in  theory  and  in  practice  ; 
and  that  we  should  be  seen  by  the  illustrious  and  blessed  here  and  there, 
and  amongst  those  who  are  of  the  right  hand.'' 

It  will  be  recognized  that  this  passage  is  in  close  dependence  upon 
the  thoughts  and  expressions  in  the  Odes.  The  coincidence  is  striking 
with  those  passages  where  the  Odist  speaks  of  being  lifted  up  into  Divine 
light  (Ode  xv,  and  Ode  xxi)  and  becoming  one  of  the  neighbours  of  God 
(Ode  xxi,  and  Odexxxvi);  and  the  allusion  to  believers  as  those  who  are  on 
the  right  hand,  is  also  remarkable.  The  language  does  not  show  the  same 
coincidence  as  the  thought.  Instead  of  f^iiii  we  have  the  equivalent 
11-^L/,  and  instead  of  c^^o  for  neighbours  we  have  the  equivalent  L^^>>.. 
But  these  variations  do  not  invalidate  the  dependence  of  'Abdisho'  upon 
the  thought  of  the  Odist. 


ODE    XVI 

As  the  work  of  the  husbandman  is  the  ploughshare ; 
And  the  work  of  the  steersman  is  the  guidance  of  the  ship  : 
So  also  my  work  is  the  Psalm  of  the  Lord  in  His  praises  ; 
1   77/.  Stud.  u.  A'rit.,  p.  610. 


xvi]  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  283 

2  My  craft  and  my  occupation  are  in  His  praises  ; 
Because  His  love  hath  nourished  my  heart, 
And  even  to  my  lips  His  fruits  He  poured  out. 

3  For  my  love  is  the  Lord 

And  therefore  I  will  sing  unto  Him. 

4  For  I  am  made  strong  in  His  praise, 
And  I  have  faith  in  Him. 

5  I  will  open  my  mouth, 

And  His  spirit  will  utter  in  me 

The  glory  of  the  Lord  and  His  beauty  ; 

6  The  work  of  His  hands 

And  the  fabric  of  His  fingers ; 

7  For  the  multitude  of  His  mercies, 
And  the  strength  of  His  Word. 

8  For  the  Word  of  the  Lord  searches  out  the  unseen  thing,     Cf.  1  Cor.  ii.  10. 
And  scrutinizes  His  thought. 

9  For  the  eye  sees  His  works, 
And  the  ear  hears  His  thought. 

10  It  is  He  who  spread  out  the  earth, 
And  settled  the  waters  in  the  sea : 

11  He  expanded  the  heavens, 
And  fixed  the  stars ; 

12  And  He  fixed  the  creation  and  set  it  up: 
And  He  rested  from  His  works. 

13  And  created  things  run  in  their  courses, 
And  work  their  works : 

And  they  know  not  how  to  stand  (still)  and  to  be  idle. 


2S4  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xvi 

14  And  the  hosts  are  subject  to  His  Word. 

15  The  treasury  of  the  light  is  the  sun, 

And  the  treasury  of  the  darkness  is  the  night. 

16  And  He  made  the  sun  for  the  day  that  it  might  be  bright  ; 
But  night  brings  darkness  over  the  face  of  the  earth  : 

Cf.  Ps.  xix.  1.  l1     And  (by)  their  reception  one  from  the  other 

They  speak  the  beauty  of  God. 

i  <S     And  there  is  nothing  that  is  without  the  Lord  ; 
Cf.  Col.  i.  17.  For  He  was  before  anything  came  into  being. 

Cf.  Heb.  i.  2.  l9     And  the  Worlds  were  made  by  His  Word, 

And  by  the  thought  of  His  heart. 

(Doxology.) 

30     Glory  and  Honour  to  His  name. 

Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  1.  Schulthess  suggests  d»»^x  '  the  mast'  for  oiiv^  '  the  steering'. 
This,  however,  is  not  sound.  The  verb  ;^  is  very  frequently  used  to 
express  '  the  steering '  of  a  ship,  e.  g. 

Ulftja   jj^jojjsa.:^.     (Ephr.  R.E.  i.  314). 
'  He  steers  ships  to  the  harbour.' 
Further,  )i*^.  is  generally  used  in  the  plural  and  refers  to  tools  whose 
function  is  to  strengthen  the  construction  of  a  ship. 

v.    2.     Frankenberg  unnecessarily  proposes  to  eliminate  the  beth  of 

v.  8.  The  verb^^?  is  not  duly  catalogued  in  the  Thesaurus,  and  this 
has  given  rise  to  many  inadmissible  theories  about  this  sentence.  It  is, 
however,  an  obvious  Syriac  triliteral  root  with  the  meaning  of  '  to  fathom, 
to  scrutinize'.     See  Dictionnairc  de  la  langue  chaldeenue,  and  Vocabulaire 


xvi]  ODES  OF    SOLOMON  385 

chalde'en-arabe   {sub   voce).      The   following    quotation    from    Gregory   of 
Cyprus,  a  fourth-century  writer,  is  sufficient : 

'  And  now  behold  my  eyes  fly  over  the  countries  of  the  luminaries, 
and  see  clearly  all  that  is  found  in  the  bottom  and  in  the  depths 
of  the  abysses.' — MS.  of  the  Rylands  Library,  p.  117. 

The  meaning  of  the  word  had  been  divined  by  Tondelli,  who  refers  to 
Brun's  Lexicon. 

In  a  recent  paper  by  Dr.  P.  Haupt  in  the  Journal  of  Biblical  Literature 
(xxxvii,  1918,  pp.  229-232)  the  Assyrian  root  Dagalu,  '  to  see,  to  look 
for ',  is  discussed,  and  it  is  shown  that  it  existed  in  Hebrew,  and  that  it 
can  be  restored  in  Cant.  v.  10  and  Ps.  xx.  6.  It  is  curious  that  Dr.  Haupt 
does  not  seem  to  have  noticed  its  occurrence  in  the  Odes  0/  Solomon. 

v.  9.  Earth  unnecessarily  proposes  to  read  -c*e*iL^.  to  make  it 
conform  with  cmIS-^a^-ici^. 

v.  15.  The  printed  text  has  Jfcoo^o  ;  but  the  MS.  reads  )l^,^,.g>o, 
and  we  should  correct  accordingly. 

v.  17.     It  is  more  grammatical  to  read  yOc*^.2>&.ttso. 

In  the  next  line  we  have  adopted  in  the  translation  ^Wyi-aa  for 
^Axuo  of  the  MS.  The  elimination  of  the  letter  lamadh  when  reduplicated 
is  frequent  in  the  old  manuscripts.  Those  who  prefer  the  reading  of  the 
MS.  will  translate  'complete'  or  'fulfil'. 

For  the  understanding  of  the  somewhat  mysterious  inter-reception  of 
the  sun  and  moon,  who  borrow  light  from  one  another,  we  must  turn 
to  the  teaching  of  the  Manichaeans  and  Bardaisan.  In  the  Bardesanian 
tradition  we  certainly  have  an  alternate  reception  of  light  between  the  sun 
and  the  moon :  it  must  be  admitted,  however,  that  the  Ode  does  not 
exactly  say  this.  It  says  that  the  sun  and  the  night  receive  from  one 
another.  Probably  the  night  has  displaced  the  moon  in  the  sentence, 
'  the  treasury  of  the  darkness  is  the  night '.  If  this  should  be  contested 
we  shall  have  to  resort  to  emendation  in  another  direction,  and  instead 
of  'and  their  reception'  (yOo^sojso)  we  would  read  (yOo>io>a*so)  'and  by 
their  succession ',  for  which  we  can  find  abundant  illustrations. 


286  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [xvi 

Expository  Xotcs. 

This  Ode  again  belongs  to  the  group  of  Wisdom-Odes ;  it  is  occupied 
with  the  praises  of  the  Logos  as  the  creative  and  providential  instrument 
of  God.  All  things  were  made  by  the  Logos,  and  He  was  pre-existent 
before  creation.  The  language  is  parallel  to  that  of  the  first  chapter  of 
St.  John's  Gospel,  but  it  also  shows  coincidence  with  Colossians,  and 
with  Hebrews:  thus  verse  19  'the  worlds  were  made  by  His  word'  is 
almost  exactly  Heb.  i.  2,  'by  whom  also  He  made  the  worlds';  verse  18, 
'  He  was  before  anything  came  into  being'  is  very  nearly  Col.  i.  17,  '  He  is 
before  everything';  and  verse  18,  'There  is  nothing  that  is  without  the 
Lord  '  (he  clearly  means  the  Logos),  has  its  analogue  in  John  i.  3,  '  Without 
Him  was  not  anything  made  that  was  made'.  Evidently  in  this  Ode  we 
see  the  Logos-theology  in  its  making.  Some  persons  will,  perhaps,  object 
and  say  that  we  see  it  already  made.  But  that  raises  the  question  as  to 
what  it  was  made  out  of,  and  takes  us  back  to  Prov.  viii.  22  ff. 

In  verse  17  we  showed  in  our  Introduction  that  the  language  had 
possibly  been  borrowed  by  Bardaisan  to  illustrate  a  curious  astronomical 
belief  that  the  sun  and  moon  exchanged  illumination,  the  sun  giving 
light  to  the  moon  when  the  latter  is  waxing  and  taking  it  back  again  when 
it  is  waning.  There  is  a  possibility,  therefore,  of  literary  dependence  of 
Bardaisan  on  the  Odes  at  this  point.  What  is  curious  about  the  use  of  the 
passage  is  that  the  Ode  does  not  say  that  the  sun  and  moon  receive  one 
from  the  other,  but  something  quite  different,  viz.,  that  the  day  and  night 
influence  one  another  alternately,  like  a  pair  of  closely  matched  powers,  of 
which  now  one  and  now  the  other  prevails.  But  he  has  the  sun  to  rule 
the  day  without  introducing  the  moon  to  rule  the  night.  This  is  not  in 
accordance  with  the  book  of  Genesis.  There  is,  then,  room  for  a  suspicion 
that  the  moon  has  been  got  rid  of  by  the  Odist  or  lost  from  his  text. 
If  we  please,  we  may  imagine  that  the  text  originally  stood  : 

'  The  treasury  of  the  Light  is  the  Sun ; 
And  the  treasury  of  the  darkness  is  the  Moon ; 
And  He  made  the  Sun  for  the  day  that  it  might  be  bright, 
But  the  night  brings  darkness  over  the  face  of  the  earth  : 
And  their  reception  one  from  the  other,'  &c. 

Agreeably,  that  is,  at  once  with  the  book  of  Genesis  and  with  Bardaisan. 


xvi]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  287 

We  have  interpreted  the  expression  about  'reception  one  from  the 
other '  in  accordance  with  the  sense  put  upon  the  words  by  Ephrem  and 
Bardaisan. 

In  the  editio  princeps  the  translation  was  offered,  that 
'  their  alternations  one  to  the  other  speak  the  beauty  of  God.' 
There  is  evidence  for  such  a  statement  by  way  of  parallel,  if  the  translation 
itself  could  have  been  justified.  For  instance,  Eusebius,  arguing  the 
evidence  for  design  in  the  universe,  and  the  consequent  necessity  for 
a  pervading  Logos,  says  that  the  world  cannot  be  a  chance  product  to 
the  eyes  of  him  who  observes  the  alternate  motions  of  day  and  night 
(ji/jcepas  re  Kal  vuktos  d/i.oi/?aias  bpwvrt  Kiv?/<rets).  Probably  the  argument 
was  something  of  a  commonplace.  In  Victorinus's  tract  De  fabrica 
mundi  the  work  of  the  Creator  in  forming  the  sun  to  rule  the  day,  and 
the  moon  to  rule  the  night  was  in  order  that  day  might  bring  on  night 
(superduceret)  as  a  place  of  rest  for  the  labours  of  men,  aud  then  that 
day  might  again  prevail,  and  thus  by  alternation  (alterna  vice)  labour 
might  be  comforted  by  the  rest  of  night,  and  rest  again  regulated  by 
the  exercise  of  the  day '.  It  is  natural  that  there  should  have  been  a 
stress  laid  upon  the  alternation  of  day  and  night.  There  is  some 
parallelism  between  the  language  of  Victorinus  (based  originally  on 
Papias?)  and  the  language  of  our  Ode  with  regard  to  'night  bringing 
darkness  over  the  face  of  the  earth '. 

In  verse  17  we  have  made  a  slight  emendation  so  as  to  bring  out 
the  dependence  of  the  Odist  on  Ps.  xviii.  (xix.).  '  The  heavens  are  telling 
the  glory  of  God '.     The  Odist  is  repeating  what  he  said  in  verse  5  : 

'  His  spirit  will  utter  in  me 
The  glory  of  the  Lord  and  His  beauty.' 

Here  '  His  beauty '  is  an  alternative  term  for  '  His  glory '.  The  Odist 
was  contemplating  the  'spacious  firmament'  on  high  when  he  said  that; 
for  in  the  next  verse  he  is  imitating  Ps.  viii. : 

'  Thou  hast  set  thy  glory  upon  thy  heavens, 
When  I  consider  thy  heavens  the  work  of  thy  fingers.' 

Or  as  the  Odist  says  (verse  6) : 

'  The  work  of  His  hands 
And  the  fabric  of  His  fingers? 


388  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xvi 

Thus  the  Odist  is  working  from  these  two  Psalms  and  from  the  first 
chapter  of  Genesis.  From  this  quarter  also  (the  book  of  Genesis)  comes 
the  reference  to  God's  resting  from  His  works:  the  12th  verse  is  a  reflex 
of  Gen.  ii.  8  :  '  He  rested  from  all  His  work  which  God  had  created  in  the 
making';  notice  the  omission  of  the  reference  to  the  seventh  day,  and 
what  follows  as  to  the  activity  of  the  heavenly  bodies  on  that  day  as  well 
as  on  other  days  of  the  week. 

In  the  editio  princeps  the  case  was  stated  as  follows  ; 

'  On  examining  the  Ode  more  closely  we  detect  an  unmistakable- 
case  of  anti-Judaic  polemic.  The  writer,  after  describing  the  beauty 
of  creation,  and  the  Lord's  rest  from  His  works,  goes  on  to  say 
something  which  shows  that  he  does  not  mean  to  deduce  the  Jewish 
Sabbath  from  the  statements  in  Genesis.  "  Created  things  run  in  their 
courses  and  do  their  works  and  know  not  kow  to  stand  or  to  be  idle." 
Suppose  we  turn  to  Justin's  Dialogue  with  Trypho,  c.  22,  where  Justin 
is  arguing  with  Trypho  for  the  non-necessity  of  circumcision  and  the 
Sabbath  ;  "  I  will  declare  to  you,  and  to  those  who  wish  to  become 
proselytes",  says  Justin,  "a  divine  word,  which  I  heard  from  the  old 
man  to  whom  I  owe  my  conversion.  He  said,  '  You  observe  that  the 
heavenly  bodies  do  not  idle  nor  keep  Sabbath.  Remain,  therefore,  as 
you  were  born  ;  do  not  keep  Sabbath,  nor  practice  circumcision  ' ". 

'  It  is  clear,  then,  that  the  16th  Ode  means  to  say  that  the  Sabbath 
is  not  kept  by  the  Heavenly  bodies  ;  and  as  it  goes  on  to  say,  "and 
the  (Heavenly)  Hosts  are  subject  to  His  word  "  it  follows  that  God  is 
regulating  the  motions  of  the  world  on  the  Sabbath  days  as  well 
as  on  the  week-days  :  a  point  which  Justin  expressly  makes  in  c.  29, 
"  God  undertakes  the  regulation  of  the  world  on  this  day  exactly  as  on 
other  days".' 

To  this  reasoning  exception  was  taken  by  Harnack,  on  the  ground  that 
the  Odist  does  not  say  with  Justin  ow  dpyet  ov&e  craft (3aTit,ei,  consequently 
we  are  not  to  think  of  anti-Judaic  polemic  in  the  Ode,  which  is  like  the 
rest  of  the  collection,  Jewish  in  character. 

Suppose  we  ask  the  question  how  an  early  Christian  of  the  type  of 
Justin  Martyr  would  present  his  case  against  the,  Jew  who  pointed  him 
to  the  law,  and  emphasized  its  unchangeability.  We  naturally  turn  to 
the  early  collections  of  Testimonies  against  the  Jews,  to  pick  up  the 
counter-quotations  and  the  rebutting  arguments.  Here  is  an  instructive 
passage  from  the  section  which  the  Testimonies,  ascribed  to  Gregory  of 
Nyssa,  devote  to  the  Sabbath. 


xvi-xvii]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  289 

The  writer  enumerates  a  number  of  cases  in  which  the  Sabbath  was 
broken  historically,  or  cannot  be  literally  kept  in  ordinary  life ;  and  then 
he  asks  this  question :  '  How  is  it  that  the  Sun  and  Moon  and  Stars 
fulfil  their  appointed  course  even  on  the  Sabbath  ? ' 

7rois  Se  77A10S  Kal  creXijvi]  kcll  aorpa  tov  wptcr/xevov  8p6/J.ov  eKreAet  /cat  tu 
o-a/3/3arw  ; 

One  might  almost  say  that  the  Odist  and  the  Testimony-collector  had 
been  in  collusion,  so  close  is  their  agreement ;  it  is,  therefore,  useless 
to  maintain  that  the  Sabbath  was  not  intended  by  the  idleness  or  standing 
still  of  the  creation. 

The  argument  that  the  Ode  is  Jewish  and  therefore  could  not  have 
been  spoken  in  an  anti-Sabbatic  manner,  or  that  the  Ode,  not  having 
an  anti-Sabbatic  sentence,  must  be  Jewish,  hardly  needs  further  con- 
sideration. , 


ODE    XVII 

1  I  was  crowned  by  my  God ; 
And  my  crown  is  living : 

2  And  I  was  justified  by  my  Lord  ; 
And  my  salvation  is  incorruptible. 

3  I  was  loosed  from  vanities. 
And  I  am  not  condemned. 

The  choking  bonds  were  cut  off  by  His  hand * ; 

4  I  received  the  face  and  the  fashion  of  a  new  person ; 
And  I  walked  in  Him  and  was  redeemed. 

5  And  the  thought  of  truth  led  me ; 

And  I  walked  after  it 2  and  did  not  wander. 

*  Cod. :  her  hands.  2  i.  e.  the  thought. 

11  U 


290  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xvu 

(Christ  speaks.) 
6     And  all  that  have  seen  me  were  amazed  ; 

And  I  was  supposed  by  them  to  be  a  strange  person. 
7a   And  He  who  knew  and  brought  me  up, 

Is  the  Most  High  in  all  His  perfection: 
7b   And  He  glorified  me  by  His  kindness, 

And  raised  my  thought  to  the  height  of  Truth. 
8     And  from  thence  He  gave  me  the  way  of  His  steps ; 

And  I  opened  the  doors  that  were  closed : 

Cf.  Ps.cvi.(cvii.)i6;    9     And  I  broke  in  pieces  the  bars  of  iron: 

Tea     xlv     2  • 

But  my  own  iron  (bonds)  melted  and  dissolved  before  me. 

10  And  nothing  appeared  closed  to  me; 
Because  I  was  the  opening  of  everything. 

1 1  And  I  went  towards  all  the  l  bondsmen  to  loose  them  ; 
That  I  might  not  leave  any  man  bound  and2  binding; 

12  And  I  imparted  my  knowledge  without  grudging; 
And  their  request  to  me3  with  my  love. 

13  And  I  sowed  my  fruits  in  hearts, 
And  transformed  them  through  myself: 

14  And  they  received  my  blessing  and  lived; 
And  they  were  gathered  to  me  and  were  saved. 

Cf.  Ephr.  Epiph.      15     Because  they  became  to  me  as  my  own  members  ; 
Hymn  \x,  I.  And    j   wag   thejr   head 

(Doxology.) 

16     Glory  to  thee  our  Head,  the  Lord  Messiah. 
Hallelujah. 

1  H,  my.  2  H,  and.  3  lit.  my  request 


xvii]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  291 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  4.  It  seems  clear  that  we  must  alter  d*-^-*  ('by  her  hands')  to 
a»-Ji2>  ('by  his  hand').  The  writer  seems  to  have  thought  that  he  was 
emancipated  'by  the  thought  of  Truth  '  (fem.)  which  follows  in  the  next 
verse,  and  so  added  the  feminine  suffix. 

v.  7.  The  Syriac  sentence  ov^ao  Ua-iao  uj^io  Joot  ^«-»  oo»o 
o^J^ooa,  is  difficult  to  understand,  and  in  the  text  we  have  suggested 
that  some  words  might  have  been  lost  after  ]oo».  In  following  H  and 
in  adding  a  yodh  to  ui/Vajo  we  shall  have  the  meaning  'But  He  who 
knew  and  brought  me  up  is  the  Most  High  in  all  His  perfection'. 
We  could  not  safely  take  Jocu  jj*>  as  an  adjective  and  translate  '  is  high ' ; 
because,  as  is  demonstrated  by  w^^o  of  the  following  line,  it  would  have 
had  the  contracted  form.  Instead  of  w-*^*,o  'and  He  is  glorified',  B  has 
t»i*a*o  'and  He  glorified  me',  forming  possibly  a  parallel  with  wa*s>o 
above  suggested.  '  He  brought  me  up  and  glorified  me '.  The  parallelism 
would  even  be  better  preserved  if,  instead  of  ^±=>*o  we  were  to  read 
wasioio  'and  He  exalted  me',  with  the  simple  addition  of  an  alaph.  The 
sense  of  the  whole  verse  would  be  : 

'  But  He  who  knew  and  exalted  me,  is  the  Most  High  in  all  His 
perfection ;  and  He  glorified  me  by  His  kindness,'  &c. 

v.  8.  There  is  no  need  to  change  o»kJi^©»»  into  ^VnN,o>»  as  Gunkel 
has  done,  and  we  do  not  understand  the  un-Syriac  verb  wO^=»oot  which 
Grimme  substitutes  for  the  natural  ^  o©U  '  He  gave  me '. 

v.  9.  Frankenberg  proposes  to  change  the  particle  w»^>  into  a  form 
of  verb  derived  from  the  verb  «^»,  but  Grimme  substitutes  for  it  the 
dative  ^*X  'to  me',  and  considers  the  first  JJ)*3?  as  a  dittographical  error 
on  the  part  of  the  copyist. 

v.  12.  The  sense  is  very  doubtful.  The  MS.  has  'and  my  prayer', 
'  request ', '  intercession  '.  In  Syriac  one  may  consider  this  as  the  beginning 
of  a  new  sentence,  and  in  adding  the  attributive  verb  which  can  be 
omitted  we  would  translate  '  And  my  prayer  (for  them  ?)  (is  or  was)  in 
my  love',  which  is  not  a  good  parallelism.  We  may  also  consider  the 
word  as  a  complement  of  I^oomo  'and  I  gave',  and  translate  'And 
I  gave  them  my  knowledge  without  grudging  and  my  prayer  {or  inter- 
cession) (for  them?)  in  my  love'.      In   this  last  meaning  'in  my  love' 

U  3 


292  ODES   OF    SOLOMON  [xvn 

refers  to  both  members  of  parallelism,  and  the  whole  phrase  means : 
In  my  love  I  gave  them  without  grudging  my  knowledge  and  my 
intercession  (or  prayer).  This  last  sense  would  be  greatly  improved, 
and  all  linguistic  difficulty  would  vanish  if  jla-Ns  were  translated  by 
'consolation,  comfort',  as  in  the  Lewis  text  of  Luke  ii.  25,  joe*  ^^.a^oo 
"^-.ijjo-.?  )lo_i>=>  ('and  he  was  waiting  for  the  consolation  of  Israel'). 
The  meaning  of  the  sentence  would  in  that  case  be  '  In  my  love  I  gave 
them  abundantly  my  knowledge  and  my  comfort '. 

v.  13.  This  sense  is  by  no  means  certain.  The  indirect  complement 
of  the  verb  ^w.  is  always  expressed  with  X  like  the  English  '  to, 
into',  and  the  particle  s  used  here  offers  some  difficulty.  It  is  this 
difficulty  which  has  no  doubt  caused  Barth  to  translate  '  und  verwandelte 
sie  durch  mich '.  It  is  not  easy,  however,  to  realize  how  the  Odist  would 
change  'through  himself.  With  the  verb  a\«  the  a  is  used  to  express 
the  change  of  one  thing  for  another,  or  an  '  exchange ',  and  such  a  meaning 
would  not  suit  the  context  very  well.  Possibly,  therefore,  we  might  read 
the  verbs  k«J^»lo  and  1^\m«.o  in  the  third  person,  and  in  eliminating  the 
ivazv  before  fc^ij  we  should  have  the  following  text  and  translation  : 

*.  t*2^»?    Joclm^    wLc-^.=>o 

'  And    my  prayer,   by   my   love,   sowed   my  fruits   in   hearts,   and 
transformed  them  through  me.' 

This  is  grammatically  and  lexicographically  correct,  and  explains  also 
the  difficulties  of  the  preceding  note. 


Expository  Notes. 

In  this  Ode  we  have  again  the  coronation  of  the  Odist  spoken  of, 
with  a  crown  that  does  not  wither,  just  as  in  the  first  Ode.  Also  there 
is  some  confession  of  a  personal  salvation.  The  latter  part  of  the  Ode, 
however,  is  certainly  ex  ere  Christi ;  we  can  see  this  from  the  closing 
doxology  to  '  our  head,  the  Lord  Christ ',  and  the  reference  which  precedes 
to  the  headship  of  Christ  with  regard  to  His  members.  Christ  also  is  the 
speaker  who  describes  himself  as  the  '  door  of  everything '  and  the  universal 


Xvii]  ODES    OF    SOLOMON  293 

liberator,  and  the  opener  of  closed  doors.  This  takes  us  back  to  the 
beginning  of  verse  9.  After  this  we  are  in  difficulties  over  the  delimitation 
of  the  speakers  in  verses  6-8.  Comparison  with  similar  situations  in 
Ode  xxviii.  8  and  Ode  xli.  8  makes  it  probable  that  the  person  who  causes 
amazement  and  appears  to  be  of  another  race  is  Christ  Himself.  On  this 
account  we  have  put  the  change  of  speakers  between  verses  5  and  6.  The 
transition,  however,  is  very  awkward. 

At  first  sight  it  might  seem  as  if  the  reference  to  the  '  breaking  of 
bars  of  iron'  in  verse  9  had  to  do  with  the  descent  into  Hades,  but  it 
is  much  more  probable  that  the  language  is  taken  from  the  107th  Psalm  : 

fxo^Xot";  crtS-^pous  crvveKXacrev 

the  Peshitta  version  corresponding  to  which  is 

f.5^  )J»i3?  JIoq.v> 

and  agrees  exactly  with  the  Odes ;  the  use  of  poxkoi  (Jlscoo)  shows  that 
the  Ode  and  the  Peshitta  transliterate  the  Greek  of  the  Psalms. 

If  we  have  correctly  denned  the  passage  of  Scripture  which  was  in  the 
Odist's  mind,  we  can  now  go  back  to  verse  4  with  its  obscure  allusion  to 
the  cutting  off  of  choking  bonds:  this  is  taken  from  verse  14  of  the  same 
Psalm,  which  runs  in  the  Greek, 

koX  tol's  Secr^oiis  avrdv  $uppr]$ev' 

We  may  compare  the  Syriac  of  the  Ode  at  this  point  with  the  Peshitta  : 

Ode  xvii.  4:  om*I)o  ca.c0.3Lc'   *«o,'i«» 

Ps.  cvi.  (cvii.)  14  :  vAxa.3    .ooi.oi..o 

The  coincidence  in  the  rendering  of  8eap.ov<s  and  SUpprj^ev  is  very  striking, 
and  raises  once  more  the  question  of  possible  connexion  between  the  Odes 
and  the  Syriac  Old  Testament. 

We  may,  at  all  events,  be  sure  that  the  Odist  is  working  from  this 
Psalm  as  a  base,  just  as  we  found  him  doing  in  the  case  of  the  21st  Psalm. 
We  are  entitled  to  explore  for  further  coincidences. 

In  verse  5  the  Odist  says  that 

'  the  thought  of  Truth  led  me, 
I  walked  after  it  and  did  not  wander.' 


294  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xvil 

This  is  imitated  from  the  Psalm  : 

v.  4.  •  They  wandered  in  the  wilderness 

v.  7.  And  he  led  them  by  a  right  way 

To  go  to  a  city  of  Settlement.' 

When  the  Odist  says  that  he  did  not  wander,  he  means  that  he  did 
not  wander  again ;  a  previous  wandering  is  assumed  as  in  the  Psalm. 
And  now  let  us  compare  the  Ode  again  with  the  Peshitta  version : 

Ode  xvii.  5  :  «-oLi.s?  )»;•*-»  )k>->«».  vo 

Ps.  cvi.  (cvii.)  7  :         ]U».clo?   L»»o)o   yOj?   ^.o 

Here  we  have  a  very  curious  coincidence :  the  '  right  way '  is  reflected 
on  the  Ode  as  a  '  thought '  or  '  counsel '  of  '  Truth ' ;  and  in  the  Peshitta 
as  a  '  way  of  Truth  ',  with  different  words  to  express  the  '  Truth  '. 

Whatever  may  be  the  explanation  of  this  coincidence  in  thought,  we 
may  be  sure  we  have  one  of  the  keys  in  our  hand  for  the  interpretation 
of  the  Ode.  To  the  three  striking  coincidences  already  noted,  we  may, 
perhaps,  add  the  reference  to  the  'loosing  of  all  bondsmen'  in  verse  11, 
which  answers  to  the  10th  verse  of  the  Psalm : 

Notice  also  the  way  in  which  the  reference  to  spiritual  fruits  and  blessing 
in  verses  13  and  14  has  been  grafted  on  verses  37,  38  of  the  Psalm  : 

tT7oii]<Tav   Kapirov  yevy'j/xaTo<; 
Kat   evkoyr/crev  avTovs. 

Enough  has  been  said  to  show  the  dependence  of  the  Ode  upon  the 
Psalm. 

In  the  introduction  we  pointed  out  that  there  were  some  striking 
parallels  in  this  Ode  to  the  Letter  of  Ignatius  to  the  Philadelphians. 
We  may  also  note  the  parallel  (no  doubt  one  of  many  similar  ones) 
with  the  Epiphany  Hymns  of  Ephrem  : 

'  Ye  have  become  children  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
(jr.  through  baptism): 
Christ  has  become  your  head ; 
Ye  have  become  members  to  Him.' — Hymn  in  Epiph.  9.  1. 


xvii-xviii]  ODES   OF    SOLOMON  295 

Ephrem  is  imitating  the  24th  Ode  at  this  point,  and  may  have  actually 
imitated  the  17th  also.  We  may  also  refer  for  the  'loosing  of  the 
bondmen'  to  Ephrem,  R.  E.  iii.  130. 


ODE    XVIII 

1  My    heart    was    lifted    up    and    enriched    in  the  love  of  the 

Most  High; 
That  I  might  praise  Him  by  my  name. 

2  My  members  were  strengthened 

That  they  might  not  fall  from  His  power. 

3  Sickness  removed  from  my  body, 

And  it  stood  for  the  Lord  by  His  will ; 
For  His  Kingdom  is  firm. 

4  O  Lord,  for  the  sake  of  them  that  are  deficient, 
Do  not  deprive  me  of1  thy  word: 

5  Nor,  for  the  sake  of  their  works, 

Do  thou  restrain  from  me  thy  perfection. 

6  Let  not  the  luminary  be  conquered  by  the  darkness  ;  Cf.  Sap.  Sol.  vii.  29 
Nor  let  truth  flee  away  from  falsehood. 

7  Let  thy  right  hand  bring  our  salvation  to  victory, 
And  receive  from  all  quarters, 

And  preserve  whomsoever  is  affected  by  ills. 

8  Falsehood  and  Death  are  not  in  thy  mouth,  my  God ; 
But  thy  will  is  perfection. 

1  Lit.  Cast  off  from  me. 


296  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xvm 

9     And  vanity  thou  knowest  not, 
For  neither  doth  it  know  thee. 

10  And  error  thou  knowest  not, 
For  neither  doth  it  know  thee. 

11  And  ignorance  appeared  like  dust, 
And  like  the  scum  of  the  sea : 

1 2  And  vain  people  supposed  that  it  was  (something)  great ; 
And  they  came  to  resemble  it  and  became  vain : 

13  And  the  wise  understood  and  meditated  (thereon). 
And  were  unpolluted  in  their  meditations ; 

For  such  were  in  the  mind  of  the  Lord. 

14  And  they  mocked  at  those  who  were  walking  in  error: 

15  And  on  their  part  they  spake  truth, 

From    the    inspiration    which  the    Most  High   breathed   into 
them. 

(Doxology.) 

16  Praise  and  great  comeliness  to  His  name. 

Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  1.  The  Syriac  can  also  be  taken  intransitively,  'my  heart  rose 
up  and  abounded  in  the  love  of  the  Most  High '.  Schulthess  has 
suggested  cou  'His  name'  instead  of  'my  name';  this  is  possible  but 
not  necessary.  Still  more  unnecessary  is  its  change  into  f-'voa  or  >.i»\ 
or  kooos  as  Bruston  has  suggested. 

v.  3.  Diettrich  suggests  )iaaci\.v>  '  His  promise  is  firm  '.  The  Syriac 
word  is,  however,  very  seldom  used.  Further,  the  idea  of  the  Kingdom 
of  God  being  firm  is  expressed  in  Ode  xxii.  12. 


xviii]  ODES  OF  SOLOMON  297 

v.  3.  B  has  Q-SO..OO  'and  they  stood  for',  referring  to  Jjo»»co 
'  sicknesses '.  H  exhibits  ji_oo  '  and  it  stood  for ',  the  subject  being 
'  my  body ',  which  seems  to  be  more  appropriate. 

v.  4.     H  has  '  do  not  loose  (lit.  dissolve) '. 

v.  7.  Both  MSS.  have  ^a^.  ^jso  which  we  have  changed  into  s^a^> 
^io.  The  note  to  the  printed  text  must  be  changed  accordingly.  The 
meaning  of  the  sentence  is  not  affected  by  the  change.  If  the  manuscripts 
are  right,  ^-ao  is  to  be  considered  as  having  been  used  expletively,  as 
meaning  possibly,  'as  if.  The  reader  is  asked  to  remember  that  the 
sentence  'all  affected  by  ills'  is  complement  of  both'^^islo  and  i^-jlo. 
This  disposes  of  some  unnecessary  theories  about  this  verse.  Literally 
)k*;.',-^  j—/  means  '  to  cling  to  evils  (or)  sufferings,  (or)  tribulations '. 

v.  10.  Connolly  suggests  that  D?  ought  to  be  superseded  by  «c»X/ 
'my  God'.  This  is  good,  but  not  necessary,  inasmuch  as  the  use  or 
this  particle  here  adds  energy  to  the  sentence,  like  the  corresponding 
Arabic  5l  '  It  is  because  thou  knowest  not  error,  that  it  does  not  know 
thee '.  B  omits  it  entirely ;  and  for  that  reason  it  is  perhaps  better  not 
to  take  any  notice  of  it  in  the  translation. 

v.  12.  The  expression  «Lqjs5»  ^}  oU  'they  came  to  its  resemblance; 
they  came  to  resemble  it'  simply  means,  'they  resembled  it'  in  Syriac. 
This  peculiarity  of  style  should  be  noted. 

Expository  Notes. 

This  is  a  very  difficult  Ode  to  interpret :  we  have  not  succeeded  in 
finding  any  Scripture  coincidences  that  could  be  depended  upon.  There 
is  a  quasi-parallel  to  the  passage  in  the  first  chapter  of  John  ('the 
darkness  overcame  it  not ').  It  is  equally  difficult  to  detect  the  Christian 
elements  in  the  Ode.  Perhaps  the  writer  is  speaking  as  a  Christian  in  the 
first  verse  ('  that  I  might  praise  Him  by  my  name ',  i.  e.  by  the  name  ,of 
a  Christian).  In  that  case  he  should  be  a  Christian  of  a  universal  type, 
since  he  says  that  the  Lord  will  '  receive  men  from  all  quarters ',  verse  7). 
We  repeat  what  was  said  of  this  Ode  in  the  first  edition : 

'The  writer  of  this  Psalm  speaks  as  a  prophet,  who  has  known 
the  Divine  visitation,  and  has  felt  its  effect  both  on  mind  and  body, 
in  the  dispelling  of  error  and  the  healing  of  disease.  He  prays  for 
a  continuance  of  the  Heavenly  gift  for  the  sake  of  the  needy  people 


29«  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [xvm-xix 

to  whom  he  gives  his  message.  He  has  evidently  been  regarded  by 
them  as  a  light  and  foolish  person,  whose  talk  is  like  the  foam  of  the 
sea.  But  there  are  others  who  are  inspired  like  himself,  and  who 
mock  at  the  unbelievers  for  their  stupidity  and  ignorance.  We  catch 
the  echo  of  some  serious  controversy  upon  religious  matters,  but  the 
subject  of  the  dispute  is  unknown.' 

In  verse  4  there  appears  to  be  a  reflection  of  the  119th  Psalm  ;  we  may- 
compare  : 

'O  Lord,  for  the  sake  of  the  deficient  do  not  remove  thy  word  from  me.' 

Ode  xviii. 

1  Take  not  out  of  my  mouth  the  word  of  truth  utterly.' 

Ps.  cxix.  43. 

Here  the  Ode  says  L*i^fc*3  for  '  word ',  and  the  Syriac  says  Jk^jsc  ;  but 

we  notice  that  the  Targum  has  Dins. 

In  the  same  verse  there  is  also  a  reference  to  Ps.  li  : 

1  Cast  me  not  away  from  thy  presence, 

And  take  not  thy  Holy  Spirit  from  me.' 

The  Nitrian  MS.  reads  )*».i  for  J^i,  and  this  should  be  right;    for 

the  Syriac  of  Ps.  li.  13  has 

where  the  Targum  has  a  different  word. 


ODE    XIX 

A  cup  of  milk  was  offered  to  me ; 

And  I  drank  it  in  the  sweetness  of  the  delight  of  the  Lord. 

The  Son  is  the  cup, 

And  He  who  was  milked  is  the  Father  ; 

And  He  who  milked  Him  is  the  Holy  Spirit. 

Because  His  breasts  were  full  ; 

And  it  was  not  desirable  that  His  milk  should  be  spilt  to  no 
purpose. 


xix]  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  299 

4  And  the  Holy  Spirit  opened  His1  bosom 

And  mingled  the  milk  of  the  two  breasts  of  the  Father, 

5  And  gave  the  mixture  to  the  world  without  their    knowing : 
And  those  who  take  (it)  are  in  the  fulness  of  the  right  hand. 

6  The  womb  of  the  Virgin  took  (it) 

And  she  received  conception  and  brought  forth : 

7  And  the  Virgin  became  a  mother  with  great  mercy ; 

8a    And  she  travailed  and  brought  forth  a  Son  without  incurring 

pain  : 
8b    For  it  did  not  happen  without  purpose  ; 

9     And  she  had  not  required  a  midwife,  Ps.  xxii.  9 ;   and 

Euseb.Z>.£\x.  8, 10. 
For  He  delivered  her. 

10  And  she  brought  forth,  as  a  man,  by  (God's)2  will: 
And  she  brought  (Him)  forth  with  demonstration 
And  acquired  (Him)  with  great  dignity  ; 

1 1  And  loved  (Him)  in  redemption  ; 
And  guarded  (Him)  kindly  ; 
And  showed  (Him)  in  majesty. 

Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  4.  Both  MSS.  read  'her  (i.e.  the  Holy  Spirit's)  bosom'  c»=>aJi*. 
under  the  influence  of  the  preceding  and  following  feminine  verbs.  We 
can  easily  read  the  masculine  oc>cu^  '  His  (i.e.  the  Father's)  bosom '. 

v.  5.  Grimme  and  Gressmann  want  I^NnN  'to  the  worlds',  cf. 
Odes  vii.  n  ;  viii.  23  ;  xii.  4,  8  ;  xvi.  19.     The  plural  form  of  the  following 

1   Lit.  Her  bosom.  2  Or,  of  her  own  will. 


3oc  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [XIX 

verb  gives  weight  to  their  view,  although,  strictly  speaking,  grammatically 
it  may  refer  also  to  j.xiN.'vN.  used  in  the  singular. 

v.  6.  Much  has  been  written  about  the  Syriac  verb  j^a^  which  prima 
facie  does  not  seem  to  yield  good  sense.  Barnes  has  suggested  l^aj^, 
which  would  answer  to  the  problematic  infirmatus  est  of  Lactantius.  The 
Syriac  verb,  however,  is  mostly  used  in  the  sense  of  '  to  faint ',  '  to  be 
exhausted  from  fatigue'  or  'hunger';  moreover,  even  in  accepting  it  in 
the  sense  of  infirmatus  est,  the  meaning  of  the  sentence  remains  obscure. 
We  think  that  the  following  should  be  accepted  as  a  plausible  inter- 
pretation. Taking  the  verb  «a^  as  used  in  the  MSS.,  we  can  find  in  it 
a  reduplicated  root  »a.^  with  an  intransitive  meaning  of  '  to  be  closed, 
restricted ',  and  a  concave  root  .a^with  a  transitive  meaning  of  '  to  gather ', 
'  to  take  furtively ',  '  to  attract ',  '  to  catch  '  (this  last  meaning  is  mostly 
used  of  fish).  Generally  speaking  it  is  a  tendency  of  our  author  to  use 
a  transitive  verb  without  complement.  The  preceding  verse  of  this  Ode 
contains  two  such  verbs.  **.^~*  and  ^,~>au.  Following  the  same  rule, 
we  may  take  the  verb  .a.^  in  its  concave  form  and  translate  :  '  And  those 
who  take  [it]  (the  mixture)  are  in  the  perfection  of  the  right  hand  ;  the 
womb  of  the  virgin  caught  [it],  and  conceived  and  brought  forth  '. 
Schulthess  proposes  Uo;a^.  j»^  tetigit  u tenon.  This,  however,  would 
require  other  changes  to  make  the  Syriac  correct.  Labourt  would  suggest 
^^^jsJ^  sa^  alas  produxit,  but  besides  the  changes  which  the  text  would 
have  to  undergo  to  be  grammatical,  the  Syriac  verb  is  used  of  a  bird 
(mostly  a  hen)  sitting  on  its  eggs  (and  seldom  of  its  nestlings).  Newbold's 
suggestion  of  aNi^  '  they  formed '  is  improbable.  The  opinion  above 
vindicated  is  rightly  upheld  by  Connolly,  and  grammatically  and  lexico- 
graphically there  is  little  doubt  that  his  translation  is  the  right  one. 
There  is  also  reason  to  believe  that  the  very  verb  Ua^  was  before  the 
translator  of  the  text  of  which  Lactantius  was  availing  himself;  hence  the 
incomprehensible  infirmatus  est  derived  from  I^a-V. 

It  will  be  seen  from  what  precedes  that  we  incline  to  believe  that 
the  correct  explanation  of  the  peculiar  language  of  Lactantius  lies  in 
the  fact  that  the  reference  made  by  Lactantius  has  come  from  a  mis- 
understood Syriac  text.  The  balance  of  the  evidence  is  that  way,  now 
that  we  have  shown  that  Lactantius  was  really  giving  an  extract  from 
a  book  of  Testimonies.      Hence  there  is  no  need   to  emend  the  text  of 


xix]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  301 

Lactantius  from  '  infirmatiis  est  uterus  Virginis '  to  '  insinuatus  est  uterus 
Virginis ',  on  the  faith  of  the  preceding  sentence  in  which  Lactantius  says : 
'  Descendens  itaque  de  caelo  sanctus  ille  spiritus  sanctam  virginem  cuius 
utero  se  insinuaret  elegit.' 

It  is,  however,  not  a  little  curious  that  in  the  Altercation  of  Simon 
and  Theophilus,  which  is  based  throughout  on  the  traditional  Testimonia, 
the  very  same  expression  turns  up  in  an  introductory  sentence  on  the 
Ascension  of  Christ : 

'  At  illi  qui  nesciebant  Christum  verbo  in  virginem  insinuatum, 
mirantes,'  &c. — Altercatio.  c.  25. 

v.  8.  In  the  text  the  number  8  ought  to  be  placed  before  tO^>~o, 
if  we  take  ^£^>  of  the  second  member  as  only  explicative,  because  in 
this  case  it  has  to  be  linked  with  something  preceding  it.  Labourt's 
opinion  that  this  particle  has  here  the  meaning  of  '  eo  consilio  ut '  is 
inadmissible. 

v.  9.  The  Syriac  o»~-l?  ^>^:se  )&•**•  k--^*  No  is  curiously  well  worded, 
and  the  Odist  seems  almost  to  derive  the  verb  <**+]  '  to  make  live ',  to 
vivify,  from  )k~.~  '  midwife ',  called  in  Syriac  '  the  living  one '.  On  this 
hypothesis,  <**./  has  certainly  the  meaning  of  '  to  vivify '  in  the  sense  of 
to  deliver  a  woman  in  travail;  to  facilitate  her  pains  (cf.  Exod.  i.  16,  17). 
Generally  the  word  is  used  in  the  Old  Testament  for  the  deliverance 
of  children  and  not  for  that  of  their  mother.  The  partisans  of  a  Greek 
original  might  explain  this  happy  sounding  of  words  through  a  com- 
bination of  /xai'a  and  fjLauvo/xai,  but  if  the  Odist  had  in  mind,  when  using 
the  verb  k*~<\  any  idea  of  deliverance  in  the  sense  of  salvation,  as  implied 
by  )oc>a^=>  of  verse  11,  the  Syriac  sentence  would  involve  a  mental 
conception  and  a  play  upon  words  which  could  be  accounted  for  exclusively 
through  a  Syriac  channel.  Otherwise  we  should  imagine  a  Greek  original 
something  like  the  following  poetical  form  : 

koli  ovk   ifxatero  fiatav, 
avTOS  yap   i/JtauvcraTO   avrrjv. 

v.  10.  It  is  not  certain  from  the  context  whether  the  virgin  brought 
forth  a  child  '  by  her  own  will '  or  '  by  the  will  of  God '.  Strictly  speaking, 
the  Syriac  'by  will'  although  frequently  meaning  'by  one's  own  will' 
leaves  the  question  undecided.     When  the  word  is  used  without  suffixes, 


302  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xix 

it  is  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  it  is  the  natural  and  usual  expression  for 
'by  one's  own  will '.  There  is  no  linguistic  reason,  however,  impeding  us 
from  translating  it  here  '  by  her  own  will '.  The  substantives  used  in  the 
following  lines  with  the  prefix  ^  seem  to  refer  to  the  Virgin,  and  if  this  be 
so,  it  is  grammatically  more  correct  to  refer  U*2>-^>  also  to  the  same  Virgin. 

The  Syriac  construction  induces  us  to  believe  that  Ji^^--/  is  to  be 
translated  by  'as  if,  or  'as  it  were  a  man',  a  rendering  adopted  by 
Labourt-Batiffol,  the  particle  ~-/  being  used  to  mean  a  comparison  with 
the  reality  and  not  the  reality  itself.  'As  a  man',  or  'like  a  man'  in 
the  sense  of  '  courageously ',  would  account  for  the  uselessness  of  the 
midwife ;  but  in  the  next  verse  it  is  stated  that  her  Son,  or  more  probably 
God  Himself,  took  the  place  of  a  midwife.  Further,  this  interpretation 
would  be  untenable  in  verses  io-n  where  the  word  )j  ->  ^  '<=  almost 
certainly  the  object  of  all  the  Syriac  verbs. 

In  the  next  line,  the  sentence  JlS-»ci~l^>  l»i>-.o  translated  by  'and  she 
brought  forth  with  demonstration '  is  not  sufficiently  clear.  Linguistically, 
we  might  translate  it  by  '  ostensibly ' :  in  this  case  we  should  have  the 
following  meaning  : 

'  She  brought  forth,  as  it  were  a  man  by  (her  own)  will  and  she 
brought  (him)  forth  ostensibly.' 

The  translation  '  en  exemple '  adopted  by  Labourt  is  not  probable  ;  we 
should  have  had  JlS-cu.^^.  His  suggestion  that  the  word  might  have 
been  )l^—cu»l  {sic.')  'hilarity'  is  impossible.  If  Jla—cu.  is  meant,  the 
change  would  be  very  violent. 

Another  explanation  has  been  offered  for  the  words  '  as  a  man ', 
which  we  shall  refer  to  the  Davidic  Psalter  as  origin.  It  is  suggested 
that  instead  of  Jt^^'a  man',  we  should  read  L^i^  'a  giant':  and 
there  is  something  to  be  said  for  the  suggestion. 

Ephrem  frequently  speaks  of  the  Virgin  as  bringing  forth  'a  giant', 
e.  g.  in  the  Hymns  on  the  Virgin  : 

'  Mary  bowed  down  and   brought  forth  the  giant  of  the  worlds, 
the  giant  of  the  powers.' 

•.  1L~»    ) ^^  [ >a^.\ »  Ji^o^ 

Ed.  Lamy,  ii.  553. 


xix]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  303 

'  The  womb  carried  thee ;   the  manger  sufficed  thee ; 
Simeon  carried  thee,  O  giant  God.' 

.Jc»W  ji^i^  *  yJ-5^   va.^a^ 

Ed.  Lamy,  ii.  559. 

'  Like  a  child  hast  thou  arisen  from  me  : 
And  like  a  giant  hast  thou  become  strong.' 

Ed.  Lamy,  ii.  623. 
The  ultimate  origin  of  the  figure,  if  the  emendation  be  correct,  is 
Ps.  xix.  6  :  'as  a  bridegroom  coming  out  of  his  chamber,  exulting  like 
a  giant,'  &c.  (Jt^i^  y+1),  or  more  probably  Ps.  Ixxxvii.  5,  which  reads  in 
the  Peshitta  Version:  'a  giant  man  (Ji^o^  J^^)  was  born  in  her,  and 
He  established  her  '„ 

v.  n.  Instead  of  Ui3»a&s  'with  salvation',  Gressmann  proposes 
Uaj»o&£>  'with  administration',  and  (by  extension)  'with  care'.  If  an 
emendation  is  to  be  introduced  into  the  text,  a  choice  between  Uia^aa^> 
or  ).jj3>o*fcS  'by  (divine)  decree'  would  be  better  Syriac. 

For  '  she  guarded  Him  in  kindness ',  we  should  by  a  slight  correction, 
reading  U_>  for  i^~>,  translate  'she  crooned  over  Him  affectionately'. 
The  confirmation  comes  from  Ephrem  : 

'  She  loved  Him  and  crooned  over  Him 

When  He  began  to  cry,  she  rose  and  suckled  Him, 
Loved  Him  tenderly,  crooned  over  Him.' 

Otl^Q.1^/    fcoCLO 
.o»U-J    k>~i^.. 

Ed.  Lamy,  ii.  553. 
'She  carried  Him,  she  crooned  over  Him,  she  embraced  Him.' 
.kjaa^*  .3/  !»_»  fc-i-^ 

Ed.  Lamy,  ii.  621. 


304  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [xix 

1  Since  thou  art   my  Son   I   will  croon  over  thee ;    since  I  have 
become  thy  mother,  1  will  honour  thee.' 

fi*i(   1W  «p  «fcook> 

Ed.  Lamy,  ii.  (ibid.). 
If  this  emendation  be  accepted,   it  is  likely  that  Ephrem  will  take  us 
a  step  further.     For  in  the  first  of  the  passages  quoted  (and  elsewhere), 
Ephrem  refers  to  the  '  swaddling  clothes '  and  the  '  manger '. 

Expository  Notes. 

This  Ode  is,  in  modern  eyes,  altogether  grotesque,  and  out  of  harmony 
with  the  generally  lofty  strain  of  the  rest  of  the  collection.  It  is  not 
surprising  that  it  was  supposed  on  the  first  discovery  of  the  Odes  to  be 
a  later  addition.  Unfortunately  for  this  hypothesis  it  happens  to  be  one 
of  the  best  attested ;  it  was  not  only  quoted  by  Lactantius  through  the 
medium  of  a  primitive  collection  of  Testimonia,  but,  as  we  have  shown  in 
the  Introduction,  it  was  known  to  Eusebius  and  elsewhere.  So  there 
is  no  ground,  in  our  present  state  of  knowledge,  for  detaching  it  from 
the  rest  of  the  collection.  It  stood  as  Ode  xix  in  the  early  source  to 
which  we  have  traced  it. 

There  is  a  further  reason  for  not  detaching  it  from  the  rest  of  the 
collection.  The  first  half  of  the  Ode  is  a  parable  or  allegory  of  the 
milk  from  the  breasts  of  God.  We  have  already  had  an  allusion  to 
the  divine  breasts  in  the  eighth  Ode,  where  the  Lord  says  '  My  own 
breasts  I  prepared  for  them  that  they  might  drink  my  holy  milk  and 
live  thereby '.     Something  to  the  same  effect  is  implied  in  Ode  xxxv  : 

1  He  gave  me  milk,  the  dew  of  the  Lord.' 
So  that  if  the  19th  Ode  is  to  be  ejected,  the  eighth  and  the  35th  will 
have  to  be  expelled  at  the  same  time.  Moreover,  if  the  figures  employed 
seem  harsh  and  unnatural  to  us,  they  do  not  appear  to  have  been  so  to  the 
early  Christians.  Clement  of  Alexandria,  in  his  Paedagogus  (lib.  i,  c.  8, 
p.  124)  has  a  long  discussion  of  the  milk  with  which  Christ's  babes  are 
nourished.  Our  nourishment,  he  says,  is  the  Divine  Word,  it  is  '  the  milk 
of  the  Father,  by  which  alone  the  babes  are  fed.  Through  the  Word  we 
have  believed  in  God,  to  whose  care-allaying  breasts  we  have  fled '.  And 
again  (p.  125)  'to  the  babes,  who  seek  for  the  Word,  the  breasts  of  the 


xix]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  305 

Fathers  kindness  supply  the  milk '.  Thus  Clement  employs  the  figurative 
language  of  the  Ode,  while  avoiding  its  crudity. 

The  two  parts  of  the  Ode,  the  milk-section  and  the  section  on  the 
Virgin  Birth,  appear  to  be  two  separate  compositions  on  the  first  examina- 
tion :  closer  study  shows  them  to  be  in  sequence ;  and  the  mysterious  verb 
with  which  the  second  part  of  the  Ode  opens,  being  in  the  feminine,  takes 
as  subject  the  '  Spirit ',  the  subject  of  the  previous  sentence.  So  the  two 
parts  were  connected  by  the  author  himself. 

The  second  part  of  the  Ode  is  really  more  perplexing  than  the  first : 
the  first  is  grotesque,  without  an  evolution  of  ideas  :  it  might  easily  have 
been  produced  at  a  single  sitting ;  but  the  second  part  appears  to  present 
the  doctrine  of  the  Virgin  Birth  in  a  highly  evolved  form  ;  as,  for  instance, 
Virgin  Birth,  plus  painlessness,  plus  non-necessity  of  a  midwife  ;  this  is 
the  sort  of  thing  that  we  come  across  in  the  Apocryphal  Gospels  of  the 
Infancy.  Can  we  really  refer  this  kind  of  speculation  to  the  borders  of 
the  first  century  ? 

One  thing  has  emerged  clearly  from  the  study  of  the  Odes.  We  have 
shown  in  the  Introduction  that  the  Odist  was  not  working  without  a 
Scriptural  base  :  he  was  operating  on  the  text  of  the  22nd  Psalm,  when 
he  was  talking  so  fantastically  about  the  non-necessity  for  a  midwife, 
and  about  the  Father  acting  as  midwife.  This  use  of  the  22nd  Psalm 
is  very  important.  In  the  28th  Ode  the  very  same  Psalm  is  applied  as 
predictive  of  Christ,  so  that  we  have  one  more  link  between  the  19th 
Ode  and  the  rest  of  the  collection.  And  it  is  not  merely  Eusebius  who 
discloses  to  us  the  meaning  of  the  text  'Thou  art  He  who  didst  draw 
me  out  of  my  Mother's  womb',  and  who  uses  obstetric  language.  The 
text  had  a  place  in  controversy  ;  for,  as  soon  as  the  Virgin  Birth  was 
conceded,  a  dispute  arose  as  to  the  nature  of  the  flesh  of  Christ,  and 
Valentinus  enunciated  the  heresy  that  the  Lord  passed  through  the  Virgin 
as  water  through  a  tube,  without  taking  substance  from  the  Virgin.  So 
when  Tertullian  comes  to  deal  with  Valentinus  in  his  treatise  De  came 
Cliristi,  he  produces  this  very  verse  from  the  22nd  Psalm,  and  comments 
upon  it  with  a  wealth  of  anatomical  knowledge  and  obstetrical  detail ! 
He  uses  the  strongest  translation  possible  for  lno-Traoi,  and  says : 

'  Avulsisti  me  ex  utero.     Quid  avellitur,  nisi  quod  inhaeret,'  &c. — 
De  Came  Christi,  c.  20,  p.  322,  ed.  Rigalt. 

1-  X 


306  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [xix 

The  text  in  the  Psalm  had  acquired  a  polemical  value  in  the  Valentinian 
controversy,  but  it  was  a  text  which  Valentinus  himself  was  assumed  to 
accept.  So  what  seems  to  us  to  be  late  may  turn  out  to  be  very  much 
older  than  it  looks.  As  to  the  painless  delivery,  one  can  find  parallels 
to  that  in  pagan  literature ;  the  idea,  at  all  events,  is  not  a  Christian 
invention.  We  have  discussed  this  obstetric  matter  sufficiently  in  the 
Introduction ;  it  remains  to  elucidate  one  or  two  remaining  points. 

In  verse  10  we  have  some  obscure  and  allusive  matter  in  the  words  : 

1  She  brought  forth,  as  a  man,  of  the  Will.' 

We  have  referred  the  last  words,  with  some  probability,  to  the  Will  of 
God,  considering  that  the  thought  involved  is  parallel  to  that  in  the 
Western  text  of  John  i.  14;  ('who  was  born  .  .  .  not  of  the  will  of 
man,  but  of  God  '). 

For  the  words,  'as  a  man',  we  must  probably  go  to  Dan.  vii.  13, 
where  '  one  like  the  Son  of  Man  came  with  the  clouds  of  heaven ' ;  for 
this  passage  was  very  early  interpreted  of  the  Incarnation.  Thus  Justin, 
Dial,  76  says  : 

to  yap  (I>9  viov  dvOpwTrov  tLTrelv,  (fiaivo/xtvov  pev  koX  yevopavov  av6pu)—ov 
firjvuei,   oi'K   c£  avOpui—ivov   (T7re'ppuTOS   VTvdp^ovTa   8rj\oi. 

The  language  of  Justin  again  recalls  the  terms  of  John  i.  13. 

The  concluding  sentences  of  the  Ode  are  almost  unintelligible,  and 
without  adequate  motive.     The  conjecture  in  the  editio  princeps  to  read 

'  She  loved  him  in  his  swaddling  clothes ' 

was  too  violent  a  change  to  find  acceptance  ;  but  there  is  something  to 
be  said  for  it.  If  we  recall  the  natural  hostility  of  the  docetic  mind  to 
the  Incarnation  through  a  Virgin,  and  the  objections  of  Marcionites  and 
others  to  any  natural  birth  at  all  as  unworthy  of  the  Son  of  God,  we  may, 
perhaps,  be  able  to  throw  a  ray  of  light  on  these  concluding  sentences. 
Thus  Tertullian  makes  Marcion  say : 

1  Indignum  hoc  Dei  Filio.' 
and  he  goes  on  to  say : 

'  Dedigneris  quod  pannis  dirigitur,  quod  unctionibus  formatur,  quod 
blanditiis  desidetur.' — De  came  Christi,  c.  4. 


xix]  ODES   OF  SOLOMON  307 

Thus  the  last  sentences  of  the  Ode  might  be  paraphrased : 

'  It  was  a  great  honour  (not  a  dishonour)  to  have  borne  him  : 
She  loved  him  in  his  swaddling  clothes, 
And  watched  over  him  with  fondling, 
And  exhibited  him  proudly.' 

But  this  is  not  to  be  taken  as  criticism  of  the  same  order  as  the  first 
part  of  this  note.  We  concede  the  obscurity  of  the  last  clauses :  but 
we  have  cleared  up  the  difficulty  of  the  Divine  accoucheur.  That  is 
certainly  from  the  22nd  Psalm.1 

The  statement  that  the  Virgin  brought  forth  her  Son  without  assistance 
is  an  early  article  of  the  Testimony  Book,  where  it  is  deduced  from 
Daniel  ii.  45,  the  stone  in  the  vision  of  Nebuchadnezzar  having  been  cut 
out  without  hands  (which  is  a  supplementary  inference  to  the  identification 
of  Christ  with  the  Stone  of  the  Scriptures).  The  term  '  without  hands ' 
(avev  x€iP^v)  appears  to  have  been  interpreted  in  two  different  ways,  each 
of  which  was  meant  to  emphasize  the  miracle  of  the  birth :  one  way  was 
to  say  that  the  Virgin  had  no  consort,  and  so  conceived  without  human 
co-operation ;  the  other,  that  she  had  no  woman's  help  at  the  time  of  the 
birth. 

Thus  in  the  Dialogue  of  Athanasius  and  Zacchaeus,  c.  114,  we  have 
the  matter  introduced  as  follows  : 

'  Zacchaeus  said :  From  what  mountain  was  the  stone  cut  out  ? 
Athanasius :  The  mountain  means  the  Virgin  Mary.  And  that  is 
why  it  says  without  hands,  because  she  begat  (yewrjo-ai)  the  Stone, 
i.  e.  the  body  (of  Jesus),  without  human  x€LPovPy^a-  For  the  prophet 
says  :  "  Nebuchadnezzar  dreamed  a  dream,"  '  &c. 

Mr.  Conybeare,  writing  in  1898,  remarked  on  this  passage2  that  'one 
is  tempted  to  render  "  without  surgical  aid  of  man  " ',  but  finally  decides 
for  the  alternative  meaning,  '  without  man's  assistance '  and  refers  to  Justin, 
Dial.  76.  The  passage  in  Athanasius  and  Zacchaeus  is  based  upon  a 
primitive  Testimony ;  and  as  soon  as  we  have  found  the  key-passage  in 
Daniel,  the  whole  matter  becomes  clearer,  and  we  see  the  meaning  of 
the  language  in  the  Ode  and  of  the  parallel  passage  in  Justin. 

When  the  Ode  says  of  a  Virgin  that  '  She  brought  forth  a  Son  without 

1  We  notice  that  Bernard  had  observed  the  underlying  allusion  to  the  Psalm. 

2  Athanasius  and  Zacchaeus,  1 12-14. 

X  2 


308  ODES    OF    SOLOMON  [xix 

incurring  pain,  for  it  did  not  happen  without  purpose' ;  we  may  understand 
the  words  'without  purpose'  (1^.-Jja*aa»  =  kcvois?)  to  mean,  'not  without 
prediction  on  the  part  of  the  prophets ',  or  '  independently  of  God's 
expressed  will '.     When  it  says  : 

'  She  had  not  required  a  midwife, 
For  He  delivered  her ', 

that  is  in  its  ultimate  origin  a  comment  on  avev  \eipatv.  When  it  says, 
1  She  brought  forth,  as  a  man,  of  (her  own)  will ',  we  should  understand 
'as  a  man'  to  mean  the  'one  like  a  son  of  man'  in  Daniel,  who  comes 
on  the  clouds,  and  is  presented  to  the  Ancient  of  Days:  and  in  that 
case  the  '  Will '  is  not  the  Virgin's,  but  the  '  Will  of  God  '. 

Now  turn  to  Justin,  Dial.  76,  where  we  find  that  the  'Stone  cut 
out  without  hands '  means  that  He  is  110  work  of  man,  but  of  the  will  of 
the  God  of  the  Universe  who  sends  Him  forth.  The  whole  passage  is 
interesting  : 

"Otclv  yap  o>s  vlov  avOpunrov  Ae'yr;  Aavi^A  Tor  TrapaXap.(SdvovTa  tt]v 
alwviov  fiao~i\.elav,  ovk  avro  tovto  aU'taro-erai  ;  to  yap  <Ls  vlbv  avOpumov 
elTrelv,  <f>aiv6p.ei'OV  pikv  koI  yf.vop.evov  avOpiarrov  p.i]vvei,  ovk  e£  avOpomivov 
o~Tre.pp.aTos  V7rdp)(OVTa  OT7A.01.  Kai  to  \i$ov  tovtov  cIttcIv  avev  \€ipS)V 
rp.-q6e.vTa,  iv  p.vo~Tr)pui)  to  avTo  KfKpaye.  to  yap  avev  \fipu>v  e'nreiv  airbv 
iKTfTp.rjo-6ai,  otl  ovk  eo-Tiv  avOpwTrivov  epyov,  uAAa  Trjs  (Sov\rj<;  tov 
77po/3aA/\oi'TOS  avTov  7raTpos  TO)V  o\(OV  ®€OV. 

Both  the  Odist  and  Justin  are  operatihg  on  primitive  Testimonies, 
which  will  be  found  also  in  the  collections  of  Cyprian,  Gregory  Nyss.,  <S:c. 
In  the  case  of  Gregory  Nyss.  (c.  8)  the  explanation  given  is  the  same  as  in 
Justin  : 

'  The  Stone  which  is  cut  out  without  hand  (»vev  \eipb<i)  is  the  one 
who  was  begotten  without  human  seed '. 

In  Cyprian,  Test.  ii.  17,  the  hands  are  explained  as  '  Manus  conci- 
dentium  ',  i.  e.  hands  of  stone-cutters,  and  there  appears  to  be  no  immediate 
reference  to  the  Virgin. 

The  reference  to  the  Virgin  is  not,  however,  excluded  ;  for  when 
Irenaeus  discusses  the  Testimonies  which  identify  Christ  with  the  Stone,  he 
makes  the  same  expansion  as  Cyprian,  and  then  goes  on  to  explain  the 
avev  x€lP&v>  n°t  of  the  absence  of  a  midwife,  but  of  the  non-cooperation  of 


xix]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  309 

Joseph.     The   passage   is   very    interesting,   for  the   context   shows   that 
Irenaeus  also  is  working  from  the  Testimony  Book : 

'  Propter  hoc  autem  et  Daniel  praevidens  eius  adventum,  lapidem 
sine  manibus  abscissum  advenisse  in  hunc  mundum.  Hoc  est  enim 
quod  sine  manibus  significabat,  quod  non  operantibus  humanis 
manibus,  hoc  est  virorum  illorum  qui  solent  lapides  caedere,1  in  hunc 
mundum  eius  adventus  erat,  id  est,  non  operante  in  eum  Ioseph,  sed 
sola  Maria  co-operante  dispositioni.  Hie  enim  lapis  a  terra  et  ex 
virtute  et  arte  constat  dei.  Propter  hoc  autem  et  Esaias  ait :  sic  dicit 
Dominus  :  Ecce  ergo  immitto  in  fundamenta  Zion  lapidem  pretiosum, 
electum,  summum  angularem,  honorificum  :  uti  non  ex  voluntaie  viri, 
sed  ex  voluntate  Dei,  adventum  eius  qui  secundum  hominem  est 
intelligamus.' — Iren.  Haer.  (hi,  p.  217,  Mass.). 

The  whole  chapter  is  headed,  Quid  est  apud  Danieletn  lapis  sine 
manibus  excisus?  There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  use  of  the  Testimony 
Book  in  this  section ;  the  reason  for  turning  to  Daniel  at  this  point  is 
clear  from  the  close  of  the  previous  chapter,  in  which  it  was  stated 
that  the  Incarnation  was  not  the  will  of  man,  but  the  will  and  work  of 
God.     Compare  the  following  sentences  with  what  has  been  just  quoted  : 

'  Sed  quoniam  inopinata  salus  hominibus  inciperet  fieri,  Deo  adiu- 
vante,  inopinatus  et  partus  Virginis  fiebat,  Deo  dante  signum  hoc,  sed 
non  homine  operante  illud.' 

Here  we  take  the  words  '  Deo  adiuvante '  to  refer  to  the  '  birth  from 
the  Virgin ',  the  sense  being  the  same  as  in  the  Ode  : 

'  She  did  not  need  a  midwife 
For  He  brought  her  to  bear.' 

It  will  not  have  escaped  notice  that  all  these  references  to  a  birth, 
not  from  man  but  from  the  will  of  God,  are  strongly  supported  by  the 
Western  text  in  John  i.  13,  where  the  will  of  man  and  the  will  of  God 
are  contrasted  in  the  birth  of  Christ,  '  who  was  born  not  of  the  will  of  man 
but  (of  the  will)  of  God'.  The  thought  of  the  19th  Ode  and  the  dvev 
X€ipo>v  of  Daniel  are  behind  the  language  of  the  Fourth  Gospel. 

The  fantastic  opening  of  this  Ode  will,  perhaps,  appear  less  fantastic 
and  more  in  harmony  with  the  rest  of  the  collection  if  we  keep  two  points 
before  our  minds :  the  first  is  the  proved  use  of  Sapiential  matter  by  the 

1  Cf.  Cyp.  ut  supra  :  Concidentium. 


310  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xix 

Odist,  for,  as  we  have  seen,  Ode  after  Ode  becomes  intelligible  as  we 
examine  the  parallels  in  Proverbs  and  the  other  Sapiential  books,  as  well 
as  the  proofs  of  the  early  Fathers  that  Jesus  {or  the  Holy  Spirit)  was 
regarded  as  the  Wisdom  of  God ;  the  second  point  is  the  preference  which 
the  Odist  shows  for  the  symbol  of  '  milk '  over  that  of  '  wine ',  a  preference 
so  decided  that  it  has  sometimes  led  to  the  suspicion  that  the  author  was 
patronizing  a  milk-sacrament,  like  that  of  certain  early  heretics. 

Let  us  then  imagine  that  the  Holy  Spirit  in  this  Ode  is  the  Divine 
Wisdom,  the  Sophia  of  the  Sapiential  books.  We  shall  hear  her  call 
clearly  enough  in  the  33rd  Ode,  and  find  proofs  there  and  elsewhere  that 
the  Odist  is  borrowing  from  the  eighth  and  ninth  chapters  of  Proverbs. 

In  this  latter  chapter,  Wisdom  sends  out  an  invitation  to  a  feast,  and 
in  particular  to  a  cup  which  she  has  mingled, 
'  She  hath  mingled  her  wine. 

Come  and  drink  of  the  wine  which  I  have  mingled.' 

where  the  LXX  has  the  curious  expansion, 

'  She  hath  mingled  her  own  wine  into  a  cup,' 
eKepacrev   eis   Kparnpa  tov   eavrijs  oivov' 

and  the  'cup'  appears  again  in  the  following  verse, 

'She  calls  with  lofty  announcement  to  the  cup,  saying,'  &c. 

(TvyKa\ov(ra  /act  a   v^f/rjKov   K?/pvy/xaTOS   eV)    Kparrjpa   kiyovcra. 

What  the  Odist  has  done  is  to  lay  emphasis  on  this  'cup ',  and  at  the  same 
time  to  explain  that  it  is  a  'cup  of  milk ' :  hence  he  begins  : 

'  A  cup  of  milk  was  offered  to  me.' 
Now  he  is  in  difficulties  ;  for  the  Scripture  calls  it  a  '  mixed  cup ' ;  and 
how  can  a  cup  of  milk  be  a  mixed  cup?     The  solution  is  that  the  milk 
has  been  taken   from   the   two  '  care-allaying  breasts  of  the  Father ',   as 
Clement  of  Alexandria  would  say. 

If  this  is  the  right  line  on  which  we  are  to  find  the  origin  of  the 
allegory  of  the  cup  of  milk,  we  might  be  obliged  to  allow  for  this  Ode 
a  Greek  origin,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  it  is  the  Septuagint  that  lays  special 
emphasis  on  'the  cup'.  We  should  also,  in  that  case,  hesitate  to  change 
the  reading  of  the  MS.  from 

'  The   Holy  Spirit  opened  her  bosom,' 


xix]  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  311 

for  the  LXX  has  an  emphasis  on  the  person  of  Wisdom  who 

'  mingled  into  a  cup  her  ozvn  wine ', 
where,  if  we  read  '  milk '  for  '  wine ',  we  must  also  read  '  her  bosom '  for 
'  his  bosom '. 

And  why  is  the  mixture  given  to  the  world  without  their  knowing? 
We  have  the  same  difficulty  in  Ode  xxx,  again  a  Sapiential  Ode,  where 
the  living  water  comes  invisibly,  and  'until  it  was  set  in  the  midst  they 
did  not  know  it'.     The  obvious  parallel  is  John  i.  10  : 

'  He  was  in  the  world,  and  the  world  was  made  by  Him,  and  the 
world  knew  Him  not.' 

That  is  not  far  from  the  expression  that 

'  the  Holy  Spirit  gave  the  mixed  cup  to  the  world  without  their 
knowing? 

There  seems  to  be  a  missing  link  to  connect  all  these  passages  together 
somewhere  in  the  Old  Testament.  From  the  fact  that  the  Fourth  Gospel 
interjects  the  words  '  and  the  world  was  made  by  him ',  which  is  the 
Sapiential  definition  of  Christ,  we  should  be  disposed  to  look  for  the  missing 
reference  somewhere  in  the  Sapiential  books.     We  have  not  yet  found  it. 

The  emphasis  on  the  cup  which  Wisdom  mixes  is  due  to  the  fact  that 
the  passage  in  Proverbs  was  a  very  early  testimony,  one  of  the  proof-texts 
that  Christ  was  the  Wisdom  of  God.  Thus  in  Cyp.  Test.  ii.  2  the  passage 
is  transcribed  as  in  the  LXX  with 

'  miscuit  in  cratere 

convocans  .  .  ad  craterem.' 

The  heading  of  the  section,  which  is  evidently  a  translation  from  Greek,  is  : 

'  Quod  Sapientia  Dei  Christus,  et  de  sacramento  concamationis 
eius  et  passionis  et  calicis  et  altaris  et  apostolorum  qui  missi  prae- 
dicaverunt : ' 

{read  de    calice    et   de   altari   et   de    apostolis  :     -n-epl   -n-aOow;   koX   \jepl) 

KpaTYJpO<;    KT€.). 

Thus  the  '  cup '  is  a  part  of  the  primitive  proof  that  Christ  is  the  Wisdom 
of  God. 

If  we  are  right  in  our  explanation  that  the  Odist  substituted  'milk'  for 
'  wine '  in  the  sentence 

eKepacrev  cts   KpaTrjpa  tov   eaurrys  olvov' 


3i2  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xix-xx 

thus  giving  '  her  own  milk  '  for  '  her  own  wine ',  we  must  recognize  similar 

expressions  in  Ode  viii : 

'  my  own  breasts  I  prepared  for  them  that  they  might  drink  my  oivn 
holy  milk.' 

This  would  bring  Ode  viii  also  into  still  closer  connexion  with  Prov.  ix.  2, 
and,  as  before,  it  would  be  the  text  of  the  LXX  that  furnishes  the  explana- 
tion of  the  emphatic  eairr^s  or  ifxavrov,  or  the  text  of  an  early  Testimony 
Book. 

With  regard  to  the  painlessness  of  the  Divine  Birth,  it  may  be  of 
interest  to  observe  that  in  one  striking  passage  at  least  Ephrem  contests 
the  belief,  e.  g.  E.  E.  iii.  6 :  '  The  First  Born  entered  the  womb  and  the 
Pure  One  suffered  not :  He  descended  and  came  forth  with  pains  ;  and 
the  Fair  One  was  agitated  over  Him.' 

ODE    XX 

1  I  am  a  priest  of  the  Lord  ; 

And  to  Him  I  do  priestly  service ; 

2  And  to  Him  I  offer  the  offering  of  His  thought. 

3  For  His  thought  is  not  like  (the  thought  of)  the  world, 
Nor  (like  the  thought  of)  the  flesh ; 

Nor  like  them  that  serve  carnally. 

4  The  offering  of  the  Lord  is  righteousness  ; 
And  purity  of  heart  and  lips, 

Cf.    Ephr.     Epiph.    5     Offer  your1  reins  (before  Him)   blamelessly; 
Hymn.  iii.  12.  a  1*0 

And  let  not  thy  heart  -  do  violence  to  heart  ; z 

Nor  thy  soul  do  violence  to  soul. 

6     Thou  shalt  not  acquire  a  stranger  .  .  .  ; 

Cf.Exod.xxii. 24-26.  Neither  shalt  thou  seek  to  deal  guilefully  with  thy  neighbour; 

Cf.  Isa.  lviii.  7.  Neither    shalt    thou    deprive    him    of    the    covering    of    his 

nakedness. 

1  B,  my  reins.  2  /;'/.  pity. 


xx]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  313 

7  But  put  on  the  grace  of  the  Lord  without  stint ; 

And  come  into  His  Paradise  *  and  make  thee  a  garland  from  Cf.  Gen.  ii.  9  and 
His  tree;  Apoc.  ii.  7. 

8  And  put  it  on  thy  head  and  be  glad  ; 
And  recline  on  His  rest ; 

9  And  His  glory  shall  go  before  thee  ;  Cf.  Isa.  lviii.  8. 
And  thou  shalt  receive  of  His  kindness  and  His  grace2: 

And  thou  shalt  be  fat  in  truth  in  the  praise  of  His  holiness. 

(Doxology.) 

10     Praise  and  honour  to  His  name. 
Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

vv.  1,  2.     The  Semitisms  should  be  noted. 

v.  6.  This  verse  presents  peculiar  difficulties,  and  none  of  the 
proposals  for  its  identification  or  interpretation  appears  to  commend  itself 
widely.     We  cannot,  for  instance,  translate  it  as  it  stands  : 

'  Thou  shalt  not  acquire  a  stranger  by  the  blood  of  thy  soul.' 
for  this  has  no  meaning  :  nor  can  we  say  that  y°i.>?  \m^>  means  'in  that 
he  is  what  thou  art '.     We  might  possibly  emend  it  to  the  form 

and  translate : 

'  Thou  shalt  not  hate  the  stranger  who  is  in  thy  own  likeness.' 
The  changes  required  are  not  violent ;  and  the  meaning  might  be  that  of 
Exod.   xxiii.   9,   'Thou   knovvest  the  soul  of  a   stranger,   for   thou   wast 
a  stranger.' 

If  we  maintain  the  reading  of  the  MS.  the  expression  o  UoL  suggests 
acquisition  for  a  price  (U^>*),  and  the  question  then  is  as  to  the  price  to 
be  paid  for  the  stranger.     The  suggestion  in  the  editio  princeps  to  read 
'Thou  shalt  not  acquire  a  stranger  by  the  price  of  thy  silver,' 

1  the  Paradise  (H).  'l  Or,  goodness  (B). 


314  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xx 

has  been  weakened  by  the  discovery  that  the  Nitrian  MS.  shows  the  very 
same  text  as  Cod.  H.  This  criticism  applies,  however,  to  most  emendations 
that  may  be  proposed.  So  we  leave  the  matter  with  a  margin  of 
uncertainty.  The  verses  which  follow  certainly  find  their  parallel  in  the 
22nd  chapter  of  Exodus,  where  we  meet  with  the  prohibition  of  keeping 
;t  man's  pledged  garment  after  sundown. 

Expository  Notes. 

This  Ode  has  caused  a  good  deal  of  difficulty  both  as  to  its  text  and 
as  to  its  interpretation.     In  the  fifth  verse,  both  the  extant  MSS.  read  : 

'  Thou  shalt  not  acquire  a  stranger  by  the  blood  of  thy  soul.' 

The  editio  princeps  suggested  an  emendation  to  this  on  the  hypothesis  that 
the  word  l  soul '  had  been  accidentally  repeated  from  the  previous  verse, 
and  that  we  ought  to  read  '  silver '  instead  of  '  soul ' ;  the  sentence  then 
runs  with  a  microscopic  change  : 

■  Thou  shalt  not  acquire  a  stranger  by  the  price  of  thy  silver.' 
This   would  make   excellent   sense,  and  lead  to  the  suggestion  that  the 
writer  was  an  Essene,  in  harmony  with  the  known  prohibition  of  slave- 
holding  amongst  this  austere  sect. 

The  correction  suggested  was  thought  too  violent  by  Flemming,  who 
agreed,  however,  that  '  by  the  blood  of  thy  soul '  should  be  corrected  to 
'by  the  price  of  thy  soul',  reading,  that  is,  Ju_ao?  for  \.xsi. 

To  this  Diettrich  took  further  exception.  There  was,  according  to 
him,  no  need  of  change  at  all.  It  was  merely  a  case  of  a  wrongly 
divided  word.  The  unintelligible  \m*^  was  to  be  resolved  into  *=>  and  Jjjo, 
and  translated  :  '  So  that  he  is  what  thou  thyself  art,'  or  '  in  that  he  is  the 
same  as  thyself  ;  and  Diettrich  also  endorsed  the  suggestion  of  an  Essene 
prohibition  of  slavery.  That  was,  we  believe,  the  furthest  point  the 
discussion  of  the  verse  had  reached  textually,  with  any  approach  to 
probability. 

Now  let  us  see  whether  we  can  throw  light  upon  this  sentence  in  the 
Ode  and  upon  the  Ode  generally  from  any  other  direction. 

Recalling  our  observation  of  the  way  the  Odist  takes  up  a  Scripture 
passage  (say  a  Psalm),  and  works  his  own  ideas  into  it  and  out  of  it,  let 
us  see  if  we  can  find  his  leading  motive  in  the  composition  of  the  Ode. 


xx]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  315 

Two  directions  suggest  themselves  to  us ;  one  was  that  of  the  first  editor, 
who  thought  the  Ode  was  inspired  by  the  ethical  prohibitions  in 
Exod.  xxii.  25,  26  against  slavery,  usury,  and  the  retention  of  the  pledged 
garment.  The  other  we  have  marked  on  our  margin  that  the  inspiration 
comes  from  that  very  noble  ethical  outburst  in  the  58th  chapter  of  Isaiah. 
The  ninth  verse  of  our  Ode  is,  in  fact,  coloured  by  Isa.  Iviii.  8 :  we 
compare  : 

Ode  xx.  9.     '  His  glory  shall  go  before  thee 

And  thou  shalt  receive  of  His  kindness  and  His  grace.' 

Isa.  Iviii.  8.      '  Thy  righteousness  shall  go  before  thee, 

The  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  thy  rearward.' 

It  is  easy  to  see  how  the  Odist  has  handled  the  text  of  the  prophet. 

The  next  question  is  whether  he  has  made  any  further  use  of  the,  text 
of  his  author,  or  if  the  reference  is  merely  a  casual  reminiscence. 

In  the  sixth  verse  the  Odist  says  that  one  is  not  to  deprive  one's 
neighbour  of  the  covering  of  his  nakedness  :  this  finds  a  good  parallel  in 
Isa.  Iviii.  7,  as  follows  : 

Ode  xx.  6.     c  Neither  shalt  thou   deprive  him  of  the  covering  of  his 
nakedness.' 

Isa.  Iviii.  7.     '  When  thou  seest  the  naked  that  thou  cover  him.' 
The  previous  sentence  in  the  Ode  says  that  we  are  not  to  deal  guilefully 
with  our  neighbours.     Now  turn  to  Isa.  Iviii.  6,  and  we  find  the  injunction 
to  '  loose  the  bands  of  wickedness ' ;  where  the  Peshitta  version  has 

bands  of  guile. 
the  same  root  that  we  have  in  the  Ode.  This  passage,  then,  is  the  origin 
of  the  sentence  we  have  in  the  Ode,  and  the  suspicion  arises  that  the 
Odist  has  been  working  from  a  Syriac  text.  We  can  go  one  step  further, 
for  we  notice  the  same  word  JLu  in  verse  9  of  the  Prophet,  where  it 
apparently  answers  to  the  Greek  dSiKia.  It  is  the  Peshitta  version  that 
invites  the  parallel.  Now  turn  back  again  to  the  Peshitta  text  in  verse  7. 
We  find  the  injunction  '  that  thou  hide  not  thyself  from  thy  own  flesh ',  in 
the  form 

i.  e.  '  and  do  not  neglect  the  son  of  thy  flesh.' 

The  expression  '  son  of  thy  own  flesh '  attracts  our  attention  ;  if  we  write. 


3i6  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [xx 

'  soul '  for  flesh,  we  have  an  expression  which  is  very  nearly  the  same 
in  sense  as  the  Odist's  expression,  '  He  is  what  thy  soul  is'.  So  we  sugmst 
again  that  the  Odist  has  been  imitating  the  Syriac  text  of  Isaiah  :  Isaiah 
has  certainly  been  imitated  elsewhere,  which  makes  our  conjecture  probable. 
We  can  now  remove  the  discontinuity  in  the  writer's  thought  in  passing 
from  the  sixth  verse  to  the  seventh.  This  discontinuity  was  recognized  in 
the  first  edition  in  the  words  :  '  then  he  leaves  morals  and  is  away  in  search 
of  the  honey-dew  and  the  milk  of  Paradise.  There  glory  waits  the  soul 
that  enters  into  the  Divine  rest'.  Even  this  discontinuity  may  have  its 
motive;  as  we  read  on  in  the  great  chapter  of  Isaiah,  we  are  told  that 
'  the  Lord  shall  guide  thee  continually  and  satisfy  thy  soul  in  dry  places, 
and  make  strong  thy  bones  ;  and  thou  shalt  be  like  a  watered  garden  '. 
For  '  garden '  the  LXX  reads  ktjttos,  but  the  Peshitta  says  Paradise,  and 
gives  the  clue  to  the  language  of  the  Odist : 

'  Come  into  Paradise  and  make  thee  a  garland  from  its  tree.' 
Now  we  see  the  reason  for  the  discontinuity  of  the  Ode ;  or  rather,  the 
apparent  discontinuity  has  disappeared.     The  Odist  concludes  with   the 
promise  : 

'Thou  shalt  be  flourishing  (///.  fat)  in  truth  in  the  praise  of  His 
holiness.' 

The  word  for  'fat'  in  the  Ode  (\«?)  is  taken  from  the  Peshiua  rendering 
of  Isaiah  lviii.  1 1  : 

Motels  *A)    >»->fn.>o 
'  and  he  shall  satisfy  thy  soul  with  fatness.' 
The  case  is  not  quite  so  conclusive  as  previous  cases  for  the  use  of  the 
Syriac,  for  the  LXX  has  in  the  next  sentence 

KO.L   to.   ocrra    crov   7riavt)r)(TeTai, 

'  thy  bones  shall  be  made  fat.' 

On  the  whole,  the  argument  appears  to  be  decisive  in  favour  of  a  Syriac 
original  for  this  Ode.  The  structure  of  the  Ode  appears  also  to  be  disclosed. 
This  particular  section  of  Isaiah  was  much  used  by  primitive  Christians 
in  arguing  against  the  Jews  and  their  ritual  :  Barnabas,  for  instance,  uses  it 
in  c.  3,  where  he  is  arguing  for  a  new  fast,  having  previously  argued 
for  a  new  sacrifice  and  a  new  law.  And  it  is  clear  that  Barnabas  is 
working  from  a  collection  of  written   Testimonies  against  the  Jeivs.     It  is 


xxj  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  317 

quite  likely,  since  the  Odist  begins  the  20th  Ode  with  a  statement  of 
the  kind  of  sacrifice  that  pleases  God,  that  he  also  has  been  using 
Testimonia  :  in  other  words,  the  passage  of  Isaiah  on  which  he  worked 
need  not  have  come  immediately  from  the  Peshitta.  The  doctrine  of 
the  '  new  priesthood '  is  also  in  the  Ode. 

For  a  Syriac  parallel  which  seems  to  be  based  directly  upon  this  Ode 
we  may  take  Ephrem,  Hymni  in  S.  Epiphan.  iii.  1 2  : 

'  The   anointed  priests   used  to   offer   the  slaughtered    bodies   of 
beasts  :  you,  resplendent  anointed  ones,  your  bodies  are  your  offerings  ; 
the  anointed  Levites  offered  the  reins  of  beasts,  you  are  more  resplen 
dent  than  the  Levites,  and  you  have  consecrated  your  hearts? 

We  note,  in  conclusion,  that  the  opening  verse  of  the  Ode  contains  two 
strong  Aramaisms  : 

'  a  priest I  priest : ' 

'  I  sacrifice the  sacrifice.' 

Such  forms  of  speech  are  possible  in  Greek ;  they  are  at  home  in  Syriac. 

In  the  foregoing  study  of  the  influence  upon  the  Odist  of  a  famous 
passage  in  Isaiah,  we  note  that  the  very  same  coincidences  (or  nearly 
the  same)  had  been  detected  by  Connolly  in  an  article  in  the  Journal 
of  Theological  Studies  for  July,  1913  (pp.  530-8)-  It  is  curious  that  the 
writer  had  used  the  coincidences  to  establish  the  exactly  opposite  con- 
clusion to  the  one  reached  by  ourselves,  viz.  that  '  Greek  is  the  original 
language  of  the  Odes ',  a  conclusion  which  was  promptly  challenged 
(though  not  very  convincingly)  by  Dr.  E.  A.  Abbott. 

Connolly  evades  the  force  of  the  Odist's  translation  of  'garden'  by 
'  Paradise '  in  harmony  with  the  Peshitta  rendering  of  Isaiah,  and  says 
'  that  the  Odist  should  put  "  Paradise "  for  "  garden  "  is  not  surprising, 
for  he  devotes  a  whole  Ode  (xi)  to  Paradise '.  We  should  have  said  that 
it  was  very  striking  that  he  should  do  so. 

In  dealing  with  the  words  '  thou  shalt  be  fat ',  he  takes  the  clause 
in  the  LXX  for  reference, 

»cat  ra  ocrra   crow  TrtavOrjcreTai, 
when  he  should  have  taken  the  previous  clause :  but  he  omits  to  notice 
that  the  words  used  for  '  fat '  in  the  Odes  is  certainly  the  Peshitta  word  in 
the  passage  in  question,  when   it  might  easily  have  been  any  one  out 
of  a  group  of  three  or  four  possible  words  :  that  is,  he  ignores  linguistic 


318  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xx 

coincidence  at  the  very  point  where  coincidence  counts.  See  also  the 
further  points  to  which  we  have  referred.  In  passing  from  this  point  we 
may  say  that,  while  we  quite  agree  with  Connolly's  criticism  of  Dr.  Abbott's 
supposed  Hebrew  original  for  the  Odes,  we  cannot  agree  with  him  that  the 
Scriptural  allusions  of  the  Odes  escape  capture.     He  says  (p.  535): 

'  It  is  unfortunate  that — whether  of  set  purpose  or  not  we  cannot 
say — the  author  has  only  too  successfully  disguised  his  Scriptural 
allusions.  Sometimes  the  disguise  is  transparent  enough,  as  when  he 
says  "as  the  eyes  of  a  son  to  his  father"  (Ode  xiv.  1) :  but  though  we 
can  occasionally  find  the  passage  he  is  using,  it  is  as  a  rule  impossible 
to  say  whether  he  is  working  with  any  particular  form  of  text.' 

Exactly  the  opposite  is  the  case,  as  we  have  shown  by  recovering  a  number 
of  references  to  the  Scripture  (especially  to  the  Psalms)  and  by  indicating 
the  particular  version  that  is  being  followed. 

The  natural  explanation  of  the  Ode,  as  regards  the  priesthood  which 
the  author  affirms  in  his  opening  sentence,  is  the  spiritual  explanation 
which  is  suggested  in  the  first  epistle  of  Peter,  according  to  which  the  new 
race  which  follows  Christ  is  also  a  new  and  royal  priesthood.  There  is  a 
residual  possibility  that  the  writer  might  have  been  a  person  of  dignity  in 
the  church  for  which  he  composes  his  hymns,  affirming  his  office  towards 
God  and  against  all  other  priesthoods,  Jewish  or  pagan.  As  we  have  said, 
it  may  be  doubted  whether  this  is  the  simple  and  natural  explanation  ;  but 
in  a  theme  so  full  of  obscurities  as  the  exegesis  of  the  Odes  one  must  fish 
all  waters.  It  is  something  like  the  suggestion  that  the  person  who  has 
the  Lord  on  his  head  and  has  been  thus  crowned  with  a  crown  of  truth,  is 
the  Apostle  John,  who,  according  to  tradition,  actually  wore  the  high-priestly 
mitre  and  head-band  with  the  Incommunicable  Name.  The  question  is 
raised  whether  such  an  explanation  for  St.  John  or  some  other  one  of  the 
early  Christian  leaders,  might  not  elucidate  the  interpretation  of  the  Odes. 
For  instance,  the  parallel  with  the  passage  in  the  ^'isdom  of  Solomon, 
where  Phinehas  is  said  to  bear  the  Divine  magnificence  '  upon  the  diadem 
of  his  head'  {Sap.  Sol.  xviii.  24)  would  acquire  fresh  relevance.  The 
reference  for  St.  John  similarly  crowned  is  found  in  a  fragment  of 
Polycrates,  Bishop  of  Ephesus,  who,  writing  in  the  time  of  the  Antonines, 
says  that  John  '  became  {or  was)  a  priest  wearing  the  irsraXov,  and  a  martyr 
and  a  teacher '.  It  is  noteworthy  that  Polycrates  does  not  call  him  a  high 
priest,  though  Jerome,  in  translating  the  words  of  Polycrates,  makes  him 


xx-xxij  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  319 

say  so.  But  Jerome  may  very  well  be  correct  in  saying  '  Pontifex  ems ',  so 
far  as  the  added  pronoun  is  concerned.  According  to  Eusebius,  upon 
whose  extract  of  Polycrates  Jerome  is  working,  the  language  of  Polycrates  is 

en  Se   kou    Iioavv7]<;  o   e7rt  to  (tttjOos  tov  Kupi'ou  avaTrecrwv'   os  iyevrjOr] 
Upev'S  to  7T€TaAov  7T€(j)opr]KW'S,  kolI  fxdpTVi  Kal  8tSacr/caXo?. 

Is  it  possible  that  avrov  has  dropped  from  the  text  of  Eusebius  after  tepeu's  ? 
It  would  make  an  excellent  parallel  to  the  opening  of  this  20th  Ode,  where 
the  Odist  begins  by  saying  'lam  a  priest  of  the  Lord'.  But  Jerome  may 
have  added  the  pronoun  on  his  own  account.  In  the  Ode,  the  priesthood 
is  expressly  set  in  antithesis  to  the  carnal  priesthoods  of  the  old  law,  and 
the  affirmation  that  one  was  God's  priest  would  be  a  negation  of  '  God's 
high  priest '  elsewhere. 

The  supposition  that  the  early  Christian  teachers  did  actually  wear 
visible  emblems,  comparable  to  those  of  the  cult  from  which  they  had 
their  origin,  has  been  much  discussed:  see  Routh,  Reliquiae^  ii.  27,  for 
the  evidence  of  Epiphanius  that  St.  James  also  wore  the  TrkraXov,  and 
an  anonymous  statement  to  the  same  effect  for  St.  Mark.  It  is  within  the 
bounds  of  credibility  that  some  such  custom  prevailed.  It  would  not 
follow,  even  if  we  accepted  Polycrates  and  his  Ephesian  tradition,  that 
St.  John  is  himself  the  Odist,  or  the  person  of  whom  the  Odist  is  thinking. 
Polycrates  might  have  applied  the  language  of  the  Odes  about '  priesthood  ' 
and  TreraXov  to  his  great  predecessor. 

We  are  not,  however,  in  a  position  yet  to  abandon  the  ordinary 
reference  of  the  Odes  to  the  Christian  believers  generally. 

ODE    XXI 

1  My  arms 1  I  lifted  up  on  high ; 
Even  to  the  grace  of  the  Lord : 

2  Because  He  had  cast  off  my  bonds  from  me ; 

And    my    Helper  had    lifted   me   up  to   His  grace   and   His 
salvation. 

3  And  I  put  off  darkness,  cf>   Ephr#   Epip^ 
And  clothed  myself  with  light :                                                       Hymn'  vii-  22- 

1  B,  arm. 


320  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xxi 

4  And  my  soul  acquired  members 
Free  from  sorrow, 

Or  affliction  or  pain. 

5  And  increasingly  helpful  to  me  was  the  thought  of  the  Lord  ; 
And   His  incorruptible  fellowship. 

6  And  I  was  lifted  up  in  the  light, 
And  I  passed  before  Him  ; 

Sap.  Sol.  vi.  19 ;  cf.    7     And  I  became  near  to  Him, 
Ode  xxxvi.6 ;  and  _,     .  .  ,  -      .       ,    TT. 

Koran  iii.  40.  I  raising  and  conlessing  L  Him. 

<S     He  made  my  heart  overflow  ;  and  it  was  found  in  my  mouth  ; 
And  it  shone  upon  my  lips. 

9     And  upon  my  face  the  exultation  of  the  Lord  increased, 
And  His  praise  likewise.2 
Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  8.  Three  hypotheses  are  possible  in  the  translation  of  the  sentence 
■  A  "fc^/.  It  may  either  mean  '  my  heart  ran  over,  or  came  forth ',  or 
'  I  will  make  my  heart  run  over,  or  come  forth ',  or  '  He  made  my  heart 
run  over  or  come  forth '.  Against  the  first  translation  we  have  the 
linguistic  fact  that  when  this  verb  is  used  in  the  form  Aphel,  it  has 
always  a  transitive  meaning  and  never  an  intransitive  sense  of  'he  ran 
over,  or  came  forth,  gushed  forth'.  It  is  so  used  in  Ode  xxvi.  1. 
Against  the  second  translation  militates  the  fact  that  the  sequence  of 
the  verbs  would  be  impaired,  for  its  rendering  would  then  be,  '  I  will 
make  my  heart  run  over  {or  gush  forth)  and  it  7cas  found  in  my  mouth  '. 
The  future  tense  joined  in  the  same  phrase  with  the  past  tense  is  not 
very  alluring  linguistically.  So  far  as  the  linguistic  elements  of  the 
sentence  are  concerned,  the  only  alternative  left  is  to  adopt  the  third 

1  Or,  giving  thanks  to.  2  Cod.  B  :  in  His  praise. 


xxi]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  321 

rendering  '  He  made  my  heart  run  over  (or  come  forth)  and  it  was  found 
in  my  mouth  and  it  shone  upon  my  lips '.  However  unnatural  the  idea  of 
God  making  a  heart  come  to  the  mouth  and  shine  upon  the  lips  may  seem 
to  be,  it  is  the  genuine  meaning  of  the  Syriac  text.  If  we  were  allowed 
to  suppose  that  a  word  has  disappeared  from  the  text  and  that  •  my  heart ' 
is  the  subject  of  the  verb  *  he  made  to  run  over '  the  object  would  be 
a  dropped  word  J;_5cjc*  or  JLjo^J^s  as  in  Psalm  xlv.  r.  In  this  hypothesis 
we  should  have  the  following  sense,  l  my  heart  eructav'it  (sc:  a  word), 
and  it  was  found  in  my  mouth  and  it  shone  upon  my  lips '. 

Expository  Notes. 

In  determining  the  meaning  of  this  Ode  our  best  plan  will  be  to 
follow  the  method  which  has  been  so  successful  in  previous  Odes.  Let 
us  see  if  we  can  find  the  writer's  literary  model. 

In  the  first  place  we  notice  a  certain  assonance  running  through  the 
Ode.     Compare : 

v.  1.     'My  arms  I  lifted  up:' 

v.  2.     '  My  helper  had  lifted  me  up.' 

v.  6.     '  I  was  lifted  up  in  His  light.' 
The  repetition  at  once  betrays  the  origin  of  the  Psalm  ;  it  can  be  detected 
even  in  the  English  version  : 

'  I  will  extol  thee,  O  Lord, 
For  thou  hast  lifted  me  up.' 

Thus  the  30th  Psalm  should  be  the  key  to  the  21st  Ode.  Let  us  now 
see  whether  this  assonance  in  the  Ode  is  derived  from  the  Hebrew, 
the  Greek,  the  Targum,   or  the  Syriac  of  the  Psalm.     In  Hebrew  the 

language  is  : 

i. e.  'I  will  exalt  thee,  O  Lord,  for  thou  has*"  drawn  me  up  (out  of  Sheol).' 
In  the  LXX,  too,  the  words  are  different : 

vi^cocrw   o"€,    Kijpie,   on  v7T€Aa/?€S  /xc. 
'  I  will  exalt  thee,  O  Lord,  for  thou  earnest  to  my  help.' 
The  Targum  also  shows  two  different  words. 
Now  turn  to  the  Syriac,  and  w©  find : 

11  Y 


322  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [XXI 

where  we  find  the  very  assonance  that  the  Odist  has  imitated.  He  was 
working,  then,  on  the  Syriac  Psalter. 

In  verse  3  the  Odist  says  that  '  he  has  put  off  darkness  and  clothed 
himself  with  light ' ;  this  is  a  paraphrase  for  verse  1 1  of  the  Psalm  : 

'  thou  hast  loosed  my  sackcloth  and  girded  me  with  gladness ' ; 

the  Odist  turns  the  '  sackcloth  '  to  mean  '  darkness  ' ;  ('  as  black  as 
sackcloth  of  hair ') :  and  '  gladness '  naturally  to  be  the  '  body  of  light '. 
'  My  Helper'  (wo»«-iJio)  in  verse  2  is  related  to  '  more  exceedingly  helpful ' 
in  verse  5  (Jfc>«u»»^5e).     The  motive  for  it  is  in  verse  10  of  the  Psalm  : 

'  Hear,  O  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  me. 
O  Lord,  be  thou  my  helper  (w»o.»x).' 

'  Praising  and  confessing  Him '  {or  giving  thanks  to  Him),  might  be 
thought  a  merely  conventional  expression  in  verse  7  ;  but  we  notice  that 
the  Psalm  in  the  concluding  verse  of  the  Syriac  version  has  : 

'  For  this  I  will  sing  (;-»)()  praise  (|uoqa)  to  Thee  and  not  be  silent : 
O  Lord  God  forever  will  I  confess  {or  give  thanks  J*o/)  to  thee.' 

Thus  the  condition  of  dependence  of  the  Ode  on  the  Psalm  can  be  seen 
in  its  texture  throughout. 

There  are  still  some  obscure  turns  in  the  Ode.  What  does  it  mean 
that  '  I  passed  before  Him  and  became  near  to  Him  '  ?  We  shall  find 
something  like  this  in  the  36th  Ode,  where  Christ  is  said  to  be  one  of  the 
Divine  neighbours;  but  the  present  Ode  can  hardly  be  ex  ore  Christie 
If  the  Ode  expressed  a  baptismal  experience,  as  Dr.  Bernard  would  urge, 
we  could  compare  the  language  of  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  : 

e'v  tu  (SairTiajxari  Xa/j.f3av6fx.€0a  evSv/xa  aOdyarov'    um/ccuvi£d/x£#a  7ravTos 
7rapa7TT(f')/xaT09,  kclL  eyyvs  t<2>  Oew  yt.yvojU.e0a. — {I3.  Q.  3 1,   io33)# 

Perhaps  Cyril  is  quoting  from  the  Ode  before  us.  But  perhaps  also  it  is 
merely  a  reproduction  of  the  language  of  Sap.  Sol.  6.  19  : 

a(f>$apcria   Se   fyyvs   elvai  ttouI  0eov. 

'  Incorruption  [sc.  immortality]  makes  one  near  to  God.' 

The  reference  which  precedes  in  the  Ode  to  '  fellowship  in  incorruption  ' 
(verse  5)  or  'fellowship  incorruptible'  should  be  noted.  We  must  leave  the 
matter  for  further  investigation. 

For  an  exact  baptismal   parallel   we  may  take   Ephrem,   Hymns  for 


xxi]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  323 

Epiphany,  vii.  22,  'Cast  off  the  darkness  that  is  upon  you.  The  secret 
darkness  ye  have  cast  off;  from  the  water  ye  have  clothed  yourself  with 
light.'  But  as  we  have  shown,  Ephrem  uses  our  Odes,  and  deliberately 
re-baptizes  them. 

The  expression  '  my  heart  ran  over  and  was  found  in  my  mouth  ' 
(verse  8)  requires  some  explanation.  It  is  evidently  based  on  the  opening 
words  of  the  45th  Psalm,  either  in  the  Targum  or  in  the  related  Peshitta 
Version. 

The  Targum  has  the  same  root  which  we  have  translated  by  '  ran  over ', 
and  so  has  the  Syriac ;  we  may  set  the  sentence  of  the  Ode  side  by  side 
with  the  other  two  as  follows  : 

Ode  xxi.  8  :  (-_ac&a^>  wjK».(o  w.a\   >$o< 

Targum  (Ps.  xlv.  2) :         20  &DO  'lb  NJ?2 

Peshitta  (Ps.  xlv.  2):  Jc^  L>cx^9  «...?»^  -4^/ 

There  can  be  no  doubt,  then,  that  the  Odist  is  imitating  the  45th  Psalm  ; 
what  has  '  run  over '  is  the  '  good  word  ',  and  this  is  what  was  '  found  in  the 
mouth '.  The  opening  of  the  45th  Psalm,  as  is  well  known,  is  one  of  the 
proof  passages  for  the  doctrine  of  the  Logos,  and  as  such  acquired  great 
currency.  The  Odist,  working  from  a  Syriac  original,  indulges  his  fondness 
for  paronomasia  by  contrasting  the  verb  which  is  used  in  the  Psalm 
(-*^j  =  eructavii)  with  a  similar  verb  (U*=>  =  quaesivit) ;  the  word-play 
cannot  be  reproduced  in  any  other  language.  It  is  clear  that  the  Odist 
was  working  from  the  Syriac  or  Aramaic  Psalter. 

Looking  more  closely  at  the  texts  we  see  that  the  Targum  has  done 
something  of  the  same  kind.  Instead  of  a  root  JQJ  it  has  substituted  NJ?2 
which  appears  to  require  translation, 

'  My  heart  sought  after  a  good  word.' 

It  is  in  this  direction,  then,  that  we  are  to  find  the  clue  to  the  meaning 
of  the  Odist's  words  : 

'  My  heart  (ran  over  with)  sc.  a  good  word  : 
(sought  after) 
And  it  (the  good  word)  was  found  in  my  mouth.' 

Now  that  we  have  once  again  found  out  the  canonical  Psalm  on  which 
the  Odist  is  working,  we  are  in  a  position  which  is  favourable  for  further 

Y  2 


324  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [XXI 

investigation.  For  example,  the  45th  Psalm  will  find  us  the  motive  for  the 
next  clause : 

'  And  it  dawned  upon  my  lips ' ; 
this  comes  from  : 

'grace  is  poured  into  thy  lips.' 
Nor  is  it  to  be  neglected  that  this  great  Psalm,  which  the  Christian 
tradition  has,  from  the  first,  interpreted  Messianically,  is  an  epithalamium 
for  King  Solomon,  and  therefore  peculiarly  likely  to  be  the  subject  of 
an  Ode.  When  we  come  to  the  26th  Ode,  the  knowledge  which  we 
have  acquired  with  regard  to  the  composition  of  the  21st  Ode  in  its 
closing  verses,  will  help  us  to  catch  the  motive  of  the  opening  verse 
in  that  Ode  also.  For  we  may  regard  the  Syriac  expression  .,.->\  >*o/ 
'  My  heart  poured  out '  ('  eructavit  cor  meum ')  as  a  recognizable  formula, 
just  as  we  should  recognize  'eructavit  cor'  if  we  came  across  it  in  Latin. 

A  conjecture  may  be  offered  as  to  the  reason  why  the  Targum 
substituted  for  >*»/  the  form  Li*s  with  which  our  Odist  seems  to  have 
been  acquainted.  May  it  not  be  that  ,*o/,  in  the  sense  of  eructavit  was 
vulgar  and  unsuited  to  public  reading  or  recitation,  and  that  for  that 
reason  a  change  was  made  to  a  closely  related  word  ?  One  often  feels  the 
vulgarity  of  the  language  in  reading  the  45th  Psalm  in  Greek  or  Latin,  or 
the  78th  Psalm,  with  its  similar  opening 

ipcv£o/xa.L   K€Kpvfj.fxeva   airb   KaTaySoXrys" 

when  quoted  by  the  Gospel  of  Matthew  (Mat.  xiii.  35).  The  Targum 
does  not,  however,  avoid  the  word  where  it  occurs  in  Ps.  lxxviii,  and 
is  certified  by  the  Hebrew.  On  the  other  hand  in  this  Psalm  the  Peshitta 
avoids  the  strong  expression  and  says  '  I  will  speak  parables '.  Evidently 
there  was  some  trouble  over  >a^»/. 

Not  only  is  the  Psalm  to  which  we  refer  a  Salomonic  Psalm,  and 
on  that  account  one  that  the  Odist  might  naturally  study,  but  it  is  also 
the  Psalm  from  which  the  Early  Church,  or  the  early  Messianic  preachers, 
took  one  of  the  titles  of  the  Messiah,  the  title  of  '  the  Beloved '.  And 
whoever  first  employed  this  title,  it  certainly  acquired  Christian  connotation  ; 
it  is  employed  in  the  New  Testament  and  it  occurs  in  the  Odes.  The 
Psalm  is  headed  in  the  Septuagint 

wo?/  wrep  Tof  dyairwrov, 


xxi-xxii]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  325 

a  very  striking  headline,  which  brings  '  Ode '  and  '  Solomon '  very  near 
together. 

The  Hebrew  does  not  bring  out  '  the  Beloved '  quite  as  clearly ;  it  says  : 

nrr  n»tf 

which  we  may  render  '  a  song  of  loves '  or  '  epithalamium ' ;  but  a  very 
slight  change  would  restore  '  Song  of  the  Beloved '  as  in  the  LXX. 

That  the  early  Christians  interpreted  '  the  Beloved '  to  be  one  of  the 
titles  of  Jesus  is  certain.     For  example,  Eusebius,  c.  Marcellum,  says  : 

'  This  very  one  (sc.  Christ)  was  the  Beloved  of  God,  as  the  title  of 
the  44th  (45th)  Psalm  discloses  by  its  contents,  viz. :  An  Ode  for  the 
Beloved.' 

So  also  Euseb.  D.  E.  iv.  15  : 

'  Consider  the  matter  more  closely  and  see  how  according  to  the 
preface  of  the  Psalm  (Ps.  xliv  (xlv)  ut  sup.)  he  makes  his  discourse  to 
open  with  the  words  concerning  the  Beloved? 

And  in  the  same  strain  Eusebius  speaks  elsewhere. 

Now  this  is  not  fourth-century  theology ;  the  Psalm  in  question  is 
constantly  appealed  to  by  early  Patristic  writers.  They  could  not  have 
ignored  its  conventional  heading. 


ODE    XXII 

(Christ  speaks.) 

1  He  who  brings  me  down  from  on  high  ; 
And  brings  me  up  from  the  regions  below  ; 

2  And  who  gathers  the  things  that  are  betwixt, 
And  throws  them  to  me  ; 

3  He  who  scattered  my  enemies 
And  my  adversaries ; 

4  He  who  gave  me  authority  over  bonds, 
That  I  might  loose  them  : 


326  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xxn 

5  He  that  overthrew  by  my  hands  the  dragon  with  seven  heads, 
And  set  me  at  his  roots1  that  I  might  destroy  his  seed — 

6  Thou  wast  there  and  didst  help  me  ; 

And  in  every  place  Thy  name  was  round  about  me. 

7  Thy  right  hand  destroyed  his  wicked  venom  ; 

And  thy  hand  levelled  the  way  for  those  who  believe  in  thee ; 

8  And  it  chose  them  from  the  graves, 
And  separated  them  from  the  dead. 

Cf.Ezek.xxxvii.4-6.    9     Jt  to°k  dead  bones, 

And  covered  them  with   bodies  ; 

io     And  they  were  motionless, 

And  it  gave  (them)  energy  -  for  life. 

1 1  Thy  way  was  without  corruption  and  thy  face  ; 
Thou  didst  bring  thy  world  to  corruption  ; 
That  everything  might  be  dissolved  and  renewed, 

12  And  that  the  foundation  for  everything  might    be  thy  rock; 
Cf.  Matt.  xvi.  18.              And  on  it  thou  didst  build  thy  Kingdom  ; 

Cf.  Ps.  xc.  i.  And  thou  becamest:;  the  dwelling-place  of  the  saints. 

Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  5.  The  MSS.  have  wofcoe-jslo  'Thou  hast  set  me  at  his  roots', 
which  is  possible  but  not  very  grammatical.  The  copyists  might  have 
added  the  taw  under  the  influence  of  the  following  verse.  We  have, 
therefore,  suggested  as  a  probable  emendation  w>in^.p1q.  On  the  other 
hand,  note  that  the  Coptic  text  is  against  the  emendation. 

v.  10.  We  do  not  see  why  we  should  eliminate  the  waw  before  l^o»-.o 
as  Grimme  has  done. 

1  B,  root.  2  H,  Help  And  it  became. 


xxii]  ODES   OF  SOLOMON  327 

v.  6.  Schulthess  suggests,  as  in  the  Coptic,  the  addition  of  <*oco* 
'  with  me '.     The  text,  however,  can  do  without  the  particle. 

v.  7.     B,  has  '  destroyed  the  poison  of  evil '. 

vv.  8-10.  Instead  of  the  third  person  fem.  sing.,  we  can  very  well 
use  the  second  person  singular  in  verses  8-10  ;  these  two  persons  are 
distinguished  one  from  another  in  the  verbs  employed  in  these  verses 
only  by  a  diversity  of  punctuation.  The  Coptic  has  used  the  second 
person. 

Expository  Notes. 

We  now  come  to  one  of  the  Odes  which  has  become  incorporated 
in  the  Pistis  Sophia.  Whatever  hesitation  we  might  have  had  as  to  the 
speaker  in  the  previous  Ode,  we  are  confident  that  Christ  Himself  is 
the  speaker  in  this  Ode,  and  apparently  Christ  ascending  from  Hades. 
The  opening  sentence  suggests  Him  that  descended  and  ascended  again ; 
and  the  account  of  dead  men  taken  from  their  graves  and  clothed  again 
with  flesh  can  hardly  be  anything  else  than  the  emancipation  of  the 
souls  that  are  imprisoned  in  Hades.  The  Odist  has  no  knowledge  of 
a  general  resurrection  (and  in  this  respect,  Bardaisan  appears  to  have 
held  the  same  view) ;  but  he  has  a  belief  in  the  immortality  of  the 
soul  and  the  gift  of  God  which  is  eternal  life  :  and  he  has  a  strong 
doctrine  of  the  Descent  into  Hades  (see  Ode  xlii,  for  example). 

It  does  not  appear  as  if  the  Odist  is  deliberately  working  over  a 
Psalm,  as  in  previous  cases.  Where  shall  we  find  in  a  Psalm  of  the 
Old  Testament  a  dragon  with  seven  heads  ?  We  can,  indeed,  find  a  good 
reference  in  Psalm  lxxiv.  13  'Thou  brakest  the  heads  of  the  dragons  in 
the  waters ',  a  passage  which  with  the  addition  of  the  seven  heads,  and  the 
expansion  of  the  waters  by  the  addition  of  Jordan  or  some  equivalent 
term,  is  commonly  referred  by  the  Patristic  writers  to  the  waters  of 
baptism,  and  the  enemy  who  is  exorcised  therein.  But  can  we  find  an 
early  instance  of  this  exegesis?  Here  are  some  late  examples  that  we 
have  noted :  the  Greek  ritual  for  the  Blessing  of  the  Waters  at  the 
Festival  of  the  Epiphany  says  :  '  Thou  didst  sanctify  the  streams  of  Jordan 
by  sending  from  Heaven  thy  Holy  Spirit,  and  by  breaking  the  heads  of  the 
dragons  lurking  there '. 


328  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xxn 

In  a  Homily  ascribed  to  Gregory  Thaumaturgus  (tr.  by  Conybeare  in 
Expositor  for  1896,  pp.  161  ff.)  we  find  : 

'  Not  any  more  let  the  race  of  men  fear  the  craftiness  and  deceit 
of  the  serpent,  because  the  Lord  hath  bruised  the  head  of  the  dragon 
in  the  water  of  baptism.' 

In  the  Armenian  ritual  for  baptism  (ed.  Conybeare,  p.  101)  some 
manuscripts  have : 

1  Thou,  Lord,  didst  bruise  the  head  of  the  dragon  upon  the  waters. 
We  humbly  pray  thee,  look  down  upon  this  water,  and  send  the  gift 
of  thy  grace,  and  the  benediction  of  the  Jordan,'  &c. 

But  here  is  something  of  an  earlier  date  which  bears  upon  the 
destruction  of  the  poison  of  the  serpent :  Cyprian,  in  one  of  his  epistles 
(Ep.  68,  ed.  Hartel,  p.  764): 

'  diaboli  nequitiam  pertinacem  ad  aquam  salutarem  valere,  in 
baptismo  vero  omne  nequitiae  suae  virus  amittere ;  quod  exemplum 
cernimus  in  rege  Pharaone.' 

Here  Pharaoh  and  the  devil  divide  the  honour  of  posing  as  the  dragon : 
it  is  certainly  curious  that  Cyprian's  language  '  nequitiae  virus '  should 
come  so  near  to  the  '  wicked  poison  '  of  the  Ode.  The  reference  to 
Pharaoh  is  taken  from  Ezek.  xxix.  3,  '  Pharaoh,  King  of  Egypt,  the  great 
dragon  that  lieth  in  the  midst  of  his  rivers '. 

So  much  for  the  baptismal  gnosis  of  the  fathers  and  the  rituals. 

Turning  to  the  Ode,  we  recognize  in  the  story  of  the  raising  of  the 
dead  from  Sheol  the  influence  of  Ezekiel,  ch.  xxxvii.  Now  we  begin 
to  strike  linguistic  parallels  :  the  Ode  says  :  verse  9  '  (thy  right  hand)  took 
dead  bones  and  spread  bodies  upon  them'  (.got.N  v.  ^_»i-o).  The 
Peshitta  says:  'and  I  will  spread  skin  upon  you'  (. o.N.s,  «oiX>|o). 
Here  the  Odist  has  used  the  same  root  as  is  employed  in  the  Peshitta 
and  the  Hebrew  (Gk.  eicrevw)  to  express  the  spreading  of  skin  over  a  body, 
and  he  has  used  it  for  the  bringing  of  flesh  upon  bones.  It  was  not 
the  right  word  to  use,  but  he  took  it  from  his  context,  i.  e.  from  the 
Hebrew  or  the  Syriac.  We  take  it  that  he  was  using  a  Syriac  text  of 
Ezekiel.  The  next  sentence,  'and  thou  gavest  them  energy  for  life', 
represents  the  Syriac  '  and  I  will  give  you  spirit  and  you  shall  live  ' :  but 
the  sentence  has  a  Greek  look,  for  Jlcu^^Ooo  stands  for  ivipyeia,  and  the 
word  is  actually  preserved  in  the  Coptic. 


xxn]  ODES   OF    SOLOMON  329 

In  verse  8  the  sentence : 

'  Thou  didst  choose  them  from  the  graves, 
And  separate  them  from  the  dead.' 

is  under  the  influence  of  verse  62  : 

'  I  will  open  your  graves, 
And  bring  you  up  out  of  your  graves'; 

but  there  is  no  preference  for  one  version  over  the  other. 

The  expression  'they  were  without  motion'  (^Jjlfcoo  Do)  is  obtained 
from  the  seventh  verse  of  the  prophecy,  'there  was  a  moving'  (Jj^oj). 
The  Greek  o-eio-yaos  would  not  furnish  the  required  parallel.  On  the  whole, 
we  suspect  Syriac  origin  for  the  Ode,  but  the  case  is  not  nearly  so  strong 
nor  so  convincing  as  some  which  we  had  from  the  Psalms. 

If  we  are  right  in  recognizing  the  influence  of  Ezekiel  in  the  middle 
of  the  Ode,  it  would  seem  to  be  either  on  account  of  the  liberation  of  souls 
from  Hades  or  of  the  raising  of  the  dead  generally.  The  Syriac  Bible 
heads  the  chapter  '  Resurrection  of  the  dead '.  Ephrem  used  it  to 
describe  the  escape  from  Hades.  In  the  Nisibene  Hymns  (37,  5)  he  speaks 
as  follows  : 

'  I  saw  in  the  valley  that  Ezekiel  who  quickened  the  dead  when 
he  was  questioned ;  and  I  saw  the  bones  that  were  in  heaps,  and 
they  moved ;  There  was  a  tumult  of  bones  in  Sheol,  bone  seeking 
for  his  fellow,  and  joint  for  her  mate ;  .  .  .  Unquestioned,  the 
voice  of  Jesus,  the  Master  of  all  creatures,  quickened  them.' 

The  Ode  itself  suggests  the  release  from  Hades  in  the  words  : 
'  He  gave  me  authority  over  bonds, 
That  I  might  loose  them.' 

We  have  not,  however,  been  able  to  find  the  thread  of  the  sequence 
of  the  Ode,  either  for  the  opening  verses  or  its  close. 

The  perplexity  concerning  the  Dragon  and  his  roots  and  his  seed 
(verse  5)  may  perhaps  be  illuminated. by  a  reference  to  the  Greek  Acts  of 
John  (ch.-  98)  where  the  Gnostic  writer  of  the  Acts  refers  to  Sarai/a?  nal  17 
KaTwriKT]  pi£a,  which  root  he  identifies  with  the  nature  of  created  things. 
There  is  no  need  to  accept  his  Gnostic  interpretation  of  the  '  root ' ; 
the  point  for  us  is  the  existence  of  an  expression  like  the  '  root  of  Satan ' ; 
for  Satan  as  the  dragon  compare  Apocalypse  xii.  9  : 

6  8pa.K<i)v  6  yueyas,  6  o(£is  o  dp^atos,  6  Ka\ovfAevo<s  AtapoAos  kou  o 
2aTava$. 


33©  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xxil 

Suppose  we  identify  the  Dragon  with  Satan  and  the  Serpent  in  Genesis, 
as  the  Apocalypse  suggests.  We  find  that  the  Apocalypse  also  knows 
that  the  Dragon  has  seven  heads.  It  is  natural,  then,  to  infer  that  we  are 
dealing  in  some  respects  with  an  interpretation  of  the  third  chapter  of 
Genesis  (Gen.  iii.  15).  This,  then,  is  the  place  where  the  reference  to  the 
'  seed '  comes  from,  that  is  to  be  destroyed  ;  for, 

'  I  will  put  enmity  between  .  .   .  thy  seed  and  her  seed.' 
The  woman  and  her  seed  are  to  be  at  war  with  the  devil  and  his  brood. 

The  word  ^a^ao  which  is  used  of  the  '  overthrow '  of  the  Dragon 
answers  on  the  one  hand  to  the  repeated  ifiXrfti]  of  the  Apocalypse, 
and  to  <ri'VTpiif/ei  of  Romans  xvi.  20  ;  (Pesh.  ja«**.).  As  to  the  '  root ',  it 
is  probably  a  Syriac  or  Aramaic  variation  of  ;av  (root)  for  >~>n.v  '  heel ' 
of  Genesis  iii.  15. 

If  this  is  the  right  direction  for  the  explanation  of  the  Conflict  with 
the  Dragon  in  Ode  xxii,  we  need  not  refer  to  the  baptismal  gnosis  on  the 
dragon  in  the  midst  of  the  waters,  or  the  Patristic  allusions  to  a  dragon  in 
the  Jordan.  There  are  no  '  waters '  in  the  curse  on  the  serpent  in  Genesis. 
The  allusions  to  the  dragon  in  the  baptismal  rituals  will  belong  to  a  later 
date,  and  to  subsequent  reflection. 

The  objection  may  be  made  that  the  dragon  with  seven  heads  ought 
not  to  be  equated  with  the  relatively  terrorless  snake  in  Genesis.  The 
answer  to  this  objection  is  (1)  that  the  two  are  expressly  identified  in 
Apocalypse  xii,  (2)  that  the  same  variation  between  '  snake '  and  '  dragon  ' 
is  found  in  Exodus  iv,  where  it  is  noted  by  John  Lightfoot  as  follows  : 
'  Moses'  rod  at  Sinai  is  said  to  be  turned  into  "  Nahash ",  a  common 
or  ordinary  snake  or  serpent ;  but  when  he  casts  it  down  before  Pharaoh, 
it  becometh  "  Tanin ",  a  serpent  of  the  greatest  dimensions,  belike  a 
crocodile.'  So,  if  more  evidence  is  wanted  than  that  of  the  Apocalypse, 
let  Exodus  be  offered. 

In  the  same  connexion  Lightfoot  offered  a  weighty  illustration  of 
the  truth  that  the  bruising  of  the  serpent's  head  belongs  to  the  Messiah, 
for,  as  he  says,  '  It  is  worth  the  observing,  that  Moses  is  commanded 
to  "take  it  by  the  tail",  for  to  meddle  with  the  serpent's  head  belonged 
not  to  Moses,  but  to  Christ,  that  spake  to  him  out  of  the  bush  "  !  No 
doubt  Christ,  as  the  seed  of  the  Woman,  is  peculiarly  set  apart  for  the 
conflict  with  the  head  of  the  dragon.     Does  not  the  study  of  the  Ode 


xxn]  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  331 

show  that  Genesis  iii  was  already  interpreted  Messianically  in  the  days  of 
the  Odist  ? 

To  this  there  can  hardly  be  any  other  than  an  affirmative  answer, 
seeing  that  it  is  so  interpreted  in  the  Apocalypse.  In  the  Odes,  we 
have  the  seed  of  the  Woman  engaged  in  the  destruction  of  the  seed  of 
the  serpent ;  in  the  Apocalypse,  we  have  the  serpent  plotting  to  destroy 
the  residue  of  the  seed  of  the  Woman ;  the  two  interpretations  are  com- 
plementary. The  seven  heads  of  the  dragon  which  are  common  to  both 
of  the  interpretations  belong  to  folklore  rather  than  to  Bible  story :  for 
this  mythical  creation  ranges  from  Japan  to*  the  Scotch  Highlands :  its  tale 
is  told,  as  Professor  Elliot  Smith  points  out,  in  the  '  Celtic  Dragon  Myth ' 
of  J.  F.  Campbell,  as  well  as  in  the  story  of  Herakles  and  the  daughters  of 
Hesperus :  and  it  goes  back  to  an  original  Octopus  or  devil-fish,  which 
may  well  have  been  a  terror  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  Levant  or  the  Persian 
Gulf.  That  we  have  found  the  right  meaning  may  be  seen  from  Ephrem's 
Hymns  to  the  Virgin  (Lamy,  ii.  606),  where  it  is  said  that  'the  boy  trod 
on  the  cursed  one  and  broke  (the  head  of)  the  serpent,  and  cured  Eve  of 
the  poison  cast  at  her  by  the  murderous  dragon,  who  by  his  guile  had 
overthrown  her  (o*a.«*oo)  in  Sheol '. 

In  reading  this  Ode  we  must  pay  careful  attention  to  the  periphrases 
which  the  Odist  employs  to  describe  the  Divine  Nature  and  the  Divine 
Action.  In  the  compass  of  this  single  Ode  there  is  a  rich  harvest  of 
Targumisms  ;  we  have  the  '  hand  of  God ',  the  '  name  of  God  ',  the  '  right 
hand  of  God ',  the  '  face  of  God '.  The  Odist  will  not  even  say  that  '  God 
is  round  about  him  ' ;  he  says  that '  thy  name  was  all  round  me  everywhere '. 
He  will  not  say  that '  God  is  his  rock  ' ;  he  says  '  Thy  rock  is  the  foundation 
of  everything '.  If  we  look  at  Psalm  cxxv.  2,  ('  so  the  Lord  is  round  about 
his  people '),  we  shall  find  the  origin  of  the  Odist's  language ;  the 
coincidence  with  the  Syriac  is  very  close  : 

o»v>  b,^>   *-.o   )u;jaoo 

The  Targumic  variation  on  the  part  of  the  Odist  is  very  clear.  It  is  not 
the  official  Targum  that  is  here  drawn  on  :  that  interpreter  proceeds  to 
get  rid  of  the  doubtful  '  circumference '  of  God,  by  saying  that  '  the 
Majesty  of  the  Lord  is  round  about  his  people '.  The  same  phenomenon 
appears  in  the  closing  verse  of  the  Ode  :   the  Odist  will  not  say  '  Lord, 


332  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xxii-xxin 

thou  hast  been  our  dwelling  place ' :  he  has,  indeed,  the  expression 
) ;  ,v>  v  re  k»*2>  as  in  the  Peshitta,  but  it  is  equated  not  with  God,  but 
with  the  Kingdom  that  is  founded.  The  official  Targum  alters  the 
language  of  the  Psalm  in  another  direction  :  '  O  Lord '  he  says,  '  thy 
dwelling  is  the  place  of  thy  Shekinah  in  the  heavens '.  The  Odist 
is  clearly  an  independent  Targumist  in  his  manner  of  glossing  the 
text,  but  as  regards  the  text  itself,  he  appears  to  depend  on  the 
Peshitta. 

Here  is  another  curious  point  with  regard  to  the  circumlocution  noted 
above,  according  to  which  the  Odist  does  not  speak  of  God  as  his  Rock 
in  the  same  way  as  the  Psalter  so  commonly  does,  and  in  spite  of  his 
proved  dependence  upon  the  Psalter.  The  Peshitta  version  is  in  the  same 
case :  it  never  translates  '  God  my  rock ',  or  the  '  Rock  of  my  salvation '. 
It  always  either  omits  or  paraphrases  the  reference  to  God  as  Rock. 
The  natural  explanation  is  furnished  us  by  the  Targum,  which  does  the 
same  thing  in  its  own  way,  commonly  substituting  '  fortitude '  or  some 
non-material  expression.  It  seems,  then,  that  the  Odist  and  the  Peshitta 
version  are  both  under  Targumist  influence  ;  the  Odist  was  not  independent 
of  the  Peshitta,  and  was  working,  for  the  most  part  at  all  events,  on  that 
text  as  his  base.     He  was  evidently  speaking  in  the  name  of  Christ. 


ODE    XXIII 

i     Joy  is  of  the  saints  ! 

And  who  shall  put  it  on  but  they  alone? 

Cf.  Sap.  Sol.  iii.  9 ;       2      Grace   is  of  the  elect ! 

1V-  !5-  And  who  shall  receive  it  but  they  who  trust  in  it  from  the 

beginning? 

3     Love  is  of  the  elect ! 

And  who  shall  put   it  on,  but  those  who  have  possessed   it 
from  the  beginning? 


xxin]  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  333 

4  Walk  ye  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Most  High  1  ; 

And  ye  shall  know  the  grace  of  the  Lord  without  grudging  ; 
To  His  exultation  and  to  the  perfection  of  His  knowledge. 

5  And  His  thought  was  like  a  letter, 
And  His  will  descended  from  on  high  ; 

6  And  it  was  sent  like  an  arrow 
Which  is  violently  shot  from  the  bow ; 

7  And  many  hands  rushed  to  the  letter, 
To  seize  it  and  to  take  it  and  to  read  it. 

8  And  it  escaped  from  their  fingers, 

And    they   were    affrighted  at    it  and    at  the '  seal  that  was 
on  it. 

9  For  it  was  not  permitted  to  them  to  loose  the  seal  ; 

For  the  power  that  was  over  the  seal  was  greater  than  they. 

10  But  those  who  saw  it  went  after  the  letter, 
That  they  might  know  where  it  would  alight, 
And  who  should  read  it, 

And  who  should  hear  it. 

1 1  But  a  wheel  received  it, 

And  (the  letter)  came  over  it  ; 

12  And  there  was  with  it  a  sign 

Of  the  kingdom  and  of  the  government. 

13  And  everything  which  was  moving  the  wheel 
It  mowed  and  cut  down ; 

1  Or,  of  the  Lord  (B). 


334  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [xxm 

14  And  it  destroyed1  many  things  that  were  adverse; 
And  it  spanned 2  the  rivers  : 

15  And  crossed  over  and  rooted  up  many  forests,3 
And  made  a  broad  path. 

16  The  head  went  down  to  the  feet  ; 
For  down  to  the  feet  ran  the  wheel ; 
And  that  which  had  come  upon  it. 

Cf.  2  Cor.  iii.  1.         17     The  letter  was  one  of  recommendation4  ; 

For  there  were  included  in  it 6  all  districts : 

]  8     And  there  was  seen  at  its  head,  a  head  which  was  revealed 
Even  the  Son  of  Truth  from  the  Most  High  Father; 

19  And  he  inherited  and  took  possession  of  everything; 
And  the  thought  of  the  many  was  brought  to  naught, 

20  And  all  the  apostates0  became  bold  and  fled  away, 
.And  the  persecutors  became  extinct  and  were  blotted  out. 

21  And  the  letter  became  a  great  tablet,7 

Which  was  wholly  written  by  the  finger  of  God  ; 

22  And  the  name  of  the  Father  was  upon  it ; 
And  of  the  Son  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
To  rule  for  ever  and  ever. 

Hallelujah. 

1  Both  MSS.  it  contained.  2  Lit.  covered  with  earth.  s  Or,  nations  (B). 

4  Or,  command  ;     B,   It  was  a  letter  and  a  command. 

B  Lit.  were  gathered  together.      G  Or,  seducers,  leaders  astray.       7  Or,  volume'. 


xxiii]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  335 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  5.  The  idea  that  the  'will  of  God'  descended  from  heaven  is  very 
common  in  Syrian  Fathers  and  Syriac  breviaries  :  '  His  will  descended  and 
inhabited  with  its  servants '  (Ephr.  iii.  248,  R.  E.) ;  '  His  will  descended 
for  men '  (Ephr.  ibid.,  249,  &c). 

The  expression  that  'His  Will  descended  from  on  High'  is  to  be 
referred  to  the  Incarnation,  and  the  Lord  is  frequently  referred  to  in 
the  Nestorian  rituals  as  the  '  Invisible  or  Hidden  Will '.  Here  are  some 
extracts  from  Mar  Abd  'Isho\  which  will  illustrate  the  point. 

'  In  a  befitting  way  His  Will  descended  towards  men  :  He  sent  His 
Beloved,  the  Begotten  of  Himself,  that  is,  His  Express  Image.' 

'  The  Will  of  the  Creator  descended  and  united  itself  to  the  will  of 
the  creature :  the  Divine  nature  clothed  itself  with  the  human  nature.' 

'The  Invisible  Will  came  down,  took  a  parsopa,  and  appeared 
openly,  and  thereby  renewed  that  which  was  broken  up.'  * 

It  is  clear,  then,  that  the  Descent  of  'the  Will  is  another  way  of  saying 
Incarnation.  Probably  the  starting  point  for  such  a  line  of  thought  is 
Psalm  xl.  5  :    '  Lo,  I  come  :    to  do  thy  Will,  O  God.' 

v.  13.  The  opinion  of  Bruston  who  suggests  ^.lcs>?  for  >&...Jlso»  is 
improbable. 

v.  14.  Both  MSS.  have  j£^r>aaao? ;  and  the  note  to  the  text  must 
therefore  be  changed  accordingly.  As  far  as  the  meaning  is  concerned, 
the  word  does  not  differ  from  Jliaajo?,  of  which  it  is  only  the  relative 
adjective. 

v.  16.  Gressmann's  suggestion  that  the  verb  k.**j  'he  came  down'  is 
the  fern.  sing,  of  *-j  'he  rested ',  is  not  good  in  the  context. 

In  the  next  line  we  remark  that  H  has  the  singular  Ji^^.  ('foot'  not 
'  feet '). 

For  the  belief  that  the  head  which  went  down  to  the  feet  represents 
the  descent  of  the  Divinity  upon  the  Humanity  of  Jesus,  we  may  find 
some  support  in  the  following  glosses : 

Melito,  Clavis,  6.  1  '  Caput  Domini,  ipsa  Divinitas,  eo  quod 
principium  et  creator  sit  omnium  rerum.' 

In  Daniele,  ii.  21  'Pedes  Domini  homo  assumptus  a  verbo  vel 
sancti  apostoli.'' 

1  The  reference  is  to  Badger,  Nestorians,  pp.  39,  41,  45. 


33<5  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xxm 

In  Deuteronomio :    '  Qui  appropinquant  pedibus  eius  accipient  de 

doctrina  illius.' 

Et  in  Psalmo.     '  Adorabimus  in  loco  ubi  steterunt  pedes  eius.' 
Eucherius,  Liber  Formularum  (P.  L.  50.  733  B):   'Sicut  per  caput 

divinitas,  ita  per  pedes  humanitas  eius  exprimitur  :  de  qua  humanitate 

in  Exodo  scriptum  erat.'     (Exod.  xxiv.  10.) 

v.  r8.  H  has  <h*-.u>,  'his  {or  its)  head'  as  referring  to  the  other  head 
mentioned  in  verse  16.  According  to  this  MS.,  therefore,  it  would  seem 
that  another  head  had  sprung  forth  upon  the  first  head.  For  the  second 
\m^S  Barnes  suggests  Jl7,  which,  however,  would  render  the  sentence 
ungrammatical. 

v.  20.  The  verb  a*.^ao/  '  they  dared ',  '  they  became  bold '  has  been 
changed  by  Barth  into  cu.»k»i»/  'they  were  hurt',  'wounded',  'maimed', 
or  '  they  perished ',  and  by  Wellhausen  into  cu.tsL/  '  sie  wurden  zerstreut ' ; 
which  verb  is  commonly  used  in  Syriac  in  the  sense  of  '  to  squander 
possessions',  'to  dilapidate'. 


Expository  Notes. 

This  Ode  is  the  most  difficult  of  all  the  hymns  in  the  collec- 
tion. It  contains  an  account  of  a  mysterious  letter,  shot  from  heaven 
like  an  arrow  from  a  bow,  sealed  with  a  terrible  seal,  written  with 
the  finger  of  God,  and  inscribed  with  the  name  of  the  Trinity.  No 
one,  so  far,  has  succeeded  in  breaking  this  seal ;  it  is  too  strong  for 
the  critics. 

The  opening  sentences  of  the  Ode  in  which  the  Odist  prepares  for  his 
special  message  are  quite  intelligible.  They  take  us  to  the  Wisdom  of 
Solomon  :  in  the  third  chapter  we  read  as  follows : 

ol  ttcttoi^otcs   cV    avrio  (rvvrjcrovcriv  a\i]6eiav, 

KCU     Ot    TTICTTOI    CI'    ayaTTI]    7T/30CT/i.CVOVCril'    avrw, 

on   vapis   xai   cA.co5  tois   c/cAcktois  ovtov. 

Sa/>.  So/,  iii.  9. 
And  again  : 

OTL    XaPL<*     KCLL    e^-t05    TOtS    CK'AcK'TOt^    aVTOV. 

Sap.  Sol.  iv    15. 


xxin]  ODES  OF  SOLOMON  337 

This  is  the  passage  which  has  suggested  to  the  Odist  the  refrain : 

'  Joy  is  of  the  saints  : 
Grace  is  of  the  elect : 
Love  is  of  the  elect.' 
and  he  goes  on  in  the  language  of  Wisdom 

'  Walk  in  the  Knowledge  of  the  Most  High 

to  the  perfection  of  Knowledge.' 

So  far  we  might  classify  the  Ode  as  one  of  the  Wisdom  Odes,  and  as 
half-Gnostic.  Now  comes  the  mystery,  for  the  preface  is  ended.  Various 
explanations  have  been  offered  of  the  letter,  and  the  wheel  that  comes 
over  it,  or  on  to  which  it  comes.  Some  have  compared  the  flying  roll  in 
Zechariah,  some  the  mysterious  letter  in  the  Hymn  of  the  Soul,  or  the 
letter  carried  by  an  eagle  in  the  Baruch  story :  but  the  obscurity  is 
undispelled,  and  we  can  only  give  the  best  translation  that  seems  possible 
and  offer  a  tentative  elucidation. 

There  is  an  explanation  suggested  by  the  Syrian  Fathers,  and  especially 
by  St.  Ephrem,  that  the  mysterious  letter  is  the  message  which  Gabriel 
brought  to  the  Virgin.  As  we  have  shown  abundantly  the  acquaintance 
of  Ephrem  with  the  Odes,  which  he  quotes  and  misquotes,  understands 
and  obscures,  it  will  be  proper  to  examine  what  he  has  to  say  on  the 
subject  of  a  letter  from  Heaven.  In  the  Hymns  on  the  Virgin,  Ephrem 
says  expressly  that  Gabriel  brought  with  him  a  letter : 

'He  brought  a  letter  which  was  sealed  with  the  mystery  hidden 
from  the  ages  ;  and  its  contents  were  peace  to  the  maiden  and  good 
hope  to  all  the  ages.' 

(Ed.  Lamy,  ii.  593.*) 

1  See  also  col.  641  of  the  same  volume  : 

'  The  Father  had  written  a  letter :  by  the  hand  of  the  Watcher  (sc.  Angel) 
He  sent  it  to  Nazareth  :  to  the  Virgin  Mary  whom  He  had  chosen  and  had 
good  pleasure  in,  that  she  should  be  the  Mother  of  the  Only-Begotten.' 
For  further  references  see  Narsai  quoted  in  Brev.  Chald^  i.  46  ;  Jacob  of  Sarugh, 
Liber perfectionis  (ed.  Bedjan),  p.  727,  &c. 
»  Z 


338  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xxm 

We  get  the  same  thought  in  the  Oriental  Breviary  as  follows : 

'  [God]  sent  a  letter  which  He  sealed  with  His  essence,  which  has 
no  beginning.' 1 

'[Gabriel]  entrusted  to  her  [Mary]  the  letter  which  had  been 
entrusted  to  him  by  the  Father.'2 

1  Gabriel  was  sent  by  the  Father  to  Mary,  he  took  a  letter  and 
descended.     This  letter  contained  a  mystery  hidden  from  the  Ages.'8 

The  Letter  appears,  then,  to  be  something  of  a  documentary  character ; 
for  the  Odist  reminds  us  in  concluding  his  story  that  it  was  written  by  the 
finger  of  God,  like  the  Ten  Commandments.  Where  shall  we  find  a 
missing  document  that  answers  to  the  conditions  ?  And  what  is  the 
meaning  of  all  the  strife  that  is  provoked  by  the  Letter  and  its  attendant 
Wheel  ?  The  only  clue  that  seems  worth  following,  as  we  have  just  seen, 
is  the  Syriac  reference  to  the  Salutation  of  the  Virgin  by  the  angel  Gabriel, 
as  being  in  the  form  of  a  letter.  In  that  case,  the  Ode  is  a  dramatic 
representation  of  the  Incarnation.  Let  us  see  if  there  is  any  light  thrown 
upon  the  Ode  in  this  direction. 

According  to  the  Odist,  the  Letter  was  a  great  volume  or  tablet ; 
'  tablet '  is  the  best  explanation  for  the  Syriac  word  that  is  employed, 
in  view  of  the  parallel  with  the  tables  inscribed  by  the  finger  of  God. 
When  we  write  down  the  word  '  a  great  tablet '  we  are  confronted  with 
Isaiah  viii.  i,  the  prologue  to  the  story  of  the  Birth  of  the  Messiah  : 

'  Take  thee  a  great  tablet.' 

No  doubt,  then,  we  are  on  the  right  track.  The  Hebrew  and  Peshitta 
texts  use  a  different  word,  the  former  of  necessity  (for  )fc-..  n  i°>  is  of 
Greek  origin),  the  latter  because  it  imitates  the  Hebrew :  the  Targum 
has  also  a  different  word,  which  also  means  '  tablet '.  The  LXX  prefers 
'  a  roll  of  paper '.  The  language  of  the  Odist  appears  to  be  independent 
of  these  possible  sources,  but  his  meaning  is  the  same. 

Isaiah  continues  with  an  injunction  of  the  Lord  to  write  on  the  tablet 
'  with  the  pen  of  a  man '.  This  is  the  starting-point  for  the  next  statement 
of  the  Odist,  that  the  Letter  was  altogether  written  by  the  finger  of  God. 


Ed.  Bedjan,  i.  44.  2  Ibid.,  p.  45.  3  Ibid.,  p.  Jj. 


xxm]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  339 

He  often  works  with  antitheses  of  this  kind,  and  appears  to  have  thought 
that  a  human  pen  was  not  adequate  to  the  mystery  that  he  was 
unfolding.  So  far,  we  appear  to  be  on  the  right  track ;  it  is  the  coming  of 
Christ  that  is  being  described,  and  the  Scripture  is  drawn  upon  that 
describes  that  coming. 

Now  we  begin  to  see  daylight  in  some  other  directions.     The  Will  of 
God  that  descends  from  Heaven  answers  to  another  Scripture : 

'  Lo !   I  come, 

In  the  volume  of  the  book  it  is  written  of  me  .  .  . 
To  do  thy  will,  O  God.'— Ps.  xl.  7,  8. 

It  may,  then,  be  very  properly  said  that  '  His  will  descended  from  on 
High '. 

Then,  in  the  next  place,  it  is  probably  from  the  fifth  verse  of  the  same 
Psalm  : 

'  Thy  thoughts  which  are  to  us-ward ; ' 
that  this  Odist  derives  his  expression : 

'  His  thought  was  like  a  letter ; ' 

the  same  word,  )l^->a«»v>,  being  used  here  by  the  Odist  and  the  Peshitta 
version. 

The  third  verse  of  the  Psalm  has  also  been  drawn  upon  somewhat 
perversely,  for  the  sentence  really  belongs  to  the  previous  verses : 

'  Many  shall  see  it  and  shall  fear.' 

Accordingly  the  Odist  has  a  rush  of  hands  to  seize  the  sealed  letter, 
which  escapes  them,  and  they  are  frightened  at  the  Letter  and  the 
terrible  seal  that  was  on  it.  (The  Peshitta  says,  '  they  shall  see  it  and 
rejoice '.)  The  reason  for  the  introduction  of  the  seal  takes  us  back  to 
Isaiah  viii.  16  : 

'  Bind  up  the  testimony, 
Seal  the  law  among  my  disciples.' 

The  Odist  goes  on  to  explain  that  the  reason  why  the  many  who  saw 
the  letter  went  after  it  was  in  order  that  they  might  know  where  it 
would  alight  and  who  should  read  it.  Here  we  have  probably  an  echo 
of  a  controversy  as  to  the  place  where  the   Messiah  was  to  be  born. 

Z  2 


34Q  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [xxnr 

We  know  the  evangelical  solution  of  the  problem  :  but  the  Odist  has 
his  eye  on  the  time  when  the  problem  was  still  unsolved.1 

The  references  to  the  Kingdom  and  the  Government  are  easily  made 
from  the  tablet  of  Isaiah,  e.  g. 

Isa.  ix.  7.     '  The  increase  of  His  government,  .  .  .  the  throne  of 
David  .  .  .  and  His  Kingdom.' 

So  also  the  references  to  the  Trinity,  and  to  '  rule  that  is  for  ever  and 
ever',  are  all  deducible  from  the  same  section,  for  'of  the  increase  of 
His  government  there  shall  be  no  end  .  .  .  from  henceforth  even  for 
ever '.     No  reference  to  the  New  Testament  is  necessary.2 

There  remains  the  mysterious  '  wheel '  and  the  conflicts  that  are 
associated  with  it.  All  the  rest  of  the  Ode  appears  to  be  cleared  up. 
How  does  the  Wheel  and  its  warfare  come  into  the  story  of  the  Nativity  ? 
And  who  are  the  persecutors  and  the  apostates  ? 

Is  it  possible  that  Wheel  stands  for  Angelic  Being?  There  is  some 
ground  for  this  in  Syriac.  See  the  Thesaurus  under  JL^«^.  Examples 
might  be  multiplied. 

The  expression  '  there  was  seen  at  its  head  the  head  which  was 
revealed ',  is  an  attempt  to  avoid  saying  something  of  an  anthropomorphic 
character.  Whenever  we  come  across  the  expression  wJi^J./  with  or 
without  f*js,  we  may  expect  to  find  traces  of  Targumism ;  for  this  is 
the  way  in  which  one  avoids  saying  that  God  knows  or  that  God  sees. 
Say  rather,  it  is  revealed  before  Him,  or  it  is  seen  before  Him.  The 
language  of  the  Ode  is  then  a  periphrasis :  it  probably  means  that 
'  God  was  seen  at  the  head  of  the  letter,  and  the  Son  of  Truth  from 
the  Father ',  but  this  is  what  the  Odist  does  not  like  to  say  even 
parabolically ;  so  he  produces  a  sentence  in  the  style  of  the  Targums. 

1  Or  it  may  be  that  there  is  a  reference  to  the  Cave  of  the  Nativity,  which 
was  thought  to  be  foretold  in  Isa.  xxxiii.  16.  '  His  lodgement  oMi^-so  shall  be 
in  a  lofty  cavern' ;  cf.  Justin,  Dial.  78,  and  Luke  ii.  7  (KaraXvcrat,  KamXi'/zrm). 

2  The  Testimony  writers  prove  the  endless  reign  of  Christ  from  the  texts 
which  establish  the  first  Advent:  e.g.  Cyprian,  ii.  29  'Quod  ipse  sit  rex  in 
aetemum  regnaturus*.  Proofs  follow  from  Zach.  ix.  9  ;  Isa.  xxxiii.  14  sq.  (the 
'  cave  '-passage,  &c). 


xxiv]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  341 

ODE    XXIV 

1     The  Dove  flew  over  the  head  of  our  Lord  the  Messiah,1 

n  TT'  iij  Cf.  Ephr.  Hymn,  in 

Because  He  was  her  head;  Fest.Efiiph.\.%9. 

1     And  she  sang  over  Him, 
And  her  voice  was  heard : 

3  And  the  inhabitants  were  afraid, 
And  the  sojourners  trembled ; 

4  The  birds  took  to  flight, 

And  all  creeping  things  died  in  their  holes. 

5  And  the  abysses  were  opened  and  closed ; 

And  they  were  seeking  for  the  Lord,  like  (women)  in  travail : 

6  And  He  was  not  given  to  them  for  food 
Because  He  did  not  belong  to  them : 

7  And  the  abysses  were   submerged  in  the    submersion  of  the 

Lord: 
And   they  perished  in  the  thought   which  they  had  existed 
in  from  the  beginning. 

8  For  they  travailed  from  the  beginning, 
And  the  end  of  their  travail  was  life. 

9  And  every  one  of  them  that  was  defective  perished  ; 

For  it  was  not  permitted   to   them   to   make  a  defence   for 
themselves  that  they  might  remain: 

10     And  the  Lord  destroyed  the  imaginations 

Of  all  them  that  had  not  the  truth  with  them  ; 
1  H,  over  the  Messiah. 


342  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xxiv 

1 1  For  they  were  defective  in  wisdom, 
They  who  were  lifted  up  in  their  hearts. 

12  And  they  were  rejected, 

Because  the  truth  was  not  with  them. 

13  For  the  Lord  disclosed  His  way, 
And  spread  abroad  His  grace ; 

14  And  those  who  understood  it 
Know  His  holiness. 

Hallelujah. 


Critical  Notes. 

v.  3.  This  verse  appears  to  have  been  derived  from  the  song  of  Moses 
at  the  Red  Sea,  e.  g.  Exodus  xv.  29  (Syr.) : 

'  The  peoples  heard  it  and  trembled.  Then  the  chieftains  of 
Edom  (oSw?)  were  afraid ;  and  the  strong  men  of  Moab,  shaking 
took  hold  of  them  ;  and  the  dwellers  ()»o.v>.\ )  of  Canaan  were  all 
defeated.' 

If  this  is  a  correct  identification  of  the  language,  the  Ode  is  in  part  an 
Ode  of  deliverance  at  the  Red  Sea ;  and  the  abysses  in  verses  5,  7  which 
are  submerged,  are  to  be  sought  for  in  the  same  song.     Cf.  verse  8  : 

'the  abysses  sunk  down  in  the  heart  of  the  sea.'1 

v.  4.  The  expression  o^a^  l^o~>>  means  literally  '  left  its  wings ',  and 
therefore  can  hardly  be  translated  linguistically  by  '  dropped  its  wings '. 
The  verb  is  used  in  Ode  xxxiii.  3,  and  frequently  by  other  writers,  in 
the  sense  of  'to  give  freedom  to  an  object  in  order  to  accomplish  the 
function  assigned  to  it  with  all  its  energy'.     It  is  so  used  in  the  vulgar 

1  So  we  translate  o^lO  according  to  the  Syriac  lexicographers,  who  explain 
it  by  -~>-»j  {fundum  petivit),  and  this  translation  is  in  good  agreement  with 
o  y^  of  the  Ode. 


xxiv]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  343 

Syriac  of  our  days.  Following  this  sense  the  meaning  of  the  sentence 
would  be,  '  Fowl  flew  swiftly '.  This  meaning  is  rendered  necessary  by  B, 
which  instead  of  Jk-»i9  has  fcwiS  'it  (the  dove)  flew'.  We  could  with 
difficulty  evade  this  sense  with  the  last  reading,  which  seems  preferable, 
corresponding  as  it  does  with  k—»i9  of  the  first  verse. 

The  opinion  of  Bruston,  who  regards  the  verb  o^oo  as  a  '  substantive ' : 
1  Un  mal  mortel  le  retenait ',  is  very  improbable. 

v.  5.  We  think  that  the  verb  0. motto  'and  they  were  closed',  'and 
they  hid  themselves ',  or  '  they  were  hidden,  covered '  is  good  in  the 
sentence,  and  we  do  not  see  why  we  should  change  it  to  o»n->tjo  'and 
they  looked ',  as  Labourt  has  done. 

Gressmann  has  suggested  that  instead  of  v*^-»?  ^*ot  ^./  U;y»N,  ^--^ 
we  might  read  .ooC^>?  e^<*  W  l» u-o.\  ~J^a  'and  they  swallowed 
the  Lord  like  things  belonging  to  them '.  Such  violent  and  unnecessary 
changes  cannot  commend  themselves.  The  same  may  be  said  in  the  first 
line  for  Grimme's  emendation  of  the  existing  phrase  into  ooot  o.tnoti»o 
and  Frankenberg's  reading  ooot?  cu»oil{o.  There  is  also  no  necessity  to 
change  ^^  into  ^cLo  as  Grimme  has  done  in  the  second  line. 

v.  6.  Cod.  H  omits  ^  before  jl^uU,  which  gives  the  sense,  'and 
no  food  was  given  to  them '. 

v.  7.     This  is  the  only  meaning  the  Syriac  sentence  can  have. 

It  is  clear  that  the  Odist  wishes  to  say  that  when  Christ  was  baptized 
something  depressing  happened  in  the  lower  world.  The  passage  and  its 
correct  meaning  was  known  to  Ephrem  Syrus,  who  in  his  Carmina  Nisibena 
(35,  p.  59)  makes  the  devil  say  that '  when  Christ  was  submerged  in  baptism, 
He  broke  away  and  swamped  me '. 

The  Odist  has  the  same  thought  in  his  mind  in  Ode  xxxi,  2  : 

'  The  abysses  were  dissolved  before  the  Lord : 

Folly  was  submerged  by  the  truth  of  the  Lord.' 

v.  9.  Bruston  erroneously  reads  %2»  for  ^o?  or  ^o  and  believes 
that  the  word  stands  for  )>3?  'tablet'. 

v.  12.  The  suggestion  of  Grimme,  who  regards  all  the  second  member 
of  this  verse  as  dittographical  error,  is  not  necessary. 


344  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xxiv 

Expository  Notes. 

Another  Ode  thick  with  obscurity.  Its  opening  describes  the  descent 
of  the  Spirit  upon  Christ  at  His  baptism,  and  describes  it  in  unorthodox 
language,  by  making  the  Spirit  subordinate  to  the  Son.  We  have  shown 
how  Ephrem  corrects  the  Odist  for  his  lapse  from  correct  theology.  It  was 
suggested  in  the  first  edition  that  there  was  uncanonical  matter  involved  in 
the  account  of  the  fluttering  and  singing  dove.  However  that  may  be, 
the  baptismal  incident  is  soon  ended,  and  we  are  apparently  plunged 
into  Hades  along  with  Christ  whom  the  abysses  are  expecting  to  devour. 
As  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  says : 

'  His  body  was  made  to  bait  death  withal,  to  the  end  that  the 
dragon,  lying  in  wait  to  devour  Him,  might  cast  forth  those  whom 
he  had  already  devoured.' — Catech.,  xii.  15. 

This  quaint  belief,  that  Hades  desired  to  devour  and  was  compelled  to 
disgorge,  appears  to  have  been  a  favourite  conceit  of  the  ancients.  We 
shall  find  it  again  in  Ode  xlii.  11:'  Death  cast  me  up  and  many  along 
with  me ' ;  and  it  is  dilated  on  at  length  by  Ephrem  in  his  Carmina 
Nisibena,  e.  g. 

1 1,  Sheol,  was  fed  upon  the  dead ;  yea,  I  feasted  upon  corpses : 
Elijah  slew  the  prophets  of  Baal  and  gave  them  to  me ' ;  '  The 
righteous  constrained  me  to  devour,  but  Jesus  has  compelled  me  to 
disgorge.' 

There  seems  to  be  some  occult  connexion  of  ideas  between  the  baptism 
of  Christ  and  the  descent  into  Hades ;  what  else  does  it  mean  when 
it  says  '  the  abysses  were  submerged  in  the  submersion  of  the  Lord  '  ? 

Almost  every  sentence  in  this  Ode  is  obscure,  and  we  have  failed 
to  get  completely  into  the  Odist's  world  of  ideas.  Kleinert  and  Harris 
have  suggested  that  there  is  some  allusion  to  the  Flood,  especially  in 
verse  4  ;  but  the  arguments  are  not  satisfactory  nor  conclusive. 

v.  6.  '  He  was  not  given  to  them  for  food,  because  He  did  not  belong 
to  them.' 

The  meaning  is  brought  out  more  clearly  by  a  comment  of  Victorinus 
on  Apocalypse  xii.  4,  where  the  seven-headed  dragon  tries  to  devour  the 


xxiv]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON 


345 


seed  of  the  woman.  Victorinus  (is  he  here  quoting  Papias,  as  in  so  many 
other  cases  ?)  says  that : 

'  He  who  was  not  born  of  seed,  owed  nothing  to  death,  therefore 
He  could  not  devour  Him,  that  is,  detain  Him  in  death, — for  on  the 
third  day  He  rose  again.' 

As  this  reference  of  Victorinus,  with  its  possible  dependence  on  Papias, 
and  its  certain  allusion  to  the  dragon  that  would  devour  the  seed  of  the 
woman  in  the  Apocalypse  (xii.  4),  is  of  critical  importance,  we  transcribe 
the  Latin  of  Victorinus  : 

'  Sed  qui  de  semine  natus  non  erat,  nihil  morti  debebat,  propter 
quod  devorare  eum  non  potuit,  id  est  in  morte  detinere,  nam  tertia 
die  resurrexit.'     {P.  L,  v.  336,  d.) 

If  this  is  based  on  Papias,  it  throws  the  Odist  into  the  same  current 
of  beliefs  with  the  millenarians  who  first  expounded  the  Apocalypse. 
We  have,  however,  found  nothing  eschatological  or  millenarian  in  the 
Odes.  This  suggests  that  the  Odist  is  not  a  commentator  on  the 
Apocalypse,  but  that  he  shares  certain  Messianic  ideas  with  the  author 
of  that  book,  as,  for  example,  the  fight  between  the  dragon  and  the 
woman,  and  between  his  seed  and  her  seed. 

Is  it  possible  that  Victorinus  (or  Papias)  may  have  drawn  on  the  Odes  ? 

Certainly  there  is  another  Ode  whose  meaning  is  much  clearer  after 
reading  Victorinus.     In  the  31st  Ode  (v.  8)  Christ  is  made  to  say  : 

'  They  made  me  a  debtor, 
(though  I  rose  up) : 
Me,  who  had  not  been  a  debtor.' 

If  we  take  this  to  mean  that  Christ  was  made  to  pay  the  debt  to  death, 
which  he  could  not  really  pay,  and  that  He  rose  from  the  dead,  we  have 
the  very  meaning  in  the  passage  from  Victorinus. 

We  see  a  further  link  between  the  Odist  and  the  author  of  the 
Apocalypse :  for  Victorinus  says  that  the  dragon  could  not  devour  the 
Messiah,  i.  e.  he  could  not  hold  Him  in  death.  Thus  the  devouring  of 
the  man-child  in  the  Apocalypse  means  the  death  of  Christ,  and  the  Odist 
says  the  same  thing.  He  also  believes  that  Death  could  not  devour  Him ; 
He  was  no  food  for  that  abyss. 


346  ODES   OF  SOLOMON  [xxv 

ODE    XXV 

i     I  was  rescued  from  my  bonds  ; 
And  unto  thee,  my  God,  I  fled. 

2  For  thou  wast  the  right  hand  of  my  salvation, 
And  my  helper. 

3  Thou  hast  restrained  them  that  rise  up  against  me, 
And  they  were  seen  no  more : 

4  Because  thy  face  was  with  me, 
Which  saved  me  by  thy  grace. 

5  But  I  was  despised  and  rejected  in  the  eyes  of  many  : 

Cf.  Sap.  Sol.  Hi.  16,  And  j  was  jn  tnejr  eyes  ii^e  ieacj . 

and  cf.  Ode  xxvui.  9. 

6  And  I  acquired  strength  from  thyself, 
And  help. 

7  Thou  didst  set  me  a  lamp  at  my  right  hand  and  at  my  left, 
That  in  me  there  may  be  nothing  that  is  not  bright ; 

8  And  I  was  covered  with  the  covering  of  thy  spirit ; 
And  I  removed  from  me  the  raiment  of  skins. 

9  For  thy  right  hand  lifted  me  up, 
And  removed  sickness  from  me. 

10  And  I  became  mighty  in  thy  truth, 
And  holy  by  thy  righteousness ; 

1 1  And  all  my  adversaries  were  afraid  of  me  : 

And  I  became  the  Lord's  by  the  name  of  the  Lord : 

12  And  I  was  justified  by  His  gentleness, 
And  His  rest  is  for  ever  and  ever. 

Hallelujah. 


xxv]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  347 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  2.  The  opinion  of  Labourt,  who  thinks  that  instead  of  |a_o»as*  we 
should  read  Joo»a3  fcolo,  is  unnecessary. 

v.  5.  \^l  yl  '  like  lead '  is  not  a  very  happy  image.  Would  it  not  be 
possible  to  suppose  that  it  was  the  Biblical  word  J«-W  *»?  'like  a  lost, 
damned  (man) '  as  in  Ode  xxviii.  9  ?  Or  does  the  Odist  mean  that  Christ's 
enemies  thought  he  had  sunk  like  lead  into  the  great  abyss  ?  Cf.  Exodus 
xv.  10  '  they  sank  like  lead  in  the  mighty  waters '. 

v.  8.  The  verb  kja-»|o  may  very  well  be  understood  in  the  second 
person,  'Thou  hast  taken  off' ;  the  Coptic  has  the  first  person.  So  is  the 
case  with  li^o.|o  of  the  next  verse,  which  may  be  taken  as  the  third 
person  feminine  referring  to  '  thy  right  hand ',  or  as  the  second  person 
singular  referring  to  God. 

v.  10.  Frankenberg  proposes  to  read  U*fift*.o  'and  strong  '  for  )>.tr>..o, 
which  is  possible. 

v.  11.     The  second  line  is  wanting  in  the  Coptic. 

Expository  Notes. 

This  Ode  is  of  a  much  more  intelligible  structure  than  those  which 
immediately  precede.  It  appears  to  be  a  song  of  personal  redemption  and 
illumination.  One  or  two  verses  have  an  appearance  of  being  ex  ore 
Christi.  For  example,  in  verse  5  one  recognizes  the  refrain  of  '  despised 
and  rejected ' ;  and  if  we  may  make  a  slight  correction  in  the  Syriac  and 
read  J»*s/  instead  of  J^»/,  we  should  have  a  parallel  to  '  I  was  in  their  eyes 
like  a  lost  man ',  in  the  28th  Ode  (verse  9),  where  Christ  says 

'  I  seemed  to  them  as  one  of  the  lost.' 

The  objection  would  be  that  the  Coptic,  as  well  as  the  Syriac,  has  'lead'. 
But  this  objection  is  not  final,  as  the  texts  in  question  are  closely  related. 
Moreover,  we  get  the  same  refrain  again  in  the  42nd  Ode  (verse  10), 
where  Christ  is  certainly  the  speaker : 

'  I  was  not  rejected,  though  I  was  reckoned  to  be  so : 
I  did  not  perish,  though  they  thought  it  of  me.' 

Evidently  these  Odes  are  by  the  same  author,  and  they  must  be  early,  for 
they  convey  an  impression  of  surprise  at  the  recovery  and  resurrection  of 


348  ODES  OF   SOLOMON  [xxv 

Jesus,  which  would  not  have  been  natural  in  times  very  long  after  the 
foundation  of  the  Christian  Church.  It  is  not,  however,  easy  to  see  how 
to  refer  this  Ode  generally  to  the  mouth  of  Christ. 

For  the  enemies  who  have  been  turned  back,  and  who  are  seen  no 
more,  'we  have  also  parallels  in  the  rest  of  the  Odes.  For  instance,  in 
Ode  xlii.  5  : 

'all  my  persecutors  are  dead.' 
Again  in  Ode  xxiii.  20  : 

'The  persecutors  became  extinct  and  were  blotted  out.' 
Again  in  Ode  xxii.  3  : 

'  He  scattered  my  enemies  and  my  adversaries,' 

followed  as  in  Ode  xlii  by  a  descent  into  Hades. 

If  these  sentences  refer  to  Christ  and  his  enemies  and  persecutors 
we  may,  perhaps,  regard  them  as  written  during  an  interim  peace  of  the 
early  Church;  but  we  are  still  in  difficulty  as  to  the  division  of  the  25th 
Ode  between  the  prophet  and  Christ. 

In  another  direction,  we  are  encompassed  with  interpreters'  difficulties. 
The  Ode  appears  to  come  from  a  Semitic  hand ;  the  writer  is  '  covered 
with  the  covering  of  thy  Spirit ' ;  and  there  is  a  Semitic  play  on  words  in 
verses  8,  9  : 

'  I  removed  (fcoo-j/)  from  me  the  raiment  of  skins : 
Thy  right  hand  lifted  me  up  (wufcoa-i/).' 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  as  we  have  shown  in  the  Introduction,  the 
writer  concludes  with  a  statement  that  he  is  a  Christian  justified  by 
the  kindness  (xpya-To-rrjs)  of  God.  This  seems  to  require  a  Greek 
authorship. 

The  closing  verse  of  the  Ode  has,  in  fact,  been  interpreted  in  the 
Introduction  as  covering  a  Greek  play  on  the  words  xpiords  and  xPWr"';, 
which  is  taken  up  in  the  reference  to  justification  by  the  gentleness 
(xf)r)aTOTr)<;)  of  the  Lord.  The  argument  is  a  very  strong  one,  and 
thoroughly  harmonious  with  an  Antiochian  origin  for  the  Odes. 

But  there  stands  against  it  the  strikingly  Semitic  language  of  the 
previous  verses,  such  as 

'  covered  with  the  covering  of  thy  Spirit,' 


xxv]  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  349 

and  especially  the  play  on  words  involved  in 

'Thou  didst  remove  (fcs»»_»/)  from  me.' 
'Thy  right  hand  lifted  me  up  (wuk.^ui/).' 

It  is  not  easy  to  reconcile  the  two  points  of  view.  If  the  Syriacisms 
are  not  to  be  got  rid  of,  we  must  find  some  other  method  of  dealing 
with  the  closing  verse,  or  say  that  the  writer  was  bilingual  and  thought 
in  two  languages.  Perhaps  there  may  be  in  the  closing  sentences  a 
reference  to  Isaiah  xliv.  5  : 

'  One  shall  say,  /  am  the  Lord's, 
And  another  shall  call  himself  by  the  name  of  Jacob,'  &c. 

This  would  make  a  very  good  starting-point  for  the  verse : 

'  I  became  the  Lord's 
By  the  Name  of  the  Lord.' 

v.  7.  The  key  to  this  passage  was  suggested  in  the  editio  princeps, 
which  adds  a  foot-note  referring  to  Psalm  cxxxii.  17.  Apparently  it  was 
regarded  as  a  case  of  the  use  of  biblical  language  by  an  author  who  was 
familiar  with  the  Psalms. 

Now  that  we  know  more  about  the  Odist's  methods,  we  inquire 
whether  he  has  the  actual  Psalm  before  him,  and  is  making  use  of  it. 

The  Odist  goes  on  from  the  mention  of  the  lamps  to  the  right  and 
to  the  left  and  discourses  about  the  covering  or  enduement  of  the  Spirit 
which  he  has  received ;  when  we  turn  to  the  Psalm  we  find  two  references 
to  clothing  adjacent  to  the  verse  which  we  are  discussing :  the  previous 
verse  says : 

1 1  will  clothe  her  priests  with  salvation ; ' 

the  following  verse  says  : 

'  His  enemies  will  I  clothe  with  shame.' 

Thus  the  Psalm  furnished  the  suggestion  for  the  '  covering '  in  the  Ode. 

In  the  ninth  verse  of  the  same  Psalm  we  find  again  an  allusion  to  the 
clothing  of  God's  priests  with  righteousness.  Suppose  we  now  look  for 
closer  coincidences  in  language  or  ideas.  Our  guides  are  the  Peshitta 
version  and  the  related  Targum. 

The  first  thing  we  notice  is  that  the  Targum  regards  the  Psalm  as 


350  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xxv 

a  prayer  made  by  David  over  Solomon  as  the  anointed  or  Messiah  :  thus 
in  verse  i  o  : 

'Turn  not  away  the  face  of  Solomon  thy  Anointed.' 

The    Peshitta   has   a   trace   of  the   same  identification,   for  it  ends  the 
seventeenth  verse  of  the  Psalm  with 

'  I  will  make  bright  a  lamp  for  his  (sc.  David's)  anointed.' 
This  is  very  remarkable ;  it  seems  that  Solomon  has  been  interpreted  as 
the   Messiah  of  the  Psalm,   and   equated   with   the   Christ  of  the   New 
Testament      Then  we  notice  that  the  allusion  to  the  Odist's  adversaries, 

'All  my  adversaries  were  afraid  of  me,' 
is  derived  from  the  closing  verse  of  the  Psalm, 

'  His  enemies  will  I  clothe  with  shame.' 

So  much  for  the  transference  of  ideas  :  we  now  look  for  linguistic 
imitations  and  parallelisms.  The  Odist  speaks  of  being  covered  with  tlie 
covering  of  the  Spirit :  three  times  over  the  Targumist  changes  the  word 
'clothe '  of  the  Hebrew  into  clothe  with  the  clothings,  verses  9,  17,  18  :  and 
note  that  the  Odist  has  the  same  duplication  and  has  also  imitated  the 
plural  pch2?  in  the  '  clothings  of  skin '  J^iso  -xiA  which  follow. 

About  the  '  coats  of  skin '  we  may  compare  the  Manichaean  tenets  as 
exposed  by  Ephrem  (Mitchell,  p.  xxx).  According  to  them  the  '  sons  of 
Darkness'  had  skins;  the  father  'Darkness'  became  intoxicated  and 
perverted  the  pure  souls  (cf.  Odes  xxxviii.  9-15  and  xxxiii.  5-13,  and 
xxi.  3).  The  work  of  God  consisted  in  taking  off  the  garments  of  '  skin- 
darkness '  and  replacing  them  with  'soul-light'.  From  p.  lxviii  (ibid.)  we 
learn  that  the  Manichaeans  and  Bardesanites  believed  that  '  This  body 
with  which  we  are  clothed  is  of  the  same  nature  as  the  Darkness,  and  this 
soul  which  is  in  us  is  of  the  same  nature  as  the  Light '. 

The  Odist  has  the  lamp  of  the  Anointed  set ;  but  uses  a  different  word 
from  the  Hebrew  or  Targum :  the  word  which  occurs  in  the  Peshitta 
(»o»j/  =  I  will  make  to  shine,  I  will  kindle),  is  responsible  for  the  clause: 

'  That  in  me  there  may  be  nothing  that  is  not  shining.' 

(J^oj    h) 
For  the  lamp  that  shines,  both  the  Targum   and  the   Peshitta  coincide 
in  the  form   J^i*.   with   the  Odist.     It  seems,   then,  that  there  is  some 
interdependence  between  the  Odist  and  the  Targum  and  the  Peshitta 


xxv]  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  351 

Version.  We  need  not  be  surprised  at  the  prominence  which  this  Psalm 
acquires  in  the  Christian  tradition.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  one  of  the 
first  Messianic  Psalms  in  the  New  Testament  usage,  and  is  quoted  by 
St.  Peter  in  the  early  chapters  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles :  it  contained 
the  promise  to  David  that  from  his  seed  one  should  sit  on  his  throne. 
This  Salomonic  prediction  is  repeated  by  the  earliest  Christian  fathers,  and 
is  a  part  of  the  public  preaching  of  the  Church.  It  is  easy  to  see  how 
Odes  which  affect  to  relate  to  Solomon,  but  which  really  refer  to  Christ, 
should  have  incorporated  matter  from  the  Psalm  in  question. 

If  we  are  correct  in  this  interpretation,  we  may  have  to  abandon  the 
idea  of  a  Greek  play  upon  the  name  of  Christ  in  the  closing  verse  of 
the  Ode.  We  will  not  do  so  too  hastily,  for  there  is  some  suspicion  that 
the  Odist,  though  writing  in  Aramaic,  was  also  acquainted  with  Greek,  and 
if  so,  the  popular  play  upon  ^pio-rds  and  xPrla"r^  may  very  well  have 
occurred  to  him  in  discussing  a  Psalm  whose  theme  was  recognized  to  be 
the  Messiah  of  the  house  of  David. 

It  may  be  asked  why  the  Odist  in  borrowing  the  lamp  of  the  anointed 
has  duplicated  it,  'a  lamp  at  my  right  hand,  and  a  lamp  at  my  left'. 
Possibly  he  remembered  that  the  Law  was  spoken  of  as  a  lamp,  e.  g. 
Proverbs  vi.  23  : 

'  The  commandment  is  a-  lamp  and  the  law  a  light ; ' 
and  it  may  have  occurred  to  him  that  there  were  two  laws,  the  Old  and 
the  New,  the  Law  and  the  Gospel.  Thus  he  makes  a  duplication  something 
like  that  in  the  nineteenth  Ode,  where  milk  is  taken  from  the  two  breasts 
of  the  Father.  This  is  a  speculation,  it  is  true,  but  not  altogether  a  wild 
surmise.  In  any  case,  we  appear  to  have  found  the  Biblical  origin  of  the 
lamp  in  the  twenty-fifth  Ode ;  and  we  may  be  satisfied  that  it  has  nothing 
to  do  with  the  late  baptismal  ritual,  which  Dr.  Bernard  assigns  as  its 
origin. 

That  the  lamp  at  the  right  hand  is  the  Law  may  be  seen  from  the 
Targum  on  Psalm  xlv.  10;  for 

'At  thy  right  hand  stands  the  queen  in  gold  of  Ophir,' 
we  have 

'  The  book  of  the  law  is  ready  at  thy  right  hand  and  is  written 
in  the  gold  of  Ophir.' 
There  seems  to  be  a  survival  of  this  belief  that  the  law  stands  at  the  right 
hand  and  the  gospel  at  the  left,  in  the  custom  which  prevails  in  the 


352  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xxv-xxvi 

Roman  Catholic  Mass  of  placing  the  book  of  the  Gospels  successively  at 
the  right  and  left  hand  of  the  officiating  priest.  It  may  also  be  said  that 
the  language  is  mystical,  and  is  parallel  to  a  prayer  for  illumination  in 
Abu  Talib.  I.  6.1 

'  O  God,  give  me  light  in  my  heart,  .  .  .  light  in  my  flesh,  light  in  my 
bones,  light  before  me  and  light  behind  me,  light  at  my  right  hand,  light 
at  my  left  hand,  light  above  me,  light  beneath  me.  O  God,  augment  my 
light  and- give  me  light  and  procure  me  light.' 

It  is  permissible  to  punctuate  the  text  so  as  to  read  '  I  set  to  myself 
a  lamp '. 

ODE    XXVI 

Ps.  xliv.  (xlv.)  i.         i     I  poured  out  praise  to  the  Lord; 
For  I  am  His : 

2  And  I  will  speak  His  holy  song,2 
For  my  heart  is  with  Him. 

3  For  His  Harp  is  in  my  hands. 

And  the  Odes  of  His  Rest  shall  not  be  silent. 

Cf.  Ps.  cxviii.  (cxix.)    4     I  will  cry  unto  Him  from  my  whole  heart ; 

I  will  praise  and  exalt  Him  with3  all  my  members. 

Ps.  cvi.  (cvii.)  3.         5     For  from  the  East  and  even  to  the  West 
Is  His  praise  :  4 

6     And  from  the  South  and  even  to  the  North 
Is  His  confession  : 5 

Cf.  Gen.  xlix.  26.         7     And  from  the  top  of  the  hills  to  their  utmost  bound 
Is  His  perfection.6 

Ps.  cvi.  (cvii.)  8,  &c.    8     Who  can  write  the  Odes  of  the  Lord, 

Or  who  read  them  ! 

1  Quoted  by  Wensinck,  The  Dove  of  Bar  Hebraeus,  p.  lxxxvii.  2  Lit.  Ode. 
s  Lit.  from.  4  Lit.  Praise  is  His.  5  Lit.  Confession  is  His.  We  may  also 
translate:  Thanks  are  to  Him.         6  Or,  The  perfectionment  (the  finish)  is  His. 


xxvi]  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  353 

9     Or  who  can  train  his  soul  for  life, 
That  his  soul  may  be  saved  ? 

10  Or  who  can  rest  on  the  Most  High, 
That  from  His  mouth  he  may  speak? 

1 1  Who  is  able  to  interpret  the  wonders  of  the  Lord  ?  Cf.  Ps.  cv.  (cvi.)  2. 
For  he  who  interprets  would  be  dissolved, 

And  that  which  was  interpreted  will  remain. 

1 2  For  it  suffices  to  know  and  to  rest ; 
For  in  the  rest  the  singers  stand  ; 

13  Like  a  river  which  has  an  abundant  fountain, 
And  flows  to  the  help  of  them  that  seek  it. 

Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  1.  The  opening  reflects  Psalm  xliv.  (xlv.)  1  in  the  Syriac,  not  only 
in  the  use  of  the  verb  "*>W,  but  in  the  sequence  of  a  future  tense  to  a  past ; 
1 1  poured  out ', '  I  will  speak '.  There  is  therefore  no  need  to  change  the 
tense  of  the  opening  verse  as  Charles  suggests. 

v.  7.  Frankenberg  unnecessarily  proposes  to  eliminate  the  corroborative 
He  of  ot^^oa».. 

vv.  8-10.     We  may  translate  this  construction  as  optative: 

'  Oh !   that  one  could  write  the  Odes  ! 

Or  read  them  ! 
Oh!  that,'  &c. 
v.  11.  If  \^»  meaning  '  because '  is  separated  by  a  particle  from  the 
noun,  verb,  or  pronoun,  the  letter  ?  can  be  omitted,  although  its  reten- 
tion is  preferable.  In  the  present  verse  H  has  no  ?  before  6«  but 
B  has  it.  In  the  text  the  note  '  B  6©t» '  must  be  changed  accordingly  to 
'  H  60. '. 

v.  13.     The  Ode  here  returns  to  its  keynote  >ao/  ('I  poured  out'), 
with  the  reference  to  the  'abundant  fountain'  (|u^>o^v>). 
11  A  a 


354  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [xxvi 

Expository  Notes. 

This  beautiful  song  of  praise  is  founded  on  various  passages  in  the 
canonical  Psalter  and  elsewhere ;  in  particular,  the  Odist  has  in  his 
mind  the  107th  Psalm  in  which  the  writer  calls  upon  men  to  praise 
{i£o/jLokoye7<r0aL,  give  thanks  to)  the  Lord  for  his  goodness ;  especially  the 
redeemed  are  exhorted  who  have  been  gathered  from  the  East  and  West 
and  North  and  South.     Accordingly  the  Odist  says  : 

'  From  the  East  and  even  to  the  West 
Is  His  praise : 
From  the  South  even  to  the  North 

Is  His  thanksgiving'  (]fcs_.»ol  =  c^o/ioXoy^o-ts). 

The  refrain  of  the  107th  Psalm  is  in  the  words, 

'  Oh  !  that  men  would  praise  the  Lord  for  His  goodness  : 
And  for  His  wonderful  works  to  the  children  of  men.' 

This  provokes  the  question  on  the  part  of  the  Odist : 

'  Who  is  able  to  write  the  Odes  of  the  Lord  ? ! 

Who  is  able  to  interpret  the  wonders  of  the  Lord?' 

Gressmann  has  suggested  that  for  L»^>?  R~^>>  ('Psalms  of  the  Lord') 
we  should  read  L^o?  Rioc?  ('mirabilia  domini ') ;  we  should  thus  have 
two  slightly  different  translations  of  the  '  wonderful  works '  of  the  Psalmist : 
so  the  Odist  may  have  been  working  from  the  LXX  (#au/*ao-ia)  or 
translating  the  Hebrew  text  or  its  Targum.  (The  Peshitta  appears  to  have 
omitted  the  word  altogether.)  In  verse  24,  however,  where  the  word 
occurs  again  ('his  wonders  in  the  deep'),  the  Peshitta  renders  it  by 
JliLso?!  exactly  as  in  verse  11  of  the  Ode. 

In  the  concluding  verses  the  Odist  equates  or  couples  together 
Knowledge  and  Rest ;  something  of  the  same  kind  occurs  in  Clement  of 
Alexandria  {Paedagogus,  i.  6,  p.  115) : 

r/  fj.ev  yvuxris   iv  tw   (frwrur/xaTL'    to   Se   7repas  r>}s  yycoo-ews,   rj   uva7raucrt9. 

1  Or  better  still,  in  agreement  with  the  grammatical  suggestion  of  an 
optative, 

'  Oh  !  that  one  could  write  the  Odes  [?  wonders]  of  the  Lord  ! 
Or  [that  one  could]  read  [proclaim]  them  ! ' 


xxvi]  ODES   OF  SOLOMON  355 

This  divine  Rest  is  here  described  as  a  river  with  an  abundant  fountain  by 
which  the  singers  stand.  It  is  the  same  as  the  plenteous  fountain  of  the 
Lord  in  Ode  xi,  and  we  shall  find  it  again  in  Ode  xxx,  where  there  is  an 
invitation  to  '  rest  by  the  fountain  of  the  Lord ',  and  those  who  drink 
therefrom  find  rest  thereby.  Thus  these  Odes  are  internally  connected 
and  have  the  same  author. 

Eusebius  in  his  Theophania  (Bk.  i,  c.  23)  uses  the  same  figure  of  the 
Word  of  God,  the  Logos,  which  is 

1  as  a  river  flowing  from  an  unlimited  fountain  ...  to  those  who 
were  perishing.' 

This  is  taken  from  his  de  laudibus  Constantini  (c.  xii,  p.  462,  ed. 
Heinechen) : 

'Os   i£  aevdov   koI   aTretpov  Trr/yrj1;   avo/xfipwi'   Xoyois   apprprois,   Trorafiov 
8iK7)v  7rpdeio-iv,  oXos  TrXrj/x/xvpuyv  i<s  to  kolvov  rfjs  tov  7ravT09  (rwTrjpias. 

If  we  assume  as  suggested  in  the  critical  note  that  the  passage  in 
verses  8-10  is  to  be  translated  by  a  series  of  optatives,  we  must  find 
a  more  harmonious  translation  of  the  words,  '  He  that  could  interpret 
would  be  dissolved '.  Now  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  refrain  of  the 
107th  Psalm  which  the  Odist  is  imitating  is  optative:  all  the  great  English 
interpreters,  except  the  Geneva  translators,  render  it,  '  Oh  that  men  would 
praise  the  Lord  for  His  goodness,  &c.' '  and  so  did  the  Coptic  translator* 
of  the  LXX.  Amongst  modern  translators  Wellhausen  (in  the  Polychrome 
Bible)  renders  it : 

'  May  they  give  thanks  to  J  H  V  H  for  His  goodness  and  for  the 
wonders  which  he  does  for  men.' 

No  doubt  this  is  the  right  line  for  the  translator ;  and  the  coincidence 
with  the  Odes  in  optative  expression  is  very  clear.  To  be  consistent 
with  the  thought  of  the  Odist  we  should  then  translate  the  concluding 
part  of  the  optation  as  follows  : 

'  O  that  one  were  able  to  interpret  the  wonders  of  the  Lord  ! 
For  though  he  who  could  interpret  were  to  be  dissolved,  yet  that 
which  is  interpreted  would  remain.' 

We  have  seen  that  this  Ode  is,  to  a  large  extent,  based  on  the  Syriac 
of  Psalm  cvii ;  but  the  opening  clauses  which  constitute  the  Odist's  own 

1  See  Aldis  Wright,  Hexaplar  Psalter. 
A  a  2 


356  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [xxvi-xxvn 

prelude,  are  an  imitation  of  the  opening  of  the  45th  Psalm,  similar  to  what 
we  came  across  in  the  21st  Ode. 

The  very  first  word  ,*^>/  betrays  its  origin :  it  is  the  equivalent  of  the 
Greek  igeptv^aTo  and  its  companion  Latin  emctavit.  Only  there  is  this 
variation  from  Ode  xxi ;  the  '  heart '  is  left  to  the  next  verse  : 

1 1  will  speak  His  holy  song, 
For  my  heart  is  with  Him.' 

Here  we  have  two  verses  in  the  Ode  made  out  of  a  single  clause  in 
the  Psalter.     The  link  between  the  two  is  the  Peshitta  version. 
The  expression 

1 1  will  speak  His  holy  song ', 
probably  goes  back  to  the  Targum,  where  we  find 

'  my  heart  pours  out  a  good  speech  (b?VK>) ', 

where  the  Peshitta  has  Joo^ls.9,  which  does  not  as  readily  give  the  meaning 
of  '  discourse '  though  it  is  in  the  Odes  one  of  the  equivalents  of  the  Greek 
'  Logos '. 


ODE    XXVII 

1  I  expanded  my  hands  :  and  I  sanctified  (them)  to  my  Lord  ' : 
For  the  expansion  of  my  hands  is  His  sign. 

2  And  my  expansion 
Is  the  upright  wood. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  1.  Linguistically  it  is  possible  to  translate  'and  I  sanctified  (them'* 
to  the  Lord',  i.e.  my  hands;  the  pronoun  in  the  case,  ~*>/,  being 
frequently  omitted  by  the  writers  of  such  sentences. 

v.  3.  In  view  of  the  unwarranted  assertions  of  some  scholars  it  is 
useful   to  remark   (a)  that  the  word  Jbeus  '  wood '  refers  frequently  in 

1  Or,  I  sanctified  my  Lord. 


xxvii-xxvtii]  ODES   OF  SOLOMON  357 

Syriac  literature  to  the  Cross,  and  {&)  that  this  wood-cross  is  commonly 
compared  with  the  wood-tree  of  Paradise,  the  one  as  being  the  source 
of  death,  and  the  other  of  life  (see  Ephrem,  R.  E.  ii  1 3,  &c. ;  Breviarium 
Chaldaicum,  ii,  p.  *^*.,  &c). 

Expository  Notes. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  Psalm  is  based  upon  the  early 
Christian  attitude  in  prayer,  which  was  cruciform,  and  upon  the  habit 
of  the  early  Christians  of  finding  the  Cross  everywhere  in  the  outward 
world ;  e.  g.  in  the  handle  of  the  labourer's  plough  and  in  the  mast 
and  yards  of  the  seaman's  ship.  The  figurative  language  employed  is 
characteristic  of  the  second  century  and  not  unknown  in  the  first. 
Justin  Martyr,  for  instance,  and  Barnabas,  see  the  Cross  in  the  outspread 
arms  of  Moses  in  the  battle  against  Amalek;  and  it  is  possible  that  our 
Nitrian  MS.  had  this  in  mind  in  reading 

'  the  extension  of  my  hands  is  weary ; ' 
the  reading  of  the  other  MS.  would  require  correction  to  oe»  o»l/,  for 
U.fcoo  (extension)  is  masculine.     We  find  the  same  figure  in  the  Teaching 
of  the  Apostles  as  the  sign  of  the  Advent,  perhaps  the  same  as  the  sign  of 
the  Son  of  Man  in  Matthew. 

Very  nearly  the  same  language  as  that  of  our  little  Ode  is  used  to 
introduce  the  closing  Ode  of  the  collection,  where  it  is  not  a  mere 
repetition,  but  an  integral  part  of  the  Ode,  as  we  shall  see.  So  we  note 
again  the  interdependence  and  unity  of  the  separate  elements  of  the 
collection. 


ODE   XXVIII 

As  the  wings  of  doves  over  their  nestlings, 

And  the  mouths  of  their  nestlings  towards  their  mouths ; 

So  also  are  the  wings  of  the  Spirit  over  my  heart. 

My  heart  is  delighted  and  leaps  up, 

Like  the  babe  who  leaps  up  in  the  womb  of  his  mother :      cf.  Luke  i.  44. 


358  ODES   OF    SOLOMON  [XXVIII 

Cf.  Ps.  cxy.  (cxvi.)    -     i  believed  ;  therefore  I  was  at  rest : 

10,  and  2  Cor.  iv.  13,     "* 

Heb.  iv.  3.  For  faithful  is  He  in  whom  I  have  believed. 

Cf.  Gen.  xxii.  16.         4»    He  has  richly  blessed  me  ; J 
And  my  head  is  with  Him. 

Cf.  Rom.  viii.  35.         4b    And  the  sword  shall  not  divide  me  from   Him, 
Nor  the  scimitar. 

5  For  I  was  ready  before  destruction  came ; 

And  I  have  been  set  on  His  immortal 2  pinions ; 

6  And  deathless  life  embraced  me 
And  kissed  me. 

7  And  from  that  (life)  is  the  Spirit  within  me  ; 
And  it  cannot  die,  for  it  lives. 

(Christ  speaks.) 

8  They  who  saw  me  marvelled  at  me, 
Because  I  was  persecuted ; 

9  And  they  supposed  that  I  was  swallowed  up  ; 
For  I  seemed  to  them  as  one  of  the  lost. 

10  But  my  oppression 
Became  my  salvation. 

11  And  I  was  their  scorn, 

Because  there  was  no  wrath  ■''  in  me. 

12  Because  I  did  good  to  every  man 
I  was  hated  ; 

1  Lit.  Blessing  He  has  blessed  me.  2  Or,  incorruptible. 

3  Or,  zeal,  envy. 


xxvin]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  359 

13  And  they  erne  round  me  like  mad  dogs;  Cf.  Ps.xxi.  (xxii.)  16. 

Who  ignorantly  attack  their  masters.  Euseb.  D.  E.  x. 

S  y  (p.  505). 

14  For  their  thought  is  corrupt 

And  their  understanding  perverted. 

15  But  I  was  carrying  water  in  my  right  hand, 
And  their  bitterness  I  endured 1  by  my  sweetness. 

16  And  I  did  not  perish,  for  I  was  not  their  brother, 
Nor  was  my  birth  like  theirs.2 

17  And  they  sought  for  my  death  and  could  not  (accomplish  it) ; 
For  I  was  older  than  the  memorial  of  them  ; 

And  vainly  did  they  cast  lots  against3  me.  Cf.  Ps.xxi. (xxii.)  18, 

18  And  those  who  came  after  me 

Sought  without  cause  to  destroy  the   memorial  of  him  who  Cf.  Ps.  cxviii.  (cxix.) 
was  before  them.  1  L 

19  For  the  thought  of  the  Most  High  cannot  be  anticipated; 
And  His  heart  is  superior  to  all  wisdom. 

Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  1.     H  has  the  singular  JcsooSo  ('and  the  mouth '). 

v.  15.     Perhaps  a  half- verse  has  dropped  and  we  should  restore, 

'  I  carried  water  in  my  right  hand, 
That  I  might  put  out  their  flame; 

And  their  bitterness  I  endured 
By  my  sweetness.' 

For  the  antithesis  in  the  last  lines,  cf.  Aphrahat,  i.  423,  '  Sweetness  over- 
comes bitterness.' 

1  Or,  I  forgot  (B).  2  Or,  Nor  did  they  acknowledge  my  birth  (B). 

3  Or,  threaten  me  (H). 


360  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xxvni 

The  text  of  the  MS.  is  much  better  than  the  unnecessary  emendations 
by  Frankenberg  of  )JLao  (which  he  considers  meaningless)  into  Ui~x>,  and  of 
..1. V)«->  into  yioftos. 

v.  17.  If  we  follow  the  reading  of  B  and  the  margin  of  H,  there  is 
perhaps  a  parallel  to  the  casting  of  lots  over  the  Saviour's  raiment,  but  the 
contexts  are  not  similar.  In  verse  18  we  are  near  to  the  language  of 
the  119th  Psalm  [Ps.  cxviii.  (cxix.)  161],  but  there  is  no  special  coinci- 
dence with  the  Peshitta. 

v.  19.  The  contracted  form  l^vi..  of  the  manuscripts  is  much  more 
forceful  in  the  sentence  than  the  absolute  proposed  by  Diettrich  and 
Grimme. 

Expository  Notes. 

This  Ode,  opening  with  a  similitude,  belongs  in  that  regard  with 
Odes  xiv-xvi :  but  it  may  also  be  grouped  with  those  Odes  in  which 
Christ  becomes  the  chief  speaker,  for  here  the  change  of  personality 
can  clearly  be  made  out.  At  the  eighth  verse,  and  until  the  end  of  the 
Ode,  we  are  listening  to  the  poet-prophet  who  speaks  for  Christ  and  as 
Christ.  Perhaps  the  last  verse  of  all  may  be  detached  for  a  choral 
refrain.  The  parallel  between  the  '  wings  of  doves '  and  the  '  wings  of  the 
Spirit '  arises  from  the  symbolism  of  the  Spirit  as  a  dove.  We  may  com- 
pare Bar  Hebraeus,  The  Dove  (introd.) :  '  The  Dove  abides  in  the  East 
but  the  West  is  full  of  her.  Her  food  is  fire,  and  he  who  is  crowned  by  her 
with  wings  will  breathe  forth  flames  from  his  mouth.' 

There  may  be  a  cross-reference  here  to  Ps.  liv.  (lv.).  7  :  'O  that  I  had 
wings  like  a  dove,  then  would  I  fly  away  and  be  at  rest ' ;  for  the  Odist 
goes  on,  '  I  believed,  therefore  I  was  at  rest '. 

It  is  comparatively  easy  to  detect  the  Old  Testament  passages  which 
are  in  the  mind  of  the  Odist :  we  have  shown  in  the  Introduction  the  use 
that  is  made  of  the  verse 

'  They  came  round  me  like  mad  dogs 
Wrho  ignorantly  attack  their  Master : ' 
and  how  it  is  quoted,  from  the  Ode,  by  Eusebius  and  others ;   but  it 
was  also  clear  that  the  origin  of  the  passage  was  to  be  sought  in  the 
22nd  Psalm  : 

ckvkA.wctcu'  fJLf  kvvcs  iroWoi. — Ps.  xxi.  (xxii.)  17. 


xxvm]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  361 

We  may  correct  the  reading  of  the  manuscripts  from  '  their  masters '  to 
'  their  Master ',  in  accordance  with  the  Patristic  evidence ;  but  the  meaning 
can  be  deduced  without  any  alteration  of  the  text.  The  change  had 
already  been  divined  by  Flemming  and  Labourt. 

This  recognition  of  the  use  of  the  22nd  Psalm  carried  with  it  the 
justification  of  the  reading  of  the  Nitrian  MS.  and  the  margin  of  the 
Rylands  MS. : 

'they  cast  lots  against  me.' 
We  can  also  see  now  the  reason  why  in  verse  1 5  the  Odist  says : 

'Their  bitterness  I  endured  by  my  sweetness.' 
The  'bitterness'  comes  from  the  companion  Psalm  (Ixix.  22)  where 

'  They  gave  me  gall  for  my  meat 
And  for  my  thirst  they  gave  me  vinegar  to  drink.' 

The  Peshitta  actually  has  'bitterness'  ()»;-»)  in  this  passage. 

The  statement  that  'those  who  saw  me  marvelled  at  me'  (verse  8) 
with  which  Christ's  address  begins,  occurs  again  in  Ode  xvii  (again  as 
the  opening  words  of  Christ) ;  and  in  Ode  xli  (a  similar  opening) ;  it  is 
derived  from  the  71st  Psalm  : 

wcret  repas  iyevijOr/v  Tots  7roAXois. — Ps.  lxx.  (lxxi.)  7. 
Let  us  compare  the  language  of  the  Ode  with  the  Peshitta : 
Ode  xxviii.  8.         ^  ooot  #-.)>*.*   »*^-t    o«j£?i/ 
Ps.  lxx.  (lxxi.)  7.  lU^fn\,  k.»oo»  JiJsoo? 

The  agreement  in  the  use  of  jjo>  shows  the  dependence  of  the  Odist  upon 
the  Peshitta. 

In  Ode  xli.  8  the  coincidence  is  equally  exact,  for  here  we  have : 

wJii.    ^>JLu9    »*^W     \OO»^0    «Oi^O?k»J 

In  Ode  xvii  another  word  is  used. 

The  reference  to  the  carrying  of  the  water  in  one's  right  hand  in 
verse  15  is  explained  above  by  the  insertion  of  a  conjectural  clause, 

'  that  I  might  put  out  their  flame ' ; 

perhaps  no  explanation  is  necessary;  the  thing  explains  itself;  the  dogs 
were  mad  and  would  run  away  at  the  sight  of  water.  Hydrophoria,  if  we 
may  say  so,  was  the  natural  cure  for  hydrophobia. 


3<5a  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [XXVIII-XXIX 

v.  4.  This  verse  has  been  quoted  to  show  the  manner  in  which  the 
Odist  makes  use  of  passages  from  the  Scripture,  notably  from  the  Psalms : 
he  takes  what  he  wants  and  changes  what  he  wishes.  Thus  the  quotations 
are  disguised,  and  are  only  recognized  in  the  unaltered  portions.  Connolly 
uses  this  passage  to  prove  a  Greek  original  for  the  Odes  ;  for  in  the  LXX 
as  well  as  in  the  quotation  of  the  LXX  in  2  Cor.  iv.  13,  we  have 

i-rruTTtvcra,    810   iXuXrjcra. 

Now  this  810  is  wanting  in  the  Peshitta  of  the  Psalm  that  is  being  imitated  : 
so  it  is  suggested  that  the  Odist  depends  directly  on  the  Septuagint  and 
not  on  the  Syriac  version.  There  is,  however,  another  possibility  :  the 
connecting  particle  may  come  from  the  Targum.  A  reference  shows  as 
follows  : 

Ps.  cxvi.  10.  &DK  DVTK  mtrn 

so  it  seems  that  we  are  not  obliged  to  relate  the  Odist  to  the  Septuagint. 

This  does  not  mean  that  the  Odist  was  unacquainted  with  the 
Septuagint ;  that  is  another  matter. 

In  verses  16.  17,  we  have  strong  theological  statements  that  the  Christ 
is  the  Only-begotten  (Monogenes)  and  that  he  was  miraculously  born. 
Illustrations  of  these  points  will  be  found  in  our  Introduction. 

ODE    XXIX 

Ps.  xxx.  (xxxi.)  1.        j     The  Lord  is  my  hope: 

In  Him  I  shall  not  be  confounded. 

2  For  according  to  His  praise  He  made  me, 

And  according  to  His  goodness1  even  so  He  gave  unto  me. 

3  And  according  to  His  mercies  He  exalted  mc ; 

And  according  to  His  excellent  beauty  He  set  me  on  high. 

4  And  He  brought  me  up  out  of  the  depths  of  Sheol  ; 
And  from  the  mouth  of  death  He  drew  me. 

1    Or,  grace  (B). 


xxix]  ODES  OF  SOLOMON  363 

5  And  I  laid  my  enemies  low ; 

And  He  justified  me  by  His  grace. 

6  For  I  believed  in  the  Lord's  Messiah  ; 

And  He  appeared  to  me  that  He  is  the  Lord. 

7  And  He  showed  me  His  sign, 
And  led  me  by  His  light ; 

8  And  He  gave  me  the  rod  of  His  power;  Ps.  cix.  (ex.)  2. 
That  I  might  subdue  the  imaginations  of  the  people:  Cf.  Ps.xxxn. (xxxni.) 
And  to  bring  down  the  power  of  the  men  of  might. 

9  To  make  war  by  His  Word  ; 

And  to  take  victory  by  His  power. 

10  And  the  Lord  overthrew  my  enemy  by  His  Word ; 

And  he  became  like  the  stubble  which  the  wind  carries  away.  Ps.  i.  4. 

11  And  I  gave  praise  to  the  Most  High: 

Because    He     exalted     His    servant    and    the    Son    of    His  Ps.  cxv.  (cxvl.)  16. 
handmaid. 

Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  5.  Instead  of  ^aa^o  'and  I  have  laid  low',  or  'Thou  hast  laid 
low',  to  put  the  verb  in  harmony  with  the  context  one  might  suggest 
^ioo  'And  He  laid  low'. 

v.  6.  In  the  Syriac  versions  of  the  New  Testament,  and  in  Syriac 
literature  in  general,  «*X  «JL»l/  has  been  sometimes  used  in  the  sense  of 
'  I  saw ',  '  I  noticed ',  instead  of  '  He  was  seen  by  me ',  '  He  appeared  to  me ' 
(John  ix.  n).  This  applies  also  to  Ode  xvii.  10.  We  could  therefore 
translate  here,  '  And  I  saw  that  He  was  the  Lord '. 

vv.  8,  10.  In  these  two  verses  the  language  is  certainly  borrowed  from 
the  Psalter;  but,  strange  to  say,  in  neither  case  is  the  phraseology  that  of 


364  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xxix 

the  Peshitta :  one  would  have  supposed  that  at  least  the  first  Psalm  would 
have  had  its  language  imitated.  It  is  to  be  noted,  however,  that  Aphrahat 
(juotes  Psalm  i.  4  with  JLeuk.  as  in  our  Ode  (ii.  117). 

v.   10.     Grimme  believes  that  the  word   ot^.f>^   is  a  dittographical 
error  of  the  copyist. 

Expository  Notes. 

This  Ode  is  more  like  a  cento  from   the  Psalter  than  an  interpre- 
tation of  a  single  Psalm,  such  as  we  have  had  several  cases  of. 

The  first  verse  is  imitated  from  the  opening  verse  of  the  31st  Psalm  : 

Etti  (rot,   Kvpie,  77A.7n.cra,   /jit;   Karaia-)(yv6(.iqv   €19  tciv  atuiva. 

Ps.  xxx.  (xxxi.)  1. 

The  closeness  of  the  agreement  with  the  Peshitta  may  be  noted  : 

Ode  xxx.  00  loo/  JJ  wi-a.ao  o©»  Ljjo 

Ps.  xxx.  (xxxi.).      yv^-^N    \o>=>(   JJ  ijj^ao  )«i_»  -^ 
In  verses  3,  4,  we  may,  perhaps,  see  the  influence  of  the  85th  Psalm  : 

on  to   cAeos   croi'   /xt'ya    ctt    cue, 
KCU    ippV(T(x)    T1]V    4rvX1Jv    fxov 
i$  aSov   KaTwrdrov. 

Ps.  lxxxv.  (lxxxvi.)  13. 
In  that  case  we  may  take  verse  7  : 

'He  led  me  by  His  light.' 
as  dependent  upon  the  nth  verse  of  the  Psalm, 

oo*?/y?io-oV  fX€,    Ki'pie,  ttj  oSw  crou' 
The  eighth  verse  of  the  Ode  is  composite.     The  first  clause  : 

'He  gave  me  the  rod  of  His  power,' 
is  certainly  based  on  Psalm  cix.  (ex.)  2,  and  Christ  should  be  the  speaker. 
For  '  rod  of  power '  the  Ode  has 

while  the  Peshitta  has  : 

The  next  clause  is  from  the  33rd  Psalm.  We  may  compare  the  Ode  and 
the  Peshitta : 

Ode  xxix.  8  :  ),.^,v>.\»  J N a » * ao  t^^-l« 

Ps.  xxxii.  (xxxiii.)  10.       |jqaLa>|  )N  ^»-.^  L^»  ^a^o 


xxix]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  365 

We  cannot  be  quite  sure  about  the  dependence  of  the  Ode  on  the  Syriac 
Psalm  from  the  coincidences,  which  appear  to  be  natural. 

The  closing  verse  of  the  Ode  may  be  due  to  the  116th  Psalm  (v.  7), 
or  perhaps  to  the  85th  Psalm  : 

80s  to   Kpdros  crou  tu  7raiSi  aov, 

/cat  (twctov  rbv  vlov  rfjs  770.1810-/079  crov. 

Ps.  lxxxv  (lxxxvi).  16. 

The  discrimination  of  the  parts  of  the  Ode  in  which  Christ  speaks  is 
difficult.  In  some  ways  it  looks  more  like  a  dialogue.  Verses  6,  7  might 
be  the  poet's  experience,  verses  8-10  the  Lord's,  and  the  closing  verse 
again  the  poet. 

v.  7.  The  recognition  of  the  fact  that  in  this  verse  the  Odist  is  under 
the  influence  of  the  110th  Psalm  will  help  us  to  clear  up  some  of  the 
sentences  which  follow ;  twice  we  have  a  reference  to  the  Word  of  God  : 

'  To  make  war  by  His  Word  ; ' 

'The  Lord  cast  down  my  enemies  by  His  Word.' 

From  these  two  clauses  it  is  clear  that  the  war  at  the  instance  of  the 
Word  has  the  consequence  of  victory  by  the  one  who  orders  the  war 
to  commence.  But  this  is  the  opening  verse  of  the  Psalm,  '  The  Lord 
said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  at  my  right  hand  until  I  make  thy  enemies  the 
footstool  of  thy  feet '. 

Now  turn  to  the  Targum,  and  observe  that  in  the  opening  verse 
the  explanation  is  made,  that  the  Lord  said  'by  His  Word'.  This  is 
very  interesting  and  important;  it  shows  that  the  Word  in  our  Ode  is 
to  have  a  capital  letter:  in  the  Syriac  it  is  Melletha,  and  not  in  this 
case  Pethgama ;  that  is  the  word  which  finally  takes  its  place  in  Syriac 
to  express  the  Logos. 

This  appears  finally  to  rule  out  the  idea  that  Christ  is  the  speaker  in 
this  part  of  the  Ode  :  for  the  speaker  who  gets  the  rod  of  power  and  takes 
the  victory,  gets  it  from  the  Word  and  therefore  is  not  himself  the  Word. 
It  appears,  then,  that  the  110th  Psalm  could  be  used  to  express  the 
experience  of  a  believer  in  Christ  as  well  as  of  Christ  Himself. 

In  the  Targum  the  Word  is  represented  by  Memra ;  this  is  the  first 
instance  we  have  found  of  the  appearance  of  the  Memra  in  the  history  of 
the  doctrine  of  the  Logos. 


366  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [xxx 

ODE    XXX 

i     Fill  ye  water  for  yourselves  from   the   living  fountain  of  the 
Lord  : 
For  it  has  been  opened  to  you  : 

2  And  come  all  ye  thirsty  and  take  a  draught ; 
And  rest  by  the  fountain  of  the  Lord. 

3  For  fair  it  is  and  pure ; 

And  it  gives  rest  to  the  soul. 

Ps.  xviii.  (xix.i  ii.       4     Much  sweeter  is  its  water  than  honey; 
Sir.  xxiv.  20. 

And  the  honeycomb  of  bees  is  not  to  be  compared  with  it. 

Sir.  xxiv.  3.  ^     por  jt  flows  from  the  lips  of  the  Lord, 

And  from  the  heart  of  the  Lord  is  its  name. 

6  And  it  came  unlimited  and  invisible  ; 

And  until  it  was  set  in  the  midst  they  did  not  know  it. 

7  Blessed  are  they  who  have  drunk  therefrom  ; 
And  rested  thereby. 

Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  r.  The  language  of  this  verse,  'Fill  yourselves  water',  for  'draw 
water '  or  '  get  water '  is  decidedly  Aramaic ;  we  may  compare  Isa.  xii.  3, 
'  ye  shall  draw  water  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation ' ;  here  the  Hebrew 
and  the  Greek  suggest  '  draw '  but  the  Peshitta  agrees  with  the  language 
of  the  Ode :  '  ye  shall  fill  water ' ;  thus  the  Aramaism  is  indisputable. 
The  parallel  adduced  shows,  however,  that  it  would  arise  in  translation. 
The  same  thing  occurs  in  John  iv.  7,  where  uirA^o-ai  is  rendered  by  '  fill,' 
in  the  Syriac  versions. 


xxx]  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  367 

v.  4.  Note  that  the  writer,  while  using  Biblical  terms  (Ps.  xix.  1 1), 
does  not  follow  the  Peshitta,  but  may  very  well  be  interpreting  the  Hebrew 
pino  {pleasant  or  sweet). 

v.  5.  '  Its  name '  does  not  seem  to  offer  a  satisfactory  meaning ;  it 
may  perhaps  be  ot^a*  '  its  overflow '. 

Frankenberg  has  suggested  that  '  name '  (oVo/xa)  is  a  misunderstanding 
of  ra/xa,  'flow',  'stream':  an  excellent  case  for  the  defenders  of  the 
hypothesis  of  a  Greek  original. 

v.  6.  Connolly  suggests  that  the  Syriac  word  )]^._»  means  simply 
'  the  middle '  without  any  meaning  of  '  in  medio  ponere ',  which  is  attached 
to  TiOivai,  '  to  publish,  to  bring  forward  openly '.  If  the  phrase  of  the 
Odes  seems  to  some  critics  to  require  such  an  interpretation,  it  is  useful  to 
remark  that  Syriac  literature  abounds  in  expressions  such  as  jfc»J^_aa.r>  yxco 
or  ) k>.^ ..Na.N,  «k-(  precisely  in  the  sense  of  'in  medio  ponere';  e.g.  in 
Ephrem,  jfc^_sa^.  \j}  )Koo  (R.  E.  ii.  388,  iii.  179,  192,  &c). 

Expository  Notes. 

We  have  already  alluded  to  this  Ode  as  containing  the  same  doctrine 
of  the  abundant  fountain  of  the  Lord  as  is  found  in  other  Odes  (and, 
we  may  add,  in  the  Epistle  of  Barnabas,  v.  supra).  We  also  referred  to 
the  Ode  as  containing  in  itself  a  strong  suggestion  of  a  Greek  original, 
if  we  were  to  accept  Frankenberg's  suggestion  that  in  verse  5  ovop.a  has 
been  misread  for  vatxa.  We  might  illustrate  the  language  from  Theodoret 
(P.  G.  80,  869). 

Miyu.€iTcu  yap  vSarutv  ap8eiav  to.  tov  Bzlov  Trvevp-aTos  va.fx.aia  .    .   .   ov  8y 
X°-Plv  Kai  °  Atc7"7roT^s  X/jicrTos  {'Stop  tt]v  olxtiav  8t8ao"KaA.tav  ovofid^ei. 

The  reference  to  the  honey  and  the  honeycomb  in  verse  3  takes  us 
naturally  to  the  1 9th  Psalm ;  there  is,  however,  another  possible  source : 
in  the  Wisdom  of  Sirach,  we  have  in  the  chapter  on  the  Praise  of  Wisdom 
as  follows  : 

to  yap  ixvr}/j.6(rvv6v  /xov  virep  p.z\i  yXvKv, 

KCU    Yj    KXrjpOVO/JLLa    /XOV    VTTep    /At'AlTOS    Kt)pov. 

Sirach,  xxiv.  20. 
And  since  the  speech  of  Wisdom  begins  with  the  words  : 

'  I  came  forth  from  the  mouth  of  the  Most  High,' 


368  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [xxx 

we  have  a  good  parallel  to  :  » 

'  It  comes  forth  from  the  lips  of  the  Lord.' 

This  would  mean  that  the  water  is  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  it 
is  in  the  sixth  Ode,  and  that  the  Odist  has  been  studying  this  chapter 
of  Sirach. 

We  have  noticed  above  the  Syriacism  which  is  involved  in  the  words 
with  which  the  Ode  opens,  '  Fill  ye  water ' ;  e.  g.  Isaiah  xii.  3,  '  and 
ye  shall  fill  water  with  joy  from  the  fountains  of  salvation  '. 

If  the  language  of  the  Ode  is  that  of  a  translator,  it  is  good  idiomatic 
translation. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  coincidence  between  Ode  xxx  and 
Sirach  xxiv  is  more  clear  when  we  translate  literally,  and  instead  of  saying, 
as  in  the  first  rendering,  '  It  flows  forth  from  the  lips  of  the  Lord ',  we  say 
'  It  comes  forth '  or  'it  came  forth '.  This  brings  us  very  close  to  the 
language  of  Sirach.  It  may  be  noted  in  passing  that  the  statement  in 
Sirach,  as  in  so  many  other  cases,  is  an  adaptation  of  the  Hebrew  in 
Prov.  ii.  6  : 

1  The  Lord  giveth  Wisdom  : 
Out  of  His  mouth  (LXX  Ik  tov  Trpoa-Mirov  olvtov)  cometh  knowledge 
and  understanding.' 

This  is  what  the  Wisdom  of  Sirach  meant  by  '  I  came  forth  from  the 
mouth  of  the  Most  High  ' ;  and  this  is  what  the  Odist  took  from  Sirach. 
It  is  abundantly  clear  that  the  flowing  stream  of  which  the  Ode  speaks  is 
the  Knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  it  has  been  equally  recognized  in  Ode  vi. 

We  give  special  attention  to  Frankenberg's  emendation  (vu/xa  for  ovo/xu) 
in  verse  5,  because  the  parallelism  of  the  verses  seems  to  require  a 
correction ;  moreover,  since  we  have  no  evidence  for  an  early  Syriac  text 
of  Sirach,  the  claim  is  very  strong  for  a  Greek  original  and  a  Greek 
emendation.  On  the  other  hand,  a  Syriac  emendation  might  be  ventured, 
as  above,  and  one  which  would  have  support  in  the  existing  Peshitta  text 
of  Sirach  which  Frankenberg's  emendation  does  not.  Suppose  that  instead 
of  ~t^-  ('  His  name ')  we  read  oo^*-  ('  its  outflow ')  this  would  answer 
to  the  Syriac 

'  I  pour  out  like  the  river  (Jordan)  my  teaching.' 


xxx-xxxi]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  369 

The  corresponding  Greek  word  is  not  va/xa  but  8iwpv£.  Evidently 
we  must  be  on  our  guard  against  too  rapid  conclusions  or  generalizations. 
What  we  are  certain  of  is  the  use  by  the  Odist  of  the  Sapiential  books. 
We  may,  for  instance,  be  as  sure  that  he  uses  Sirach  as  we  are  certain  that 
Sirach  imitates  Proverbs. 


ODE    XXXI 

1     The  abysses  were  dissolved  before  the  Lord  ; 
And  darkness  was  destroyed  by  His  appearance. 

2a    Error  went  astray     • 

And  disappeared  from  Him, 
2b    And  (as  for)  Falsehood,  I  gave  it  no  path, 

And  it  was  submerged  by  the  truth  of  the  Lord. 

3  He  opened  His  mouth  and  spake  grace  and  joy ; 
And  He  spake  a  new  (song  of)  praise  to  His  name. 

4  And  He  lifted  up  His  voice  to  the  Most  High,  Ci.  Isa.  viii.  1! 
And  offered  to  Him  the  sons  that  were  in  His  hands.1  Heb'  "'  I3' 

5  And  His  face  was  justified  ; 

For  thus  His  Holy  Father  had  given2  to  Him. 

(Christ  speaks.) 

6  Come  forth,  ye  that  have  been  afflicted, 
And  receive  joy. 

7  And  possess  3  your  souls  by  grace ; 
And  take  to  you  immortal  life, 

1  Or,  those  that  had  become  children  by  His  means  (John  i.  12) ;  or,  the 
sons  given  Him  by  God. 

2  Or,  done.  =»  Lit.  inherit. 
11                                                     B  b 


37©  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [xxxi 

8  And  they  condemned  me  when  I  rose  up;1 
Me  who  had  not  been  condemned.2 

9  And  they  divided  my  spoil, 
Though  nothing  was  due  to  them. 

10     But  I  endured  and  held  my  peace  and  was  silent, 
That  I  might  not  be  moved  by  them. 

Cf.  Aphr.  i.  7.  11     But  I  stood  unshaken  like  a  firm  rock, 

That  is  beaten  by  the  waves  and  endures. 

12     And  I  bore  their  bitterness  for  humility's  sake; 
That  I  might  redeem  my  people  and  inherit  it. 

Cf.  Rom.  xv.  8  and    13     And    that    I    might    not    make    void    the    promises    to    the 
Barnab.  5. 

patriarchs 

To  whom  I  was  promised  for  the  salvation  of  their  seed. 
Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  2.  The  second  member  of  this  verse  is  very  difficult  owing  to  a 
possible  corruption  of  the  text.  As  it  stands  in  B  it  runs :  '  Wickedness 
received  immobility,  and  was  submerged  by  the  truth  of  the  Lord '.  The 
suffix  o»,  however,  makes  the  Syriac  wording  very  harsh  and  ungrammatical. 
For  )fc»..V\o»  D  we  have  suggested  ]k^2».o»  <*X,  and  to  make  the  metaphor 
more  in  harmony  with  the  first  member  of  the  verse  we  have  suggested 
ls_^  for  j^.v-^.  '  Wickedness  took  for  herself  the  power  of  motion  and 
erred  from  the  truth  of  the  Lord.'  This  is  grammatically  correct  and  in 
accordance  with  the  first  part  of  the  parallelism. 

For  jLo^**,  which  more  generally  means  'meanness',  'lowliness',  we 
should,  perhaps  read  Jla*^  as  in  Ode  xi.  10.  The  'run  of  error',  'evil', 
'  truth ',  &c,  is  a  favourite  metaphor  of  the  Odist,  see  Odes  xxxviii.  6, 
xviii.  6 ;  but  the  change  is,  perhaps,  somewhat  violent. 

1   Or,  I  stood  up.  *  Or,  culprit. 


xxxi]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  371 

However  this  may  be,  a  good  meaning  is  given  in  H  if  we  translate: 
1  And  wickedness  gave  to  it  (to  error)  no  path,  and  it  was  submerged 
by  the  truth  of  the  Lord,'  or  '  And  vanity  (or  falsehood),  I  gave  to  it 
immobility,  and  it  was  submerged  by  the  truth  of  the  Lord.'  This 
meaning  is  grammatically  good,  and  we  can  adopt  it  in  the  absence  of 
a  better  one.  In  our  note  to  the  text:  'H  o»k*ao>.»  (sic\y  is  erroneous. 
The  reading  of  H  is  contained  in  the  text  itself. 

v.  6.  Labourt  suggests  that  instead  of  Jlo«—  'joy'  we  might  read 
)io»)-.  'liberty';  this,  however,  is  not  necessary;  the  beginning  of  the 
verse  is  speaking  of  people  in  pain. 

v.  8.  More  generally  the  verb  cw  means  '  to  condemn  '  (as  culprit)  ; 
the  sense  of  making  somebody  debtor  to  a  creditor  is  usually  expressed  in 
Syriac  by  means  of  a  periphrase.  That  in  this  sentence  the  meaning  of 
the  verb  refers  probably  to  '  a  condemnation '  is  borne  out  by  the  participle 
Eayu>op  which  is  seldom  found  in  the  sense  of  a  debtor  in  money ;  |a«.  is 
used  in  this  last  sense,  and  is  also  commonly  used  in  both  senses  of 
'  debtor '  and  '  culprit '.  Notice  in  the  text  of  the  next  line  the  Syriacism 
6ch^>  instead  of  W  ('they  condemned  me,  him  who  .  .  . '). 

v.  9.  The  verb  «a**»ll/  with  a  ^  is  always  used  in  the  sense  of 
something  being  due  to  somebody ;  about  this  there  is  no  doubt. 
It  seems,  therefore,  as  if  there  was  a  play  on  the  different  meanings 
of  the  verb  as  used  in  the  preceding  verse.  If  there  is  no  such 
paronomasia,  we  maintain  parallelism  by  translating  '  debt '  and  '  debtor ' 
throughout. 

v.  12.     There  is  no  need  to  read  with  Grimme  wiaa^aaa  for  )ioa*aap« 

v.  13.  The  rules  laid  down  by  the  grammarians  from  the  nth  century 
onwards  to  the  effect  that  in  the  passive  form  we  should  redouble  the  i  of 
the  Hamzed  or  assimilated  verbs  in  the  form  V^*  is  not  much  followed 
in  the  manuscripts.  It  is  possible,  therefore,  that  fcs-?okj»7  is  used 
here  by  the  scribe  for  l^»olku*7.  This  is  even  the  case  in  the  old 
manuscripts  for  any  other  verb ;  e.  g.  the  Lewis  text  has  in  Luke  i.  4 
l»V)Nlj»  for  i>V)\,Ui» ;  ibid.,  16,  25,  w^fcoo  for  »~Ajifcoo,  &c. 

Expository  Notes. 

This  Ode  is  somewhat  like  the  28th  Ode  in  that  it  contains  a  selec- 
tion of  statements  from  the  22nd  Psalm,  for  the  most  part  expounded  by 

B  b  2 


372  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [xxxi 

Christ  in  His  own  person.  The  writer  opens  with  a  couple  of  intro- 
ductory verses  on  Truth  and  Error  ;  then  he  approaches  the  22nd  Psalm 
in  the  verse  : 

'  I  will  declare  thy  name  unto  my  brethren ; 
In  the  midst  of  the  Church  I  will  sing  praise  unto  thee ; ' 

Ps.  xxi.  (xxii.)  22. 
This  he  reproduces  as  : 

'He  spake  a  new  song  0/ praise  to  His  name.' — Ode  xxxi.  4. 

He  follows  this  with  a  reference  to  the  '  children  that  God  had  given 
Him  ' ;  this  is  exactly  the  sequence  which  we  find  (awkwardly  introduced) 
in  Hebrews  ii.  13,  where  it  comes  as  a  quotation  from  Isaiah  viii.  17,  18. 
The  Odist  is  not  quoting  Hebrews,  but  the  sources  of  Hebrews  in  a 
collection  of  Testimonia.  The  reference  to  God's  gift  of  children  is  in  the 
next  verse : 

'Thus  His  Holy  Father  had  given  Him.' 

Very  likely  this  is  implied  in  the  previous  verse,  if  we  follow  the  Nitrian  MS., 
for  here  we  have  : 

1  The  children  who  were  by  His  hand,'  i.  e.  the  children  given  by  God. 

There  is  no  doubt,  then,  that  the  Odist  is  working  on  the  22nd  Psalm. 

Christ  now  becomes  the  speaker,  and  his  address  is  marked  by  further 
reference  to  the  same  Psalm ;  for  instance,  the  words  '  they  divided  my 
spoil ',  i.  e.  '  they  despoiled  me  and  divided  the  plunder ',  is  an  adaptation 
of  the  1 8th  verse  of  the  Psalm  : 

'  They  divide  my  garments  among  them, 
they  cast  lots  upon  my  vesture.' 

In  verse  12  the  Odist  repeats  very  nearly  what  he  had  said  in  Ode  xxviii 
about  'bearing  their  bitterness',  but  the  word  for  'bearing'  is  now^^o^ 
instead  of  ^>^-  Apparently  the  Odist  has  changed  the  word ;  the  origin 
of  the  '  bitterness '  is,  as  we  have  shown,  to  be  sought  in  the  Psalm.  The 
word  endure  should  be  noticed,  because  the  writer  emphasizes  it,  and 
because  it  occurs  in  the  quotation  which  Barnabas  makes  of  the  last 
verse  of  the  Ode. 

Probably  there  are  more  loans  from  the  Canonical  Psalter  to  be 
traced. 


xxxil]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  373 

ODE    XXXII 

1  To  the  blessed  the  joy  is  from  their  hearts, 
And  light  from  Him  that  dwells  in  them; 

2  And  the  Word  from  the  Truth  who  is  self-originate. 

3  For  He  hath  been  strengthened  by  the  Holy  Power  of  the 

Most  High, 
And  He  is  unperturbed  for  ever  and  ever. 

Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  3.  It  is  difficult  to  ascertain  who  is  the  'unshakable'  or  'un- 
perturbed'. The  pronoun  oo»o  can  refer  to  |ja^s3  'the  Word5,  or  to 
YxL+.&y  oC^***  'the  strength  of  the  Most  High',  or  to  the  'Most  High' 
Himself.  The  first  meaning  is,  however,  the  more  tempting.  There  is 
no  necessity  to  read  with  Grimme  nu\l{>  in  plural. 


Expository  Notes. 

We  have  edited  in  the  second  verse  Jlsq-^Is-3  in  the  singular,  as 
expressing  the  Logos,  for,  as  we  have  seen,  the  Odes  use  this  term  as 
well  as  JkXao  to  express  it.  The  '  Word  from  the  Truth '  is  possibly  the 
equivalent  for  the  '  True  Word ',  and  finds  its  parallel  in  Ode  xii : 

'  The  Mouth  of  the  Lord  is  the  True   Word, 
And  the  door  of  His  light? 

For,  as  the  Odist  explains,  the  saints  have  '  light  from  Him  that  dwells 
within '.  This  Ode  belongs  to  the  group  of  Wisdom-Odes  or  Logos-Odes, 
and  so  does  the  one  that  immediately  follows. 


374  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xxxm 

ODE    XXXIII 

i     Grace  again l  ran  and  left  the  Corruptor 

And  came  down  upon  him  to  bring  him  to  naught  : 

2  And  he2  made  utter  destruction3  from  before  him 
And  devastated  all  his  array : 

3  And  he  stood  on  a  lofty  summit  and  cried  aloud 
From  one  end  of  the  earth  to  the  other; 

4  And  drew  to  him  all  those  who  obeyed  him : 
And  he  did  not  appear  as  an  evil  person ; 4 

Cf.Prov.i.2o-2iand    5     But  a  perfect  virgin  stood 

V111,  *  sq"  Who  was  proclaiming  and  crying  and  saying : 

(Wisdom  speaks.) 

6  O  ye  sons  of  men,  return  ye ; 
And  ye  their  daughters,  come  ye ; 

7  And  leave  the  ways  of  that  Corruptor, 
And  draw  near  unto  me ; 

8  And  I  will  enter  into  you 

And  bring  you  forth  from  destruction ; 

And  I  will  make  you  wise  in  the  ways  of  truth. 

9  Be  not  destroyed  ; 
Nor  perish. 

to     Hear  ye  me  and  be  saved; 

For  the  grace  of  God   I  am  telling  among  you : 

1  Lit.  but  again.  2  i.  e.  the  Corruptor. 

s  Lit.  And  He  destroyed  the  destruction.  *  Or,  as  the  Evil  One. 


xxxin]  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  375 

11  And    by    my    means    you    shall    be    redeemed    and    become 

blessed  : 
I  am  your  judge  ;  * 

12  And  they  who  have  put  me  on  shall  not  be  injured  :  cf.  Eph.  iv.  24. 
But  they  shall  possess  incorruption  in  the  new  world. 

13  My  chosen  ones  have  walked  in  me,  Cf.  Col.  ii.  6. 
And  my  ways  I  will  make  known  to  them  that  seek  me; 

And  I  will  make  them  to  trust  in  my  name. 

Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  r.  The  verb  is^~»»  is  difficult  to  understand  if  we  read  the  word 
jl^^X  '  corruption '  as  we  have  punctuated  it,  and  as  it  is  in  the  manuscript. 
If  we  punctuate  it  \=^-  we  should  have  'the  corruptor'  (cf.  Ode 
xxxviii.  9)  with  a  sense  appropriate  to  the  context.  This  disposes  of 
many  theories  involving  the  change  of  the  verb  into  fc^A.,  Ual,  and 
k.rn»,  &c. 

v.  2.     The  Semitism  of  'he  made  utter  destruction'  should  be  noted. 

The  expression  U00L  '^a—  '  to  devastate  one's  array,  preparations,  or 
possessions'  is  frequent  in  Ephrem,  see  Mitchell's  edition,  p.  5. 

v.  4.  Labourt's  suggestion  that  the  text  should  be  yOoC^  ~U*U  Uo 
U-»  <++l  'and  he  did  not  appear  to  them  as  the  head',  is  not  necessary. 

v.  5.  It  is  unnecessary  to  change  )fc0^okj>  'virgin'  into  Ji^ol^a 
'  in  the  generation ',  as  Grimme  has  suggested. 

That  the  perfect  Virgin  is  Wisdom  (or  Christ  speaking  as  Sophia) 
may  be  seen  by  comparing  the  language  with  Proverbs  i.  20,  21,  or 
Proverbs  viii.  1  sqq. 

v.  8.  'I  will  make  you  wise  in  the  ways  of  truth '.  That  Wisdom 
is  here  considered  as  Light  may  be  inferred  from  the  expression  'those 
who  put  me  on  shall  not  be  injured',  where  the  language   should   be 

1  Or,  judgement. 


376 


ODES   OF   SOLOMON 


jxxxm 


compared  with  Ode  xxi.  3,  '  I  put  off  Darkness  and  clothed  myself  with 
Light '.     We  may  also  compare  the  '  Light  of  Truth  '  in  Ode  xxxviii.  1. 

Bardaisan  is  credited  with  a  belief  in  a  similar  Virgin  of  Light,  or 
Light-Virgin  (see  Mitchell,  Discourses  of  Ep/irem,  p.  67). 

v.  11.  We  have  punctuated  the  word  .nil.)  'your  judgement'; 
the  manuscript  has  .ciaily  'your  judge',  which  suits  better  the  context. 
Connolly  suggests  .<&aj*»j  'your  armour',  which  is  appropriate.  Less 
probable  is  the  hypothesis  of  Barth,  who  reads  ya-a^..?  (yours). 

v.  12.  Grimme  unnecessarily  suggests  the  change  of  the  text  of  the 
manuscript  into  ).v>W>k  and  D. 


Expository  Notes. 

This  Ode  seems  to  begin  abruptly  and  unintelligibly :  we  suggest 
that  something  has  been  lost  at  the  opening.  Apparently  it  is  Christ 
who  appears  as  Grace,  and  then  as  Divine  Wisdom,  in  whose  person 
He  speaks  from  the  sixth  verse  onwards,  confuting  the  Corruptor  men- 
tioned in  the  preceding  verses. 

The  key  to  the  Ode  lies  in  the  Proverbs  of  Solomon,  and  especially 
in  the  eighth  chapter.     We  may  compare : 

Ode  xxxiii.  3.     '  He  stood  on  a  lofty  summit  and  cried  aloud  : ' 
0*^.0   , n  -, »  o   \m't   U-»  S;^-V   ad 

Ode  xxxiii.  5.     '  A  perfect  Virgin  stood  proclaiming,  and  crying,  and 
saying ' : 

Ji^olo  Lijse  ));aao» 

Prov.  viii.  1-4.  '  On  this  account  Wisdom  proclaimeth  (?) ; 
For  on  the  lofty  summits  is  Wisdom  : 
She  standeth     .     . 
She  saith     .     .     . 
Unto  you,  O   men,  I  cry.' 

).v>.p 


li^oio 


W  L*  J 


**«*   V 


rs^S. 


xxxiii]  ODES   OF    SOLOMON  377 

Ode  xxxiii.  6.     'O  ye  sons  of  men,  return  ye, 

And  ye,  their  daughters,  come  ye.' 

^— >L   tootl^iao 
Prov.  viii.  4.     '  My  voice  is  to  the  Sons  of  Man ' : 

U.UXS    ^V    u^JO 

Ode  xxxiii.  8,     '  I  will  make  you  wise  in  the  ways  of  truth.' 

v.  11.     'By  my  means  you  shall  be  redeemed  and  become  blessed'; 

U=>C^     yOOOtio      yiO^lL    w,jJoO 

Prov.  viii.  32,  $$.     'Blessed  are  they  that  keep  my  ways; 
Hear  instruction  and  be  wise? 

Thus  one  principal  motive  of  the  Ode  is  the  invitation  of  Wisdom  in 
the  Book  of  Proverbs,  and  with  that  Wisdom  Christ  is  identified. 

There  are  some  unexplained  allusions  and  unrecognized  references, 
e.  g.  there  is  the  '  Corruptor '  who  is  twice  referred  to,  who  will  turn  up 
again  in  Ode  xxxviii  in  just  as  perplexing  a  form. 

Some  further  light  on  the  obscurities  that  remain  may  probably  be 
obtained  by  picking  up  the  Sapiential  clue.     For  example,  in  verse  7  : 

'  Leave  the  ways  of  that  corruptor  and  draw  near  unto  me,' 

we  are  very  close  to  the  language  of  Proverbs  ix.  4  :      . 

'  Whoso  is  simple,  let  him  turn  in  hither,' 

where  the  LXX  says  '  let  him  turn  aside  to  me ',  but  the  Syriac  has  '  let  him 
come  unto  me '. 

Again,  in  the  sixth  verse  of  the  same  chapter  of  Proverbs  we  have : 

'  Leave  off,  ye  foolish  (or  leave  off  foolishness)  and  live, 
And  walk  in  the  way  0/ understanding; ' 


37«  ODES    OF    SOLOMON         [XXXIII-XXXIV 

where  the  LXX  has  for  the  first  line 

u7ToAci7reTC    d<f>pO(rvvr)i',    iva   €is   tov   aluiva.   jJcKXiAevoT/TC. 

('  Leave  off  Folly,  that  ye  may  reign  for  ever '), 

and  the  Syriac  has 

'Cause  to  rest  from  your  folly,  and  live.' 

Evidently  the  Odist  has  personified  Folly  as  the  Corrupter;  clearly  also 
he  has  found  Everlasting.  Life  in  Proverbs. 


ODE    XXXIV 

i     There  is  no  hard  way  where  there  is  a  simple  heart ; 
Ephr.  R.E.  ii.  486.  Nor  is  there  any  barrier  where  the  thoughts  are  upright : 

2  Nor    is    there    any    storm   in    the   depth    of   the    illuminated 

thought 

3  The  one  who  is  surrounded  on  every  side  by  open  country,1 
Is  freed  from  doubts.2 

Moses    Bar-Kepha    4     The  likeness  of  that  which  is  below 

(B.M.  Add.  2i2ia, 

f.  51b).  Is  that  which  is  above; 

5  For  everything  is  above  ; 

And  below  there  is  nothing,  but  it  is  believed  to  be  by  the 
ignorant.3 

6  Grace  has  been  revealed  for  your  salvation  : 
Believe  and  live  and  be  saved. 

Hallelujah. 

1  Lit.  by  every  beautiful  place. 

2  Lit.  there  is  nothing  divided  in  him. 

*  Lit.  those  in  whom  there  is  no  knowledge. 


xxxiv]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  379 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  1.  About  the  word  l^**3  'simple',  &c,  Connolly  has  argued  that 
it  was  not  the  notion  of  simplicity  which  was  meant  by  the  Odist,  but 
that  of  'generosity'  underlying  the  Greek  a-n-Xovs ;  cf.,  however,  the 
following  sentence  of  Ephrem  : 

)^.»«°iN   U»o/  ««  Ua*>  ii,  486  (R.  E.) 
'  The  way  is  plain  to  the  simple.' 

In  the  next  line  Jla~jo  (with  a  Zakaf  or  a  Pathah  on  the  Mini)  in 
the  sense  of  '  fence,  barrier,  partition,  obstacle  to  view ',  is  catalogued  in 
the  Thesaurus  on  the  authority  of  the  Lexicographers,  but  unfortunately 
without  any  illustrations.  The  first  illustration  is  this  sentence  of  the 
Odes  of  Solomon.  Gressmann  has  changed  it,  perhaps  unnecessarily,  into 
Jfc.~j*>  'Sturz'. 

v.  3.  This  meaning  is  given  by  a  slight  change  of  Xs-*(  into  \i+(, 
which  would  make  the  sentence  grammatical  and  in  harmony  with  the 
preceding  verse,  where  it  is  spoken  of  hard  ways,  adversities,  and 
tempests.  In  maintaining  J^a-./  as  Connolly  does,  we  should  be  obliged 
to  take  the  adjective  U*aj».  as  a  substantive-subject,  and  the  place  which 
it  occupies  would  then  render  the  Syriac  wording  somewhat  weak.  The 
meaning,  too,  which  it  would  give  'where  the  good  is  surrounded  on  all 
sides,  there  is  in  Him  nothing  divided ',  is  not  very  clear.  Labourt's 
suggestion  that  instead  of  j**aj»,  we  should  read  Ji;.*.  is  not  probable. 


Expository  Notes. 

It  is  curious  that  this  little  Ode  should  have,  as  we  have  shown, 
Syrian  attestation  in  two  quarters,  Ephrem  and  Moses  Bar-Kepha. 

It  is  quite  unlike  any  other  Ode  and  does  not  proceed  from  any 
Scriptural  base.  Only  in  the  last  verse  the  language  of  the  New 
Testament  appears,  and  the  doctrine  of  salvation  by  faith  and  grace. 
For  the  rest,  the  writer  asserts  that  it  is  possible  to  rise  out  of  the 
apparent  world  into  the  real  world,  and  that  all  hard  things  become  easy 
when  the  soul  itself  is  right. 


3«o  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [XXXV 


ODE    XXXV 

i     The  dew  of  the  Lord  distilled  rest  upon  me,1 

And  a  cloud  of  peace  it  caused  to  rise  over  my  head  ; 

2  That  it  might  guard  me  continually ; 

And  it  became  salvation2  to  me: 

3  Everybody  was  shaken  and  affrighted  ; 

And  there  came  forth  from  them  a  smoke  and  a  judgement : 

4  But  I  was  keeping  quiet  in  the  ranks  3  of  the  Lord  ; 
More  than  shadow4  was  He  to  me,  and  more  than  support : 5 

5  And  I  was  carried  like  a  child  by  its  mother  ; 
Aud   He  gave  me  milk,  the  dew  of  the  Lord. 

6  And  I  grew  great  by  His  bounty: 
And  I  rested  in  His  perfection : 

7  And  I  spread  out  my  hands  in  the  lifting  up  of  my  soul ; 
And  I  directed  myself  towards  the  Most  High, 

And  I  was  redeemed  with  Him: 
Hallelujah. 

Critical  AToies. 

v.  i.  The  verb  ^j/  is  commonly  derived  from  'shadow'  and  means 
1  to  overshadow '.  The  natural  meaning  of  the  sentence  is  therefore  '  the 
dew  of  the  Lord  overshadowed  me  in  quietness'.  Here  the  Odist  seems 
to  derive  it  from  Jl^  '  dew  ',  except  if  we  suppose  that   he  is   purposely 


1  Or,  overshadowed  me  in  quietness.  2  H,  in  salvation. 

Perhaps  by  the  Word.  *  dew  (B).  6  Lit.  foundation. 


3     /» 


xxxv]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  381 

indulging  in  the  uncommon  theme  of  a  dew  giving  shadow.  On  the 
one  hand  the  word  U&*.oc*  'dew',  of  the  first  line  requires  a  verb  im- 
plying the  sense  of  rain,  on  the  other  the  word  in^.  '  cloud '  of  the 
second  line  may  combine  both  meanings  of  shadow  and  rain,  unless  in 
verse  2  we  should  understand  the  sentence  'that  it  might  guard  me' 
in  the  sense  of  warding  off  the  heat  of  the  sun  from  the  Odist.  The 
sense  of  '  dew '  appears  also  in  verse  5,  '  And  he  gave  me  milk,  the  dew  of 
the  Lord ' :  but  verse  6,  '  And  I  rested  in  his  perfection '  might  possibly 
imply  the  sense  of  '  shadow '.  In  verse  4  the  manuscripts  are  at  variance, 
for  whereas  H  gives  '  More  than  shadow  was  He  to  me ',  B  exhibits  '  More 
than  dew  was  He  to  me '.  The  Odist  is  possibly  playing  in  all  these  verses 
on  the  two  words  Jl^  and  H\$  derived  from  a  common  root  ^>^,  perhaps 
related  both  to  '  shadow '  and  to  '  dew  '.  This  assonance  seems  "to  have 
pleased  him  so  much  that  he  thought  it  expedient  to  enhance  it  by  the 
use  of  L^  'child'  in  verse  5.  On  the  whole,  the  natural  sense  of  over- 
shadowing is  preferable  in  the  first  line. 

v.  2.  The  expression  '  it  was  to  me  for  salvation '  is  good  idiomatic 
Syriac,  but  the  rendering  '  It  became  my  salvation '  is  preferable,  for 
the  expression  is  taken  from  Isaiah  xii.  2,  exactly  as  in  the  Targum, 
P,-ID?  v  mm.  Note  that  the  twelfth  chapter  of  Isaiah  is  familiar  to  our 
Odist  (how  could  it  fail  to  be,  since  it  is  so  entirely  in  his  manner  ?),  and 
the  opening  sentence  in  the  30th  Ode  is  imitated  from  it  ('  Fill  ye  water 
for  yourselves  from  the  living  fountain  of  the  Lord'). 

v.  3.  Both  manuscripts  have  U-»<s  JojI  'smoke  and  judgement'.  The 
meaning  is  very  doubtful,  and  without  violent  change  we  are  unable  to 
find  a  better  translation.     Gunkel  changes  Ja-?o  to  k~»o  'and  smell'. 

v.  4.  We  might  probably  read  )-<-»?  Joa^^a^  'with  the  Word  of  the 
Lord ',  instead  of  Joa^J^  '  in  the  rank  of  the  Lord  '.  The  elimination  of 
the  letter  3  is  possibly  due  to  a  slip  of  the  copyist. 

Expository  Notes. 

This  Ode  appears  to  express  in  poetical  language  some  peculiar 
spiritual  experience.  Some  of  the  figures  of  previous  Odes  recur;  there 
is  the  milk  of  God,  and  twice,  if  not  three  times,  there  is  the  dew  of 


3H2  ODES   OF    SOLOMON  [xxxv 

the  Lord.  No  adequate  explanation  has  yet  been  found  of  the  Divine 
dew.  It  is  a  Biblical  expression  used  in  the  prophet  Isaiah  to  represent 
the  grace  that  raises  the  dead ;  but  this  is  the  text  of  the  LXX  : 

?;   Spocros  1)  7m/>a   crov  lafj.a   avrois   iarw, — Isaiah  xxvi.   19, 

and  this  does  not  seem  to  apply  to  the  present  situation. 

The  solution  of  this  Ode  cannot  be  detached  from  that  of  the  Ode 
which  follows  ;  for  here  also  there  is  a  '  cloud  of  dew  ' ;  here,  too,  some  one 
speaks  of  becoming  great  according  to  the  greatness  of  the  Lord,  and  being 
anointed  from  His  perfection.  We  shall  see  that  the  36th  Ode  is  probably 
spoken  in  the  name  of  Christ;  and  if  so,  that  should  carry  the  35th 
Ode  to  the  same  conclusion.  But  this  does  not  seem  to  be  likely,  nor  a 
very  defensible  position.  Evidently  there  is  something  missing  in  the 
explanation. 

We  have  seen  that  the  Odist  has  been  making  word-play  out  of  the 
assonance  of  ^j/  'to  overshadow',  JiX^  'shadow',  Jl^  'dew',  and  U^J 
'  child '.  We  can  probably  find  a  motive  for  his  word-play  ;  '  the  cloud  of 
peace '  in  verse  2  is  parallel  to  the  '  cloud  of  dew '  in  the  next  Ode ;  and 
the  '  dew '  is,  in  fact,  alluded  to  in  verse  1  of  this  Ode.  But  this  '  cloud  of 
dew '  is  taken  from  Isaiah  xviii.  4 : 

'  As  a  cloud  of  deiv  in  the  heat  of  harvest,' 

where  the  Peshitta  and  the  Targum  supply  us  with  the  very  expression 
which  is  in  the  Odes  to  which  we  refer.  Thus  the  '  cloud  of  dew '  is 
a  shelter :  now  we  understand  why  the  Odist  says,  '  More  than  shelter  he 
was  to  me '.  But  this  is  not  all :  there  is  a  parallel  passage  of  Isaiah 
which  has  been  employed  by  the  Odist.  At  the  end  of  the  fourth  chapter 
of  Isaiah  we  have  the  following  statement : 

'The  Lord  will  create  over  the  whole  habitation  of  Mount  Zion 
and  over  her  assemblies,  a  cloud  and  smoke  by  day,  and  the  shining 
of  a  flaming  fire  by  night ;  for  over  all  the  glory  shall  be  spread  as 
a  canopy.  And  there  shall  be  a  pavilion  for  a  shadow  in  the  day-time 
from  the  heat,  and  for  a  refuge,  and  for  a  covert  from  storm  and 
rain.' — Isaiah  iv.  5,  6,  R.  V. 

Here  we  pick  up  fresh  references  to  the  covering  from  the  heat,  and 
we  also  see  the  reason  for  the  allusion  to  the  '  smoke '  that  came  forth  in 
verse  3.     Suppose,  then,  we  look  at  this  passage  of  Isaiah  in  the  Syriac 


xxxv-xxxvi]  ODES    OF    SOLOMON  383 

version  and  in  the  Targum.  We  shall  find  the  same  assonance  between 
the  '  dew '  and  the  '  shelter '  which  the  Odist  has  been  developing ;  and  we 
shall  also  find  the  motive  for  the  verse : 

'  More  than  shelter  he  was  to  me, 
And  more  than  foundations.' 

For  the  Targum  reads  : 

'The  Lord  shall  create  over  every  sanctuary  of  Mount  Zion,  and 
over  every  place  of  the  House  of  His  Shekinah,  a  cloud  of  glory 
("ip't  py) ;  and  it  shall  be  shadowing  (^BE")  over  him  by  day  and 
thick  darkness  and  glory  as  of  a  flame  of  fire  by  night ;  because  more 
than  the  glory  which  (N^p11  f»  "WP)  He  said  He  would  bring  upon 
Him,  the  Shekinah  shall  be  protecting  Him  with  (its)  protection  :  and 
upon  Jerusalem  there  shall  be  the  shelter  of  clouds  to  shelter  over  her 
by  day,'  &c. 

Den  r6y  t6tafe6  ^jy  nbso 

It  will  be  seen  that  the  Odist  has  closely  followed  the  language  of 
Isaiah,  imitating  even  such  an  expression  as  '  more  than  the  glory ',  which 
is  peculiar  to  the  Targum.  Here,  then,  we  have  a  further  key  to  the 
meaning  of  the  Ode,  and  a  further  proof  of  the  dependence  of  the  Odist 
on  the  Targum. 


ODE    XXXVI 

1     I  rested  on  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord ; 
And  (the  Spirit)  raised  me  on  high : 

a     And  made  me  to  stand  on  my  feet  in  the  high  place  of  the 
Lord ; 
Before  His  perfection  and  His  glory; 
While  I  was  praising  (Him) 1  by  the  composition  of  His  odes. 

1  Or,  I  was  praised  in  the  composition. 


384  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xxxyi 

(Christ  speaks) 
Cf.  John  i.  9.  g     (The  Spirit)  brought  me  forth  before  the  face  of  the  Lord. 

And  although  a  Son  of  Alan, 
I  was  named  the  Luminary,  the  Son  of  God : 

Cf.  Prov.  via.  31        4     While  I  was  the  most  glorified  among  the  glorious  ones  ;  l 
(Synac).  &  &  &  > 

And  the  greatest  among  the  great  ones. 

5     For  according  to  the  greatness  of  the   Most    High,  so  she2 
made  me ; 
And  like  His  own  newness  He  renewed  me: 

Koran  iii.  40.  6     And   He  anointed  me  from   His  own  perfection  ; 

Cf.  Ode  xxi.  7.  ^ 

And  I  became  one  of  those  that  are  near  to  Him  ; 

7  And  my  mouth  was  opened  like  a  cloud  of  dew ; 

And  my  heart  gushed  out,  as  it  were,3  a  gush  of  righteousness  ; 

8  And  my  access  (to  Him)  was  in  peace: 

And  I  was  established  in  the  Spirit  of  Providence. 
Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  3.  In  view  of  uncertainties  it  is  safer  to  follow  the  reading  of 
the  manuscripts. 

v.  5.  It  would  be  somewhat  more  grammatical  to  read  with  Grimme 
,-■,->  y  and  refer  the  verb  to  the  'Lord'  or  'God'.  The  manuscripts, 
however,  in  using  the  feminine  form  have  referred  it  to  the  'Spirit'  of  the 
Lord  in  verses  1,  2. 

Expository  Notes. 

In  this  Ode  we  have  assumed  that  after  the  usual  preface  of  the 
poet  who  composes  the  Ode,  the  speaker  is  the  Lord  Christ.  In  that 
case,   the   Holy  Spirit   is  the   Mother  of  Jesus,   and  we  actually   find  a 

1  H,  glorifiers.  -  Sc.  the  Spirit.  '  B,  om. 


xxxvi]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  385 

suggestion  to  that  effect  in  an  early  heretical  gospel  attributed  to  the 
Ebionites.  Equally  doubtful,  from  an  orthodox  point  of  view,  is  the 
statement  in  verse  6  that  Christ  is  one  of  the  Divine  neighbours ;  we  have 
indicated  on  the  margin  the  reference  to  the  same  title  which  has  been 
preserved  in  the  Kur'an  (^j^i.J  I  ^.s),  i.  e.  one  of  those  who  are  near 
(to  God). 

A  very  slight  change  in  verse  5  will  rid  us  of  the  obscurity  of  such 
a  phrase  as  the  Divine  newness ;  read  : 

'  He  (or  she)  made  me  glad  with  His  own  gladness ' ; 


>£--»,_■»   o»2.o«*» 


r 


,0 


this  not  only  relieves  the  obscure  sentence,  but  makes  sequence  with  the 
following  line, 

{  He  anointed  me,'  &c. ; 

for  this  is  the  famous  early  Christian  testimony,  'God  hath  anointed 
thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness',  which  is  quoted  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  (i.  8)  from  Psalm  xlv.  6,  7.  Now  this  Psalm  is  an  epithalamium 
composed  for  King  Solomon;  so  that  we  have  again  in  the  Odes  either 
Solomon  himself  or  Christ  as  Solomon. 

Justin  Martyr,  discussing  this  very  Psalm,  points  out  to  Trypho  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  here  calls  Christ  God  as  well  as  Christ,  which  agrees  with 
what  the  Odist  says  in  verse  3  : 

'Though  a  Son  of  Man,  I  was  named  Son  of  God.' 

The  proof  was  made  (1)  from  the  unction,  (2)  from  the  address  to 
the  anointed  one  as  God.  It  is  one  of  the  oldest  arguments  from 
Scripture  in  the  Christian  theology. 

If  this  should  turn  out  to  be  a  correct  interpretation  of  the  Ode,  we 
shall  have  to  admit  that  the  name  of  Solomon  attached  to  the  Odes  is 
something  more  than  an  outside,  bookmaker's  or  bookseller's,  label ; 
it  must  be  used  in  the  internal  interpretation  of  the  Odes  as  Odes  of 
Rest,  for  that  is  one  of  the  root-meanings  of  Solomon's  name,  and  he 
is  supposed  to  have  this  name  as  being  historically  the  man  of  peace. 
See  what  is  said  on  this  point  in  the  following  Ode. 

v.  4.  Special  attention  should  be  paid  to  this  term  JoS»o»  (in  vulgar 
Syriac  **a*2>»),  for  it  answers  to  the  Targumic  p213"i,  which  is  the 
11  C  c 


386  ODES    OF    SOLOMON  [XXXVI 

translation  of  Elohim  when  that  word  is  taken  in  the  plural  and  does  not 
mean  God. 

For  instance,  in  Genesis  iii.  5,  the  serpent  assures  the  woman  that, 
if  they  eat  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  they  will  be  like  the  Great  Ones  who 
know  good  and  evil.  Such  a  writer,  for  instance,  as  our  Odist  would  never 
interpret  this  passage  of  God  Himself,  whom  he  affirms  not  to  know  evil; 
probably  this  explanation  was  widely  current  ;  and  it  underlies  the 
substitution  of  'the  Great  Ones'  for  Elohim.  As  we  have  said,  the  point 
is  an  important  one,  for  if  it  carries  the  sense  of  Elohim,  for  the  expression 
in  the  Ode  it  shows  that  the  person  who  is  speaking  in  the  Ode  is  not  an 
ordinary  human  being. 

v.  6.  It  would  be  interesting  to  determine  more  exactly  the  origin  of 
the  peculiar  expression,  '  One  of  those  that  are  near  to  Him '.  Is  it 
possible  that  it  is  the  Odist's  adaptation  of  the  phrase  in  Daniel  ? 

'  One  like  unto  the  Son  of  Man  came  to  the  Ancient  of  Days  and 
they  brought  him  near  before  Htm.' — Dan.  vii.  13. 

Here  we  may  compare  the  language  of  the  Ode  : 

with  »mmpn  Tric-ipi 

of  the  prophet,  the  Syriac  version  being  almost  identical  with  the  Hebrew 
[Chaldee].  There  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not  recognize  the  Apocalyptic 
passage  in  Daniel  as  the  origin  of  the  language  in  the  Ode ;  in  each  case 
it  is  the  Son  of  Man  who  is  referred  to,  for  we  have  identified  Christ  as  the 
Speaker  in  this  Ode,  and  it  is  the  Messiah  that  is  the  person  who  is  brought 
near  to  the  Highest  in  Daniel.  Moreover,  in  this  very  Ode,  the  speaker 
has  already  denoted  himself  as 

'  The  Son  of  Man,  the  Luminary,  the  Son  of  God.' 
In  this  point  of  view,  any  suspicion  of  unorthodox  leanings  in   the  ex- 
pression '  one  of  those  that  are  near '  disappears  ;  the  Odist  is  no  more 
unorthodox  than  the  Book  of  Daniel  which  he  borrows. 

This  suggestion  throws  further  light  on  the  language  of  the  Ode  as 
well  as  on  the  Book  of  Daniel  and  its  text.  To  begin  with,  we  recognize 
in  the  Aramaic  text  of  Daniel,  which  is  the  only  text  we  possess  for  the 
major  part  of  the  book,  the  traces  of  a  true  Targum.  Here,  again,  we 
have  the  expression  'before  God'  used  as  a  substitute  for  'God'.     Instead 


xxxvij  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  387 

of  '  they  brought  him  near  to  the  Most  High ',  the  text  says,  '  they  brought 
him  near  before  the  Most  High '.  This  is  genuine  Targum  which  ha-, 
been  substituted  for  a  missing  Hebrew  text  of  Daniel  in  the  major  part 
of  the  book.  We  may  recognize  the  same  tendency  in  the  Ode  in  verse  3, 
where  the  Christ  is  brought  forth  Ui^a?  wotds/  «**  ^_»,  which  is  a  kind 
of  double  Targumism  and  may  be  itself  an  imitation  of  Daniel. 

Again  we  have  to  recall  that  it  is  to  this  very  language  of  Daniel 
that  we  had  already  referred  the  expression  in  Ode  xix,  where  the  Virgin 
'  brought  forth,  as  it  were  a  man ',  which  we  interpreted  as  the  equivalent 
of  '  one  like  to  a  son  of  man  '. 

We  have,  then,  two  distinct  cases  of  Apocalyptic  in  the  Odes.  It 
was  one  of  the  things  we  should  naturally  have  expected  to  find,  if  the 
Odes  had  been  rightly  assigned  to  the  Eastern  Church  and  to  the  first 
century  (or  even  to  the  beginning  of  the  second  century).  Here  is  the 
elusive  factor,  almost  as  clearly  recognized  as  if  it  had  been  the  Apocalypse 
of  John  that  we  were  studying.  The  Odist  tells  us  plainly  that  'Jesus 
is  the  Son  of  Man  in  the  visions  of  Daniel '.  His  sources  of  information 
are  clearly  Aramaic  or  Syriac,  and  not  Greek.  There  is  no  possibility 
of  dependence  upon  a  Greek  text. 

Incidentally  we  shall  raise  again  the  question  as  to  the  speaker  in 
Ode  xxi.  6,  7,  who  says : 

'  I  passed  before  Him  and  became  near  unto  Him.' 

The  expression  has  a  Targumist  evasion  in  the  words  '  before  Him ' 
('from  before  His  face');  but  the  expression  'became  near  unto  him' 
may  here  be  called  non-Targumic.  '  Passed  before  Him '  may  be  the 
Odist's  imitation  of  the  passage  in  Daniel  which  says  that  the  Son  of  Man 

'came  ()>£-2o)  to  the  Ancient  of  Days.' 

It  may  be  admitted  that  the  suggestion  that  Ode  xxi  as  well  as  Ode  xxxvi 
has  traces  of  Daniel  is  not  so  convincing  as  in  the  case  of  the  latter  Ode. 
So  we  will  leave  the  matter  uncertain  in  the  hope  of  further  and  future 
illumination. 

The  prophecy  of  the  dominion  given  to  the  Son  of  Man  in  Daniel, 
ch.  vii,  was  certainly  in  the  original  Book  of  Testimonies :  Cyprian  has  it, 
and  Gregory  of  Nyssa ;  and  Justin  quotes  it  frequently. 

It   may   perhaps    be   asked   what   is   the   meaning   of  the  title  'the 

C  c  2 


388  ODES    OF   SOLOMON        [xxxvi-xxxvii 

Luminary',  interjected  between  the  terms  'Son  of  Man'  and  'Son  of 
God'.  We  are  far  away  by  this  time  from  Dr.  Bernard's  explanation 
that  it  is  the  baptized  person's  description  of  himself:  but  this  does  not 
relieve  us  of  the  duty  to  find  a  better  solution. 

We  suggest  that  this  also  comes  from  Daniel.  In  chap.  ii.  23  Daniel 
praises  God  because  He  is  the  revealer  of  secrets,  and  because  '  He 
knoweth  what  is  in  the  darkness,  and  the  light  dwelleth  with  Him '. 
A  reference  to  the  text  shows  that  the  rendering  'the  light'  ( S~iinj)  has 
been  derived  from  a  reader's  correction.  No  doubt  it  was  a  sound 
correction,  but  the  text  says  '  the  luminary '  (fifVPD).  So  does  the  Syriac 
version  presenting  the  very  same  peculiar  form  that  has  turned  up  in 
our  Ode.  It  is,  then,  not  an  unnatural  inference  that  the  Odist  worked 
on  an  uncorrected  text  of  Daniel,  and  interpreted  the  '  Luminary '  to  be 
the  Christ. 


ODE    XXXVII 

1      I  stretched  out  my  hands  to  the  Lord  ; a 
And  to  the  Most  High  I   lifted  my  voice  ; 

Cf.  Luke  i.  44  2     And  I  spake  with  the  lips  of  my  heart ; 

(Syriac).  A_ncj  pje  hearrj  me  when  my  voice  reached  Him.- 

3  His  Word  came  to  me, 

And 3  gave  me  the  fruits  of  my  labours : 

4  And  gave  me  rest  by  the  grace  of  the  Lord. 

Hallelujah. 

Critical  Note. 

v.  2.     The  verb  "^aj   of  the  manuscripts  is  much  better  than  a2u 
proposed  by  Bruston  (see  Luke  i.  44). 

1  my  Lord  (H).  a  Lit.  fell  with  him.  3  Lit.  who. 


xxxvn]  ODES   OF    SOLOMON  389 

Expository  Notes. 

At  first  sight  this  appears  to  be  a  Psalm  of  the  simplest  possible 
character,  a  brief  story  of  prayer  and  of  the  answer  'to  prayer.  But 
there  is  more  in  it  than  appears  on  the  first  reading.  The  stretching 
out  of  the  hands  occurs  in  the  35th  Ode,  where  we  have 

'  I  spread  out  my  hands  in  the  lifting  up  of  my  soul,' 

and  this  must  be  connected  in  some  way  with 

'  I  stretched  out  my  hands  to  the  Lord, 
And  to  the  Lord  I  lifted  up  my  voice.' 

The  variation  is  in  the  manner  of  the  Odist,  when  dealing  with  a  Biblical 
theme,  and  may  equally  happen  when  he  is  repeating  his  own  formulae. 
Then  we  notice  that  this  Ode  is  also  one  of  the  Odes  of  Rest,  and  in  the 
35th  Ode,  the  sentence  before  the  one  just  quoted  is  '  I  rested  in  His 
perfection'.  Thus  there  must  be  some  connexion  between  the  35th  Ode 
and  the  37th.  Let  us  see  whether  this  reference  to  a  'rest  in  God'  may 
not  give  us  a  clue  to  the  meaning.  Imagine  that  the  reference  is  to 
Solomon  as  a  man  of  rest.  Then  this  37th  Ode  will  refer  to  Solomon's 
prayer  at  the  dedication  of  the  Temple.  '  The  King  stood  before  the  altar 
of  God  and  spread  forth  his  hands  towards  heaven  and  said'  (2  Chron. 
vi.  12,  14).  God's  answer  to  Solomon  is  in  the  words,  'the  Lord  appeared 
to  Solomon  by  night  and  said  to  him,  I  have  heard  thy  prayer'.  The 
Ode  expresses  this  in  the  manner  of  a  Targum  : 

'  He  heard  me  when  my  voice  reached  Him ; 
His  word  came  to  me.' 

and  the  statement,  '  I  have  chosen  this  place  to  myself  for  an  house  of 
sacrifice '  would  answer  to  the  Odist's  '  He  gave  me  the  fruit  of  my 
labours '. 

Thus  this  Ode  might  be  labelled  an  Ode  of  Solomon  in  a  historical 
sense,  without  any  need  to  introduce  Christ  as  Solomon. 

Supposing  we  accept  this  solution  for  Ode  xxxvii,  where  it  will  apply 
very  well,  can  we  carry  back  a  Solomonic  interpretation  into  Ode  xxxv  or 
xxxvi  ?  We  will  take  the  case  of  Ode  xxxvi.  Notice  that  there  is  a  play 
on  Solomon's  name  in  the  last  verse  : 

'  My  access  to  Him  was  in  peace ; ' 


39©  ODES   OF   SOLOMON       [xxxvii-xxxvm 

and  the  last  half  of  the  verse  : 

'  I  was  established  by  the  spirit  of  Providence.' 

will  correspond  to  2  Chron.  vii.  18  : 

'  I  will  establish  the  throne  of  thy  Kingdom  as  I  covenanted  with 
David  thy  father.' 

There  is  another  great  Solomonic  Psalm  in  the  Psalter,  the  72  nd 
('  Give  the  king  thy  judgements,  O  God ').  In  this  Psalm  we  are  told 
that  'he  shall  come  down  like  rain  upon  the  mown  grass,  as  showers 
that  water  the  earth '.  Perhaps  it  is  these  showers  ('  drops  of  dew ' 
),m«nni>  in  the  Syriac  Bible)  that  are  responsible  for  the  frequent  reference 
to  the  '  dew  of  the  Lord '  in  the  Odes. 

That  the  origin  of  the  description  of  Christ  as  '  the  dew '  may,  perhaps, 
be  in  the  Psalm  which  we  have  referred  to,  can  be  seen  from  Eusebius, 
Theofhania,  Bk.  I,  c.  25  : 

'This  is  the  common  Saviour  of  all  {sc.  the  Logos),  on  whose 
account  this  universal  essence  is  productive  and  rejoices  that  it  ever 
drinks  from  his  dewdro/>s.' 

ODE    XXXVIII 

Cf.  Ps.  xlii.  (xliii.)  3.     1      I  went  up  into  the  Light  of  Truth  as  into  a  chariot : 
And  the  Truth  led  me  and  brought  me : 

2     And  carried  me  across  hollows  and  gulfs. 

And  from  the  cliffs  and   reefs  it  preserved  me  ; 

Cf.  Ps.  cvii.  30.  3     And  became  to  mc  a   I  laven  of  Salvation  ; 

And  set  me  on  the  arms x  of  immortal  life. 

4     And    it   went  with    me  and  made  me   rest  and  suffered  me 
not  to  err; 
Because  it  was  and  is  the  Truth  ; 

1  B,  step. 


xxxvin]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  391 

5  And  I  ran  no  risk  because  I  walked  with  Him ; : 

And  I  made  no  error  in  anything,  because  I  obeyed  Him. 

6  For  Error  fled  away  from  Him  : 
And  would  not  meet  Him : 

7  But  Truth  was  proceeding  in  the  right  way ; 

And  whatever  I  did  not  know  He  made  clear  to  me  : 

8  All  the  drugs  of  Error  and  the  plagues  of  death  which  are 

considered  to  be  sweet  (beverage). 

9  And  I  saw  the  Destroyer  of  the  Corrupter^  when  the  Bride 

who  was  being  corrupted  was  adorned, 
Along  with  the  Bridegroom  who  corrupts  and  is  corrupted. 

10  And  I  asked  the  Truth,  Who  are  these?  and  He  said  to  me: 
This  is  the  Deceiver  and  the  Error: 

11  And  they  imitate  the  Beloved  and  His  Bride: 
And  they  lead  astray  and  corrupt  the  world. 

12  And  they  invite  many  to  the  Banquet, 

And  give  them  to  drink  of  the  wine  of  their  intoxication ; 

13  And  they  make  them  vomit  up  their  wisdom  and  intelligence ; 
And  they  deprive  them  of  understanding ; 

i4a  And  then  they  leave  them  ; 

And  so  these  go  about  like  madmen  and  corrupt  ; 

I4b   Since  they  are  without  heart ; 
And  do  not  seek  after  it. 

1  Sc.  the  truth.  2  Or,  Corruption. 


392  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xxxvin 

15  And  I  was   made   wise  so  as  not  to  fall  into  the    hands  of 

the  Deceiver ; l 
And  I  congratulated   myself  that  the  Truth  had  gone   with 
me  ; 

16  And   I  was  established  and  lived  and  was  redeemed ; 
Cf.  1  Cor.  iii.  10.  And  my  foundations  were  laid  by  the  Lord  ; 2 

Cf.  1  Cor.  iii.  6.  For  He  planted  me. 

17  For  He  set  the  root: 

Cf.  1  Cor.  iii.  6.  And  watered  it  and  fixed  it  and  blessed  it : 

And  its  fruits  will  be  for  ever. 

18  It  struck  deep  and  sprang  up  and  spread  wide, 
And  it  was  full  and  was  enlarged. 

j  9     And  the  Lord  alone  was  glorified, 
Cf.  1  Cor.  iii.  10.  In  His  pianting  and  His  husbandry  :  3 

20  In  His  care  and  in  the  blessing  of  His  lips  ; 
In  the  beautiful  planting  of  His  right  hand. 

21  And  in  the  splendour4  of  His  planting, 
And  in  the  thought  of  His  mind. 

Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  1.  In  the  text  we  have  punctuated  the  word  Jhi^ '  waves ',  but  it 
might  be  read  as  Jbi^ '  valleys  ',  '  ridges  ',  '  reefs  ',  '  ledges  ',  '  cliffs  ',  which 
gives  a  sense  more  in  harmony  with  the  rest  of  the  Ode  in  which  land  is 
intended. 

As  for  the  word  L^wN,  erroneously  translated  in  the  editio  princeps, 
it  is  certain  that  it  must  be  pointed  and  translated  '  Haven'. 

1    15,  Deceivers.  2  Lit.  On  the  hand  of  the  Lord. 

3  Or,  work.  4  H  and  H  discovery  {ex  errore). 


xxxvin]  ODES   OF  SOLOMON  393 

v.  6.     There  is  no  need  to  change  with  Grimme  o*ii.  into  o»^.. 

v.  8.  Both  manuscripts  have  Jlcu^...?  'sweetness'.  Not  seeing  how 
torments  might  be  considered  as  sweetness  of  death  we  have  changed  in 
the  text  the  word  into  JIaik*— ?  'terror'  and  we  have  omitted  to  place 
in  the  foot-note  the  reading  of  the  manuscripts.  The  former  translations 
in  following  the  order  of  words  as  found  in  the  text  were  somewhat 
unintelligible  :  e.  g. 

'  All  the  poisons  of  error  and  the  plagues  which  are  thought  to  be 
the  sweetness  of  death.' 

The  translation  which  we  have  adopted  above  cannot  do  the  slightest 
violence  to  the  Syriac  grammar,  in  which  we  are  informed  that  the  two 
terms  of  annexion  are  often  separated  (AfingancC s  Gram.,  No.  420). 

In  view  of  the  difficulty  arising  out  of  the  former  translations  Barth 
suggested  the  change  of  J*^.^.o  into  ]wa_v^».o.  The  change,  apart  from 
being  too  violent,  cannot  solve  the  problem  of  '  the  torments  of  the  sweet- 
ness of  death '. 

If  we  take  )lcu\—  in  the  sense  of  'juice  of  fruits,  liquor',  we  may  see 
in  it  an  underlying  Greek  olv6jxt\i  like  the  corresponding  J^o~.  This 
sense  would  be  in  harmony  with  the  rest  of  the  Ode  which  deals  with 
intoxication. 

'  Plagues  of  death '  may  be  considered  as  a  Semitism  for  '  deadly  plagues  '. 
v.  9.  The  first  member  of  this  verse  Jla—  ?  o«i\-wf>^>.o  offers  some 
difficulty ;  it  means  evidently  '  the  destroyer  of  the  corruption  \  because 
'  the  corruptor  of  the  corruption '  has  no  meaning  in  itself.  The  author  is, 
therefore,  playing  on  the  two  different  meanings  of  the  verb  '  to  destroy ' 
and  '  to  corrupt '.  The  idea  of  destroying  corruption  is  expressed  again  in 
Ode  xxxiii.  1. 

Here  also  it  would  perhaps  be  better  to  punctuate  JJAL?  'of  the 
corruptor '  to  make  it  conform  with  ^^»?  of  the  end  of  the  verse, 
and  with  what  we  have  suggested  in  our  note  to  Ode  xxxiii.  1.  Conse- 
quently there  is  no  need  to  change  with  Grimme  the  sentence  of  the 
manuscripts  into  JL=w  o\->j-v>\lo. 

v.  17.  «o»o»lso  with  waw  of  the  manuscripts  is  better  Syriac  than 
**o»o»is?  suggested  by  Grimme. 


.^94  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  [xxxvin 

Expository  Notes. 

This  Ode  from  its  first  verse  is  full  of  difficulties  and  obscurities.  The 
Odist  ascends  a  chariot,  called  the  Light  of  Truth,  and  the  Truth  guides 
him  through  various  dangers,  by  land  and  by  sea,  to  a  haven  of  salvation. 
This  Psalm  of  Truth  now  becomes  a  Psalm  of  Truth  and  Error ;  the 
contrary  natures  of  the  two  are  exhibited,  and  then,  by  a  sudden  personifi- 
cation, Truth  and  Error  acquire  human  forms,  and  we  have  before  us  what 
looks  like  a  pair  of  heretical  teachers,  whose  wiles  the  Odist  considers 
himself  lucky  to  have  escaped.  Then  the  Ode  ends  with  praise  for  the 
skilful  culture  of  the  great  husbandman,  whose  plant  the  Odist  confesses 
himself  to  be. 

All  of  this  is  very  difficult  to  explain ;  are  we  dealing  with  real 
experience,  or  is  it  allegory  ?  Are  they  real  heretics  that  are  being 
denounced  ?  One  reason  for  thinking  so  lies  in  the  fact  that  Ignatius  of 
Antioch,  in  dealing  with  Antiochene  and  other  contemporary  heresy,  uses 
language  which  is  similar  to  that  of  the  Odist :  he  says  that  these  heretical 
teachers  mingle  error  with  truth,  as  poisoners  or  druggists  put  medi- 
caments into  honey-wine.  See  what  has  been  said  on  this  in  the 
Introduction.  Ignatius  also  calls  these  heretical  teachers  mad  dogs 
who  bite  one  unawares ;  and  the  Odist  also  says  that  they  make  men 
mad,  and  then  the  victims  go  about  like  mad  rmen1  to  hurt  other  people. 
Possibly  the  word  'dogs'  has  dropped  from  the  text  of  the  Ode  at  this 
point. 

We  have  discussed  elsewhere  (see  p.  148)  the  possibility  that  the 
chariot  in  verse  1  may  really  be  a  ship,  perhaps  a  misunderstood  o^^a  of 
a  Greek  text.  This  would  argue  a  Greek  original  for  the  Ode ;  but  this 
evidence  for  Greek  originals  has  been  steadily  growing  less  in  the  course  of 
our  study  of  the  collection,  and  even  o^a  might  require  an  explanatory 
word.  This  particular  Ode  has  a  Greek  word  mVSwos  transliterated  in  it, 
but  the  word  occurs  not  uncommonly  in  Syriac  writers.  It  is  certainly 
curious  that  the  word  turns  up  again  in  the  very  next  Ode  ! 

The  only  clear  references  to  the  Scripture  are  the  allusion  to  the  43rd 
Psalm  in  verse  r  : 

'  Send  out  thy  light  and  thy  truth. 
Let  them  lead  me  and  let  them  bring  me ; ' 


xxxviii-xxxix]       ODES   OF   SOLOMON  395 

and  the  reference  to  the  107th  Psalm  : 

'  So  he  bringeth  them  to  the  haven  where  they  would  be.' 
The  suggestion  was  made  by  Professor  Torrey  of  Yale  that  the  words  in 
the  Ode 

1  It  became  to  me  a  Haven  of  Salvation,' 
were  an  Aramaic  misunderstanding  of  '  brought  me  to  the  Haven '.     If 
this  could  be  established  it  would    make   the  Scriptural   parallel   much 
closer. 

If  it  were  not  for  the  fact  that  antiquity  has  been  established  for 
the  Odes,  both  as  regards  individual  compositions,  and  as  a  collection, 
we  should  have  been  tempted  to  regard  this  attack  on  the  heretical 
teachers  who  make  men  mad,  as  a  conventional  Patristic  attack  on  Mani 
and  his  followers  the  Manichaeans.  Thus  Eusebius  (Theophama,  Bk.  IV, 
chap.  30)  speaks  of  '  that  madman  of  yesterday  and  of  our  own  times, 
whose  name  became  the  titular  badge  of  the  Manichaean  heresy  \  And 
Cyril  of  Jerusalem  (Cat.  vi.  19):  'Thou  must  hate  all  heretics,  but 
especially  him  who  even  in  name  is  a  maniac,  who  arose  lately  under 
the  emperor  Probus.'     Eusebius  plays  on  the  same  note  in  his  History. 

However,  it  is  clear  from  Ignatius  that  heretics  had  been  classed  with 
mad  dogs  from  a  very  early  time.     Mani  is  only  a  belated  illustration. 


ODE    XXXIX 

1      Mighty  rivers  are1  the  power  of  the  Lord;  Cf.  Amos  v.  24 

Which  carry  headlong 
Those  that  despise  Him  : 

3     And   entangle  their  paths, 
And  sweep  away  their  fords :  'A 

3     And  carry  off  their  bodies 
And  destroy  their  souls. 

1   Or,  (As)  mighty  rivers  is.  2  Or,  ferries. 


396  ODKS   OF   SOLOMON  [xxxix 

4  For  they  are  more  swift  than  lightning,1 
And  more  rapid  : 

5  But  those  who  cross  them  in  faith 
Shall  not  be  moved  ; 

6  And  those  who  walk  on  them  without  blemish 
Shall  not  be  afraid. 

7  For  the  sign  in  them  is  the  Lord ; 

And  the  sign  becomes  the  way  of  those  who   cross  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord. 

8  Put  on,  therefore,  the  name  of  the  Most  High  and  know  Him  : 
And  you  shall  cross  without  danger, 

While  the  rivers  shall  be  subject  to  you. 

9  The  Lord  has  bridged  them  by  His  word  ; 
And  He  walked  and  crossed  them  on  foot; 

io     And  His  footsteps  stand  (firm)  on  the  waters,  and  were  not 
erased  ; 
They  are  as  a  beam  that  is  firmly  fixed.2 

ii     And  the  waves  were  lifted  up  on  this  side  and  on  that; 
And  the  footsteps  of  our  Lord  Messiah  stand  (firm), 

12  And  are  not  obliterated, 
And  are  not  defaced. 

13  And  a  way  has  been  appointed  for  those  who  cross  after  Him. 
And  for  those  who  agree  to  the  course  of  His  faith ; 

And  who  adore  His  name, 
Hallelujah. 

1   B,  lightnings.  2  Or,  fixed  by  Truth. 


xxxix-xl]  ODES  OF   SOLOMON  397 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  r.  By  an  oversight  the  text  has  been  pointed  ^Il^i  ('They  die 
headlong'  or  'upside  down'):  but  H  has  certainly  pointed  it  ^_l^ab 
'  they  bring  headlong '.  We  may  compare  the  description  of  the  torrent 
in  Ode  vi.  8  which  '  carries  rawayn  the  temple '.  So  the  meaning  of  the 
verse  is  according  to  the  manuscript,  as  we  have  put  in  the  translation  '  they 
carry  them  (the  despisers)  headlong  '. 

Newbold  reads  JL*.  for  o»^>~  and  translates  '  mighty  rivers  are  the 
powers  of  the  Lord ',  which  is  possible. 

Expository  Notes. 

In  this  Ode  the  writer  speaks  the  experience  of  a  traveller  who  is 
stopped  on  his  way  by  the  sudden  rise  of  a  rapid  river,  which  becomes 
unfordable  and  is  actually  unbridged.  The  Lord,  however,  is  as  good  as 
a  ford  or  a  bridge  :  his  footprints  are  as  secure  to  tread  in,  as  if  one  had 
a  firm  beam  on  which  to  cross.  The  Ode  is  like  a  little  sermon  on  the 
text,  'When  thou  passest  through  the  waters  I  will  be  with  thee'  (Isa. 
xliii.  2).  Or  perhaps  it  is  Psalm  lxxvii.  19,  'thy  way  is  in  the  sea 
and  thy  paths  in  deep  waters  and  thy  footprints  are  not  known '. 

The  description  of  the  Lord's  walking  on  the  waves  reminds  one  of 
Galilee,  but  there  are  parallel  expressions  in  the  Old  Testament. 

We  have  suggested  on  the  margin  that  the  text  of  the  Ode  is  under 
the  influence  of  Amos  v.  24  in  the  Syriac,  the  '  mighty  rivers '  being 
parallel  to  the  '  mighty  torrent  of  righteousness  '. 

ODE    XL 

1     As  the  honey  distils  from  the  comb  of  the  bees, 

And  the  milk  flows  from  the  woman  that  loves  her  children, 
So  also  is  my  hope  on  thee,  my  God. 

1     As  the  fountain  gushes  out  its  water, 

So  my  heart  gushes  out  the  praise  of  the  Lord, 
And  my  lips  utter  praises  to  Him. 


39«  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [XL 

3  And  my  tongue  is  sweet  in  His  intimate  converse 

And  my  limbs  are  made  fat  by  the  sweetness  of  I  lis  Odes. 

4  And  my  face  is  glad  with  His  exultation  ; 
And  my  spirit  exults  in  His  love  ; 

And  my  soul  shines  in  Him  ; 

5  And  the  fearful  one  shall  confide  in  Him  ; 
And  redemption  shall  in  Him  stand  assured  : 

6  And  his  gain  is  immortal  life  ; 

And  those  who  participate  in  it  are  incorruptible. 
Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  5.  We  have  pointed  JL>»  ('  fear  confides  in  Him  '),  but  the  facsimile 
shows  the  vocalization  JL.»  'the  fearer',  which  gives  the  sense,  'the  fearful 
one  confides  in  Him ',  as  we  have  translated.  Bruston  proposes  to  derive 
the  verb  ^oLfco  from  ^o(  ;  this,  however,  is  not  very  probable. 

v.  6.  oo»io-.o  'and  his  gain'  refers  to  JL>»o  of  the  preceding  note. 
We  may  possibly  read  o>jUa»o  'his  inheritance'. 


Expository  Notes. 

This  beautiful  Ode  is  altogether  experimental :  it  is  made  up  of  milk 
and  honey,  of  joy  and  gladness,  of  thanksgiving  and  the  voice  of  melody. 
The  writer  admits  that  he  is  a  shining  soul ;  '  my  soul  shines  in  Him  '. 

It  is  not  easy  to  find  an  underlying  Biblical  theme,  if  indeed  one  exists. 
In  verse  3  (a  missing  verse  recovered  from  the  Nitrian  Codex)  is  a  sentence 
in  which  the  Odist  repeats,  with  variation,  something  he  had  said  in  the 
20th  Ode; 

'Thou  shalt  be  fat  in  the  praise  of  His  holiness.' 


xl-xliJ  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  399 

Here  it  is : 

1  My  limbs  are  fat  in  the  sweetness  of  His  Odes.' 
We  showed  above  that  in  Ode  xx  there  was  a  Biblical  base  in  the  58th 
chapter  of  Isaiah.     The  same  word  for  '  fat '  is  again  used  in  the  present 
Ode. 

The  Ode  is  also  parallel  in  many  of  its  expressions  to  the  21st  Ode; 
here  also  we  have  the  overflowing  heart,  the  praising  lips  and  heart,  and 
the  exultant  face.  The  21st  and  the  40th  Odes  might  be  hung  up  side 
by  side. 

ODE    XLI 

1     Let  all 2  the  Lord's  bairns  praise  Him, 

And  let  us2  appropriate  the  truth  of  His  faith. 
2a   And  His  children  shall  be  acknowledged  by  Him  ; 

ab    Therefore  let  us  sing  in  His  love : 

3  We  live  in  the  Lord  by  His  grace ; 
And  life  we  receive  in  His  Messiah. 

4  For  a  great  day  has  shined  upon  us ; 

And  marvellous  is  He  who  hath  given  us  of  His  glory. 

5  Let  us,  therefore,  all  of  us  unite  together  in  the  name  of  the 

Lord  : 
And  let  us  honour  Him  in  His  goodness : 

6  And  let  our  faces  shine  in  His  light ; 
And  let  our  hearts  meditate  in  His  love,fj 
By  night  and  by  day. 

7  Let  us  exult  with  the  joy  of  the  Lord. 

1  Let  us  (B).  2  Let  them  (H). 


4co  ODES    OF    SOLOMON  [xli 

(Christ  speaks.) 

H     All  those  that  see  me  will  be  astonished  ; 
For  from  another  race  am   I. 

Prov.  viii.  22  (Heb.).    9     For  the  Father  of  Truth  remembered  me; 
He  who  possessed  me  from  the  beginning. 

Cf.  Prov.  viii.  25       10     For  his  riches  begat  me, 

And  the  thought  of  His  heart: 

(The  Odist  speaks.) 

11     And  His  Word  is  with  us  in  all  our  way, 

The    Saviour   who    makes    alive    and    does    not    reject    our 

souls  : 

Cf.  Philip,  ii.  8,  9.      12     The  man  who  was  humbled, 

And  was  exalted  by  His  own  righteousness  ; 

13  The  Son  of  the  Most  High  appeared 
In  the  perfection  of  His  Father ; 

14  And  light  dawned  from  the  Word 
Cf.  John  i.  1.  That  was  beforetime  in  Him; 

15  The  Messiah  is  truly  one  ; 

Prov.  viii.  23,  29.  And  He  was  known  before  the  foundations  of  the  world, 

That    He    might    save    souls    for   ever    by  the  truth  of  His 
name : 

(Doxology.) 

16  Let  a  new  song  arise  to  the  Lord  from  them  that  love  Him. 

Hallelujah. 


xli]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  401 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  1.  We  do  not  feel  justified  in  adopting  the  readings  ^j 0 ;  a  no  ■  or 
yotaj  ('let  them  announce'  or  'let  them  thank')  suggested  by  Schulthess, 
for  yctrtftvjo  'And  let  them  receive'.  In  the  following  verse  it  is  intimated 
that  by  receiving  the  truth  of  His  faith  the  sons  of  God  will  be  recognized 
by  Him. 

v.  4.  Strictly  speaking  the  verb  »<*j/  means  'it  shone'  or  '(He)  made 
to  shine '.  In  the  first  sense  the  subject  would  be  '  a  great  day  ',  and  in  the 
second  'the  Lord'.     Cf.  xi.  14. 

v.  15.  Connolly  has  pointed  out  that  the  phrase  ©iK*."**!  f+a  ^ao 
l.v>\.v»  is  used  in  the  New  Testament  Peshitta  as  a  rendering  of  -n pb 
Ka.Ta(3o\r)<;  koo-jxov.  In  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  it  is  impossible 
to  know  the  precise  epoch  of  the  appearance  of  the  Syriac  word  Jk^so»l. 
Can  we  assert  that  the  author  of  the  Peshitta,  an  Edessenian,  was  the  first 
writer  who  used  it  ?  From  the  fifth  century  onwards,  possibly  under  the 
influence  of  the  Peshitta,  it  is  constantly  found  in  genuine  Syriac  writings. 
We  are  also  unable  to  say  why  it  is  used  in  the  plural  and  why  it  is  derived 
from  the  form  Afel  of  the  verb.  On  the  other  hand,  the  expression 
kil^-*.  wj»i/  'he  laid  the  foundations'  of  something,  is  of  frequent  use 
among  Syrians,  and  appears  to  be  original,  although  these  same  Syrians 
prefer  the  use  of  the  Verb  yvao  to  w^soi/.  The  lexicographers  explain  the 
word  as  meaning  the  '  first  stages ',  or  '  strata '  of  the  world ;  hence,  they 
say,  is  the  reason  it  is  used  in  the  plural.  In  the  West  Syrian  breviary, 
and  in  some  writers  of  lower  date,  Jl^oojl.  is  simply  used  to  mean 
'creation'  and  is  almost  synonymous  with  Jicuois;  the  word  has  even 
given  birth  to  the  expression  )fc»-j»»!  .*.»  'the  beginning  of  the  creation'. 
Whether  it  was  the  author  of  the  Peshitta  who  derived  this  word  from  the 
author  of  the  Odes,  or  the  Odist  from  the  Peshitta,  it  is  difficult  to  decide, 
until  the  history  of  both  is,  through  other  channels,  more  fully  established. 
It  might  even  be  a  fortuitous  encounter  in  a  commonplace  expression 
employed  in  Edessa  from  the  first  to  the  fifth  century.  (Cf.  above,  pp.  95 
and  122.) 

Expository  Notes. 

In  this  Ode,  Christ  is  the  speaker  alternately  with  the  poet.     At  the 
eighth  verse  we  recognize  the  familiar  strain,   'all  that  see  me  will  be 
11  D  d 


402  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [xli 

astonished '.  We  must  compare  the  words  of  Christ  in  Ode  xvii  and 
in  Ode  xxviii.  The  origin  of  the  repeated  expression  is  probably 
Psalm  lxx.  (lxxi.)  7  : 

d)(T€i   repas    iytvrjOrjv  Tots   ttoAAoZs. 

Ode  xvii  helps  us  to  understand  the  next  clause ;  the  sentences  are  parallel. 

Ode  xvii.  6.  Ode  xli.  8. 

1  All  that  saw  me  were  amazed  :       '  All  those  that  see  me  will   be 
And  I  was  regarded  by  them  as  astonished ; 

a  strange  person.'  For  from  another  race  am  I.' 

Thus  the  stranger  (Lxooo/)  is  the  same  as  the  person  from  another  race 
(U*i-./  UftJ^  ^50).  It  refers  to  Christ,  and  not  to  the  Odist,  conceived 
of  as  a  proselyte  of  the  gate  who  has  joined  the  Jewish  or  Judaeo-Christian 
community.  It  is  the  same  statement  which  Christ  makes  in  Ode  xxviii 
that  'I  was  not  their  brother,  nor  my  birth  like  theirs'.  It  is  an  inti- 
mation of  the  Miraculous  Birth  and  Origin. 

That  is  the  reason  why  the  Odist  (verses  9,  15)  now  reverts  to  the 
eighth  chapter  of  Proverbs,  and  to  the  Birth  of  the  Divine  Wisdom,  for 
Christ  is  the  Wisdom  of  God. 

At  the  eleventh  verse  the  Odist  takes  up  the  reference  to  the  Word  of 
God,  and  explains  that  He  was  truly  of  one  nature  with  the  Father,  unique 
in  Himself  and  one  with  God,  and  that  he  pre-existed  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world.  The  statement  that  'the  Christ  is  truly  one',  is  quoted  and 
dilated  on  by  Ignatius  in  his  epistle  to  the  Magnesians,  as  we  have  shown 
in  the  Introduction. 

In  the  same  verse  we  have  a  Targumism  for  '  God  is  with  us  in  all  our 
way  '.  Cf.  the  Targum  on  Gen.  xxxv.  3,  where  Jacob  says  :  '  His  Word  .  .  . 
was  with  me  for  my  help  in  the  way  that  I  went.' 

There  is  a  Semitic  turn  of  speech  in  verse  6,  '  Let  our  faces  shine  by 
His  shining'.  In  the  same  veise  there  is  an  adaptation  of  a  verse  in  the 
first  Psalm  : 

1  And  in  His  law  he  will  meditate  day  and  night ; ' 
for  which  the  Odist  suggests 

1  Let  our  hearts  meditate  in  His  love  by  night  and  by  day.' 
Cf.  the  Syriac  of  the  two  sentences  : 


xli-xlii]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  403 

Psalm  i.  2.         Ju^^o  jbojjx*/  k^o»l^-j  otascu^Aso 

Ode  xli.  7.        )oo_io_JLio  [A\s  opa<o   JLan^   .qs^o^jo 

The  coincidence  is  striking  between  the  two  texts ;  and  we  may  possibly 
be  justified  in  inferring  an  actual  dependence  of  the  Ode  upon  the  Syriac 
Psalm,  though  the  translation  is  a  natural  one  and  the  ideas  are  simple. 
But  it  is  interesting  to  note  the  substitution  of  Love  for  Law  by  the  Odist. 
We  had  already  shown  his  acquaintance  with  the  first  Psalm  in  our 
notes  on  the  first  Ode.     The  41st  Ode  now  reinforces  the  conclusion. 

The  Odist  never  mentions  the  Law,  and  here  we  see  that  he  sub- 
stitutes for  it  as  well  as  avoids  it.  This  single  consideration  is  of  such 
weight  that  we  may  be  sure  he  is  neither  a  Jew  nor  a  Jewish  proselyte. 

There  is  a  coincidence  in  the  second  verse  with  the  Psalter  of 
Solomon,  which,  perhaps,  is  more  than  accidental.  In  Ps.  Sol.  xvii.  30 
we  have : 

'For  he  knoweth  them  that  they  are  all  the  children  of  God;' 
and  when  we  compare  this  with  Ode  xli :  '  All  the  Lord's  children  will 

praise  Him And  His  children  shall  be  known  to  Him  ',  we  have  a 

close  agreement  which  suggests  that  the  Odist  has  been  using  the  Psalter 
of  Solomon  as  he  uses  the  Psalter  of  David.  Or  it  may  be  that  both 
writers  are  working  on  some  unrecognized  Old  Testament  quotation. 

ODE    XLII 

1  I  stretched  out  my  hands  and  approached  my  Lord  ; 
For  the  stretching  out  of  my  hands  is  His  sign  ; 

2  And  my  expansion  is  the  outspread  wood  1 

That  was  set  up  on  the  way  of  the  Righteous  One. 

(Christ  speaks.) 

3  And  I  became  of  no  use  to  those  who  knew  me : 

For  I  shall  hide  myself  from  those  who  did  not  take  hold 
of  me: 

1  Or,  tree. 
D  d    2 


404  ODES   OF    SOLOMON  [xlii 

4  But  I  will  be  with  those 
Who  love  me. 

5  All  my  persecutors  have  died  ; 

And    they    sought    after    me   who   proclaimed   about    me '  ; 
Because  I   am  alive. 

6  And  I  rose  up  and  am  with  them  ; 
And   I  will  speak  by  their  mouths. 

7*    For  they  have  despised  those  who  persecute  them. 
7b    And  I  threw  over  them  the  yoke  of  my  love  : 

<S     Like  the  arm  of  the  bridegroom  over  the  bride, 
So  is  my  yoke  over  those  that  know  me. 

9     And  as  the  couch  that    is  spread    in   the    chambers    of   the 
bridegroom  and  the  bride, 
So  is  my  love  over  those  that  believe  in  me. 

io     I  was  not  rejected,  though  I  was  reckoned  to  be  so; 
And   I  did  not  perish  though  they  thought  it  of  me. 

i  t     Sheol  saw  me  and  was  in  distress  ; 

Death  cast  me  up  and  many  along  with  me : 

I^a.  xiv.  9,  and         12     I  have  been  gall  and  bitterness  to  it, 

Euseb.  D.E.  (x/8),  And   j  went  down  with  it  to  the  extrcme  0f  {ts  depth. 

13     And  the  feet  and  the  head  it  let  go, 

For  it  was a  not  able  to  endure  my  face : 

1  Or,  set  their  hope  on  me.  2  they  were  (H). 


XLii]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  405 

14  And  I  made  a  congregation  of  living  men  amongst  his  dead 

men  ; 
And  I  spake  with  them  by  living  lips  : 
In  order  that  my  word  may  not  be  void. 

15  And  those  who  had  died  ran  towards  me ; 

And  they  cried  and  said,  Son  of  God,  have  pity  on  us ; 

16  And  do  with  us  according  to  thy  kindness ; 
And  bring  us  out  from  the  bonds  of  darkness  : 

17  And  open  to  us  the  door 

By  which  we  shall  come  out  to  thee  ; 

For  we  perceive  that  our  death  does  not  touch  thee. 

1 8  Let  us  also  be  saved  with  thee  ; 
For  thou  art  our  Saviour. 

19  And  I  heard  their  voice, 

And  I  laid  up  their  faith  in  my  heart ; 

20  And  I  set  my  name  upon  their  heads : 
For  they  are  free  men  and  they  are  mine. 

Hallelujah. 

Critical  Notes. 

v.  1.  For  kjsijalio  Gunkel  proposes  l^^-ollo  'I  was  sanctified'. 
This  change  would  not  be  in  harmony  with  the  particle  io^.  which 
follows  the  verb  :  it  is  also  a  violent  change  which  does  not  commend 
itself,  although  corroborated  by  a  reference  to  Ode  xxvii.  1.  Labourt's 
opinion  that  l^iisl/  means  in  Syriac  'j'ai  sacrifie'  is  not  probable. 

v.  2.  Gunkel  proposes  io^u*3o  'and  the  expansion  of  instead  of 
wLa£-u*9o  'my  expansion'  of  the  manuscripts,  and  translates  'und  das 
Ausstrecken  des  ausgestreckten  Holzes,  an   dem  der  Aufgerichtete  am 


406  ODES    OF   SOLOMON  [xlii 

Wege  hing '.  Labourt  accepts  Gunkel's  theory  and  would  have  us, 
therefore,  change  the  text  of  the  second  line  into  what  he  calls  '  corrections 
excellentes '.     These  corrections  would  give  us  a  text 

J-.»L  U>o/  ^x  w^m>  |^a3  jm*o  Io^a^o 

'  l'extension  du  bots  etendu,  ou  (sic)  a  ete  pendu,  sur  la  route,  le  Juste'. 
The  Syriac  so  constituted  is  exceedingly  weak,  and  even  faulty.  In  the 
parallel  Ode  xxvii,  the  word  occurs  as  '  my  expansion ',  and  we  do  not  see 
any  obvious  reason  to  depart  from  the  reading  of  the  manuscripts.  It  is 
said  in  the  first  verse,  '  I  expanded  my  hands '  (k.£j*s)  and  )la^..«P>  of  the 
second  verse  is,  therefore,  a  continuation  of  the  same  idea.  This  is 
common  to  both  Odes.  Both  Odes  also  agree  to  the  fact  that  this 
'  expansion  of  hands  is  the  sign '  (of  the  Lord) ;  but  instead  of  ^a9  both 
use  w.K»,  which  is  almost  synonymous  with  it.  Both  Odes  harmonize  in 
their  statement  that  this  '  expansion  of  hands  '  is  a  '  straight '  or  :  extended ' 
wood ;  but  the  word  used  to  express  '  straight '  or  ( extended '  is  J^-j*3  in 
Ode  xlii,  and  -»>l?  in  Ode  xxvii.  That  in  Ode  xxvii  we  cannot  take  -.»!.> 
as  a  substantive  and  translate  'of  the  Just'  is  shown  by  its  contracted 
masculine  form,  which  cannot  suffer  a  modification  in  its  adjectival  sense ; 
there  is  little  doubt,  therefore,  that  J^-u*3  of  Ode  xlii  refers  also  to  '  wood '. 
The  utmost  we  could  linguistically  say  is  that  '  my  expansion '  is  a  sign  of 
the  'straight'  or  'extended'  wood;  supposing  that  the  word  Jl/  has  been 
omitted,  as  its  repetition  may  have  been  considered  useless ;  the  text  then 
would  have  been : 

wO»    JL/    w«^|>    L.&00?   ^£jo 

'  Because  the  expansion  of  my  hands  is  His  sign, 
and  my  outstretching  is  (the  sign  of)  the  extended  wood.' 

Ode  xxvii  ends  here ;  Ode  xlii  tells  that  this  '  straight '  or  '  extended ' 
wood  has  been  '  erected ',  or  '  hung  up  '  in  the  way  of  the  '  Righteous  One'. 
Here  the  word  is  used  in  its  emphatic  and  not  contracted  form. 

We  could,  however,  take  J-.»l>  as  a  contracted  feminine  adjective, 
referring  to  on-io/  '  His  way  ',  i.  e.  the  way  of  the  Lord.  On  this  hypothesis 
the  sense  would  be  :  '  And  my  expansion  is  the  extended  (or  straight) 
wood,  which  has  been  hung  up  on  His  straight  way'.  This  is  the  utmost 
meaning  that  the  Syriac  wording  can  give. 


xlii]  ODES   OF  SOLOMON  407 

The  reading  adopted  by  Grimme  ««al^  for'^JV.  is  improbable. 

v.  9.  Labourt's  suggestion  that  JJk.«k»*.2>  '  sleeping-room  of  a  newly 
married  couple '  should  be  read  Jufcs.«»k»»s  '  the  house  of  the  bridegroom  '  is 
not  necessary. 

v.  12.  Grimme  proposes  the  plausible  emendation  of  o»s  into  o»^>, 
thus  referring  the  pronoun  to  Sheol  of  verse  11. 

Expository  Notes. 

This  closing  Ode  of  the  collection  describes  the  Descent  of  Christ  into 
Hades,  and  the  release  of  souls  there  bound  and  imprisoned.  Prefixed  to 
this  is  a  short  introduction  coinciding  closely  with  the  27th  Ode,  and  this 
is  followed  by  a  meditation  of  the  Risen  Christ  over  His  own  triumph  and 
a  declaration  of  His  love  as  the  Bridegroom  towards  His  bride.  We  need 
not  suppose  that  the  earlier  sentences  are  an  addition,  nor  remove  them  as 
a  repetition.  The  Odist  habitually  repeats  himself;  and  in  the  present 
case  we  can  find  the  motive  for  the  repetition.  The  writer  is  working  on 
the  88th  Psalm  as  a  description  of  the  descent  into  Hades,  and  in  this  very 
Psalm  stand  the  sentences  : 

'  I  cried  unto  thee,  O  Lord,  all  day  long, 
/  spread  out  my  hands.'' 

We  compare  : 

Ode  xlii.  1.  ~;j©  Icu^.  l^.s^oL(o  **+*(  1^£»*3 

Psalm  lxxxvii.  (lxxxviii.)  10.        ^Lo^.  »m(   is^-*3 
After  this  preliminary  explanation  of  his  outspread  hands,  the  Odist 
plunges  at  once  into  the  Hades  theme,  in  the  words 

'  I  became  of  no  use  to  my  acquaintance.' 
He  is  working  on  the  sixth  verse  of  the  Psalm,  which  appears  in  the 
LXX  as: 

iyevrjdyv  ws  avOpunros  a(3orj6r)Tosf 

with  a  side-light  from  verse  9  : 

ifAaKpvvas  •yi/cocrrcn;?  jxov   cur    e/xov. 

The  Syriac  of  the  Psalm  which  answers  to  d/3o^?/Tos  is  *.  JL/  oC^.  k»*^?, 
and  the  Syriac  of  the  Ode  is  a«ju.  JN.  The  Syriac  of  the  Psalm  is  nearly 
a  transliteration  of  the  Hebrew  :  the  sentiment  is  the  same.    Now  we  have 


4o8  ODES    OF    SOLOMON  [XLH 

the  key  in  the  lock.  The  previous  clause  in  the  Psalm  declares  that 
'  I  am  reckoned  with  them  that  go  down  into  the  pit ' ;  this  is  a  theme 
that  frequently  recurs  in  the  Odes,  where  Christ  is  speaking :  it  is  in 
the  tenth  verse  of  this  Ode  in  the  form  : 

•  I  was  not  rejected  though  /  was  reckoned  to  be  so : 
I  did  not  perish  though  they  thought  it  of  me.' 

The  verse  in  the  Psalm  (verse  6),  which  says  : 

'  Thou  hast  laid  me  in  the  lowest  pit, 
In  darkness,  in  the  deep,' 

is  responsible  for  verse  12  of  the  Ode  : 

'  I  went  down  with  him  (Sheol)  into  the  extreme  of  its  depth.' 
With  this  Psalm  the  Odist  has  also  used  a  sentence  from  Isaiah,  describing 
the  descent  of  the  Morning  Star  into  Hades,  which  says  in  the  English 
Version : 

'  Hell  from  beneath  is  moved  for  thee  to  meet  thee  at  thy  coming, 
but  which  appears  in  the  LXX  and  in  the  Syriac  as  : 

'  Hades  is  embittered  at  thy  descent,'  (7rt/cpatv€Tat) ; 
which  leads  the  Odist  to  say  : 

'  I  have  been  ga/l  and  bitterness  to  him? 
In  the  Psalm  again  the  Odist  found  the  words  '  Free  among  the  dead  ', 
perplexing  words  which  the  Early  Church  interpreted  of  Christ,  and  these 
words  are  at  the  back  of  the  Odist's  statements  : 

'  A  congregation  of  living  men  amongst  his  dead  men  : 
They  are  free  men,  they  are  mine.' 

We  have  shown  in  the  Introduction  that  this  Ode  is  quoted  by 
Eusebius  and  by  Cyril  of  Jerusalem,  and  it  is  also  responsible  for  some 
sentences  in  the  Acts  of  Thomas.  We  translate  the  passage  from  the 
Greek  and  the  Syriac  for  purposes  of  comparison.  One  sentence  of  the 
Greek  Acts  of  Thomas  was  quoted  in  the  second  edition  as  a  possible 
parallel,  viz.  the  words 

ov   Ti]i'   6iav   ovk   r/i'tyxav   01   tov   Oavdrov   dp^ovres, 

but  the  passage  is  of  wider  interest : 

(Syr.)    '  Thou  didst  descend  into  Sheol  with  mighty  power,  and  the 
dead  saw  thee  and  became  alive,  and  the  lord  of  death  was  not  able 


xlii]  ODES   OF   SOLOMON  409 

to  bear  it ;  and  thou  didst  ascend  with  great  glory,  and  didst  take  up 
with  thee  all  who  sought  refuge  with  Thee.'     (^ao^i^.) 

(Greek)  '  Thou  didst  descend  into  Hades  with  mighty  power,  thou 
whose  sight  the  lords  of  death  could  not  bear,  and  gathering  together 
(vvvaya.yu>v)  all  that  fled  to  thee  for  refuge  (tows  €is  ere  Kara(f>vy6vTa<;) 
thou  didst  prepare  the  way.' 

The  Syriac  depends  altogether  on  the  Ode,  and  the  Greek  depends 
on  the  Syriac;  there  is  one  word  in  the  Greek  (o-wa.ya.ywv)  which  may, 
perhaps,  be  claimed  as  an  independent  loan  from  the  Odes,  for  in  verse  15 
Christ  speaks  of  making  a  'congregation  of  living  men  among  the  dead'. 
Otherwise  the  Greek  is  a  working  over  of  the  Syriac,  as  the  Syriac  Acts  are 
of  the  Odes.  '  Those  who  sought  refuge  with  Thee '  is  derived  from 
'  Those  who  had  died  ran  to  me '.  Perhaps  the  Syriac  Acts  have  dropped 
the  word  '  gather  ',  and  we  should  read  '  Thou  didst  gather  and  take  up  ',  &c. 
Evidently  the  Acts  of  Thomas  have  used  the  42nd  Ode. 

Ephrem  also  has  used  it  freely  in  his  descriptions  of  the  Descent  into 
Hades  in  the  Carmina  Nisibe?ia.     See  especially  for  'Sheol  made  sad ' : 

'  The  Virgin  in  her  bringing  forth  He  made  glad ;  but  Sheol  he 
grieved  and  made  sad  (axJ^Io  j-aos/)  in  His  resurrection. 

Sheol  was  made  sorrowful  (ii-aa-ol^)  when  she  saw  them,  even  the 
sorrowful  dead,  made  to  rejoice'. —  Carm.  Nisib.  27.  4,  6. 
In  the  Breviarium  Chaldaicum  (ii.  p.  >*►*,)  we  find  a  similar  strain  to 
the  language  of  the  Odes  : 

'  O  Living  One,  who  wentest  down  to  the  abode  of  the  dead,  and 
didst  announce  a  good  message  to  the  souls  who  were  bound  (yj.~() 
in  Sheol.' 

Similar  sentences  are  found  in  the  Missale  Syr.  Orient.  (Mosul,  1901), 
p.  ...x,  &c. 


THE   PSALMS  OF  SOLOMON 

PSALM    XLIII 
Psalms  of  Solomon  I. 

(i)  I  cried  unto  the  Lord  when  I  was  in  affliction  at  my  end  ; 
and  to  God  when  sinners  set  upon  me  :  (2)  for  suddenly  there  was 
heard  before  me  the  sound  of  war :  for  He  will  hear  me  because 
I  am  filled  with  righteousness.  (3)  And  I  reckoned  in  my  heart 
that  I  was  filled  with  righteousness ;  in  the  day  that  I  became 
rich  and  was  with  the  multitude  of  (my)  children.  (4)  Their  wealth, 
however,  has  been  given  to  the  whole  earth  :  and  their  glory  as  far 
as  the  ends  of  the  earth.  (5)  And  they  were  lifted  high  as  the 
stars :  and  they  said  (6)  that  they  will  not  fall,  and  they  were 
insolent  in  their  good  things,  and  they  spake  without  knowledge. 
(7)  For  their  sins  were  in  secret  and  I  knew  them  not :  (8)  and 
their  wickedness  had  exceeded  that  of  the  nations  that  had  been 
before  them  :  and  they  defiled  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord  with 
pollution. 

PSALM    XLIV 

Psalms  of  Solomon  II. 

(1)  In  the  insolence  of  the  sinful  man,  he  cast  down  with 
battering  rams1  the  strong  walls,  and  thou  didst  not  restrain  him. 
(2)  And  the  Gentile  foreigners   went  up  on  thy  altar,  and  were 

1    Lit.  great  beams. 


xliv]  PSALMS   OF   SOLOMON  411 

trampling  on  it  with  their  shoes  in  their  insolence.  (3)  For  the 
children  of  Jerusalem  had  polluted  the  Holy  House  of  the  Lord: 
and  they  were  profaning  the  offerings  to  God  1  with  wickedness. 

(4)  Wherefore  He  said,  Remove  them,  cast  them  away  from 
me.  And  He  did  not  establish  with  them  the  beauty  of  His  glory ; 
(5)  it  was  rejected  before  the  Lord  :  and  it  was  utterly  torn  in 
pieces.  (6)  Her  sons  and  her  daughters  were  in  bitter  captivity, 
and  on  their  neck  was  put  the  sealed  yoke  of  the  Gentiles  :  (7)  Ac- 
cording to  their  sins  so  He  dealt  with  them :  for  He  suffered  them 
to  pass  into  the  hand  of  him  that  was  stronger  than  they.  (8)  For 
He  turned  away  His  face  from  His  mercy:  young  men  and  old 
men  and  their  children  together ;  (9)  because  they  also  had 
worked  evil  together,  that  they  might  not  hearken  unto  me. 
(10)  And  the  heaven  was  mightily  angered,  and  the  earth  re- 
jected  them  :  (11)  because  none  in  (the  earth)  had  done  therein 
like  their  doings  ;  (12)  and  that  the  earth  may  know  all  thy 
righteous  judgements,  O  God.  (13)  They  set  up  the  sons  of 
Jerusalem  for  mockery  within  her,  in  the  place  of  harlots  ;  and 
every  one  that  transgressed  2  was  transgressing  as  if  before  the  sun  : 
while  they  made  sport  in  their  villainies  as  they  were  used  to  do. 
(14)  In  the  face  of  the  sun  they  made  show  of  their  villainies.  And 
the  daughters  of  Jerusalem  were  polluted  according  to  thy  judge- 
ments ;  (15)  for  they  had  polluted  themselves  in  lustful  inter- 
course.     My  belly  and  my  bowels  are  in  pain  over  these  things. 

(16)  But  I  will  justify  thee,  O  Lord,  in  the  uprightness  of  my 
heart;    because  in    thy  judgements  is  thy  righteousness,  O   God. 

(17)  For  thou  dost  reward  sinful  men  according  to  their  deeds  :  and 
according  to  their  wicked  and  bitter  sins.     (18)  Thou  didst  disclose 

1  Lit.  of  God.  2  Or,  passed  by. 


412  PSALMS   OF   SOLOMON  [xliv 

their  sins,  in  order  that  thy  judgement  might  be  known.  (19)  And 
Thou  didst  not  blot  out  their  remembrance  from  the  earth.  God 
is  a  judge  and  righteous,  and  accepteth  no  man's  person.  (20)  For 
the  Gentiles  reproached  Jerusalem  in  their  wickedness,  and  her 
beauty  was  cut  off  from  the  throne  of  His1  glory.  (21)  And  she 
was  covered  with  sackcloth  instead  of  beauteous  raiment :  and 
there  was  a  rope  on  her  head  instead  of  a  crown.  (22)  She  cast 
off  from  her  the  dazzling  'l  glory  which  God    had   put  upon  her  ; 

(23)  and  in  contempt   her   beauty  was  cast  away  on   the   ground. 

(24)  And  I  beheld  and  I  besought  the  face  of  the  Lord,  and  I  said, 
Enough  !  Thou  hast  made  Thy  hand  heavy,  O  Lord,  upon  Israel, 
by  the  bringing  in  of  the  Gentiles  ;  (25)  for  they  have  mocked 
and  not  pitied,  in  anger;  (26)  and  in  reproach  they  are  con- 
sumed, unless  thou,  0  Lord,  shalt  restrain  them  in  thy  wrath. 
(27)  For  it  is  not  in  zeal  that  they  did  (this),  but  in  the  lust  of 
the  soul:  (28)  That  they  might  pour  out  their  wrath  upon  us  in 
plundering  us.  But  thou.  O  Lord,  delay  not  to  recompense  them 
upon  their  own  heads ;  (29)  to  cast3  down  the  pride  of  the  dragon 
to  contempt.  (30)  And  I  delayed  not  until  the  Lord  showed 
me  his  insolence  smitten  on  the  mountains  of  Egypt :  and  despised 
more  than  him  that  is  least  (honoured)  on  land  and  sea:  (31)  and 
his  body  coming  on  the  waves  in  much  contempt,  and  none  to 
bury  (him).  (32)  Because  he  had  rejected  Him  with  scorn,  for 
he  did  not  consider  that  he  is  a  man.  And  the  end  he  did  not 
regard.  (^^)  For  he  said,  I  will  be  the  Lord  of  land  and  sea :  and 
he  knew  not  that  the  Lord  is  God,  great,  mighty,  and  powerful, 
(34)  and  He  is  King  over  Heaven  and  over  Earth  :  and  He  judges 

1  Greek,  her.  2  Greek,  '  her  diadem  of  glory  '. 

3  Cod.  B,  '  to  speak ',  in  agreement  with  the  corrupt  Greek. 


xliv-xlv]  PSALMS   OF   SOLOMON  413 

kingdoms  and  princes,  (35)  He  who  raiseth  me  up  in  glory  and 
layeth  low1  the  proud  for  destruction,  not  for  a  time  but  for  ever, 
in  contempt  ;  because  they  knew  Him  not. 

(36)  And  now  behold,  ye  great  ones  of  the  earth,  the  judgement 
of  the  Lord,  for  He  is  a  righteous  King,  and  judges  what  is  under 
the  whole  Heaven.  (37)  Bless  ye  the  Lord,  ye  who  fear  the  Lord 
reverently  ;  for  the  mercies  of  the  Lord  are  on  them  that  fear  Him 
with  judgement,  (38)  to  separate  between  the  righteous  and  the 
sinful,  and  to  reward  the  sinful  for  ever  according  to  their  deeds — 
(39)  and  to  be  gracious  to  the  righteous  after  their  oppression  by 
sinners  :  and  to  reward  the  sinful  for  what  he  has  done  to  the 
righteous :  (40)  because  the  Lord  is  kind  to  those  that  call  upon 
Him  in  patience,  to  do  according  to  His  mercy  to  His  saints  :  so  as 
to  stand  before  Him  at  all  times  in  strength.  (41)  Blessed  is  the 
Lord  for  ever  by  His  servants. 

PSALM    XLV 

Psalms  of  Solomon  III. 

(1)  Why  sleepest  thou,  my  soul,  and  dost  not  bless  the  Lord? 
(a)  Sing  a  new  song  to  God  and  keep  vigil  in  His  watch.  For 
a  Psalm  is  good  (to  sing)  to  God  out  of  a  good  heart.  (3)  The 
righteous  will  ever  make  mention  of  the  Lord  :  in  confession  and 
in  righteousness  are  the  judgements  of  the  Lord.  (4)  The  righteous 
will  never  neglect2  when  he  is  chastened  by  the  Lord :  because  his 
will  is  always  before  the  Lord.  (5)  The  righteous  stumbles  and 
justifies  God:  he  falls  and  I  wait3  what  the  Lord  will  do  to  him. 

1  Greek  koi/z/£coz>  and  so  Syriac. 

2  Greek  oXi-ywpijo-et :  cf.  Prov.  iii.  n,  Heb.  xii.  5. 

3  Read,  '  and  he  waits  '. 


4>4  PSALMS   OF   SOLOMON  [XLV-XLVI 

(6)  And  he  looks  to  see  from  whence  his  salvation  comes.  (7)  The 
stability  of  the  righteous  is  from  God  their  Saviour  :  for  in  the  house 
of  the  righteous  there  does  not  lodge  sin  upon  sin  ;  (8)  because 
he  always  visits  the  house  of  the  righteous  to  remove  the  sins  of 
his  transgressions.  (9)  And  he  delivers  his  soul,  in  whatever  he 
has  sinned  without  knowledge,  by  fasting  and  humiliation  ;  (10)  and 
the  Lord  purifies  every  holy  man  and  his  house.  (11)  But  the 
sinner  stumbleth  and  curseth  his  own  life,  and  the  day  in  which  he 
was  born  :  and  the  birth-pangs  of  his  mother;  (12)  and  he  adds 
sin  upon  sin  to  his  life  :  (13)  he  falls,  and  because  his  fall  is 
grievous,  he  rises  not  again  :  for  the  destruction  of  the  sinner  is  for 
ever.  (14)  And  he  will  not  remember  Him  when  He  visits  the 
righteous.  (15)  This  is  the  portion  of  sinners  for  ever.  (16)  But 
those  who  fear  the  Lord  shall  rise  to  eternal  life  :  and  their  life 
shall  be  in  the  light  of  the  Lord,  and  (their  life)  shall  not  fail  any 
more.  (Hallelujah).1 

PSALM    XLVI  (XLVII) 
Psalms  of  Solomon  IV. 

(i<  Why  sittest  thou,  O  wicked  man.  in  the  congregation  of  the 
righteous,  and  thy  heart  is  far  removed  from  God  ;  and  by  thy 
wickedness  thou  provokest  to  anger  the  God  of  Israel,  (2)  ex- 
ceedingly by  thy  words  and  exceedingly  by  thy  outward  signs  more 
than  all  men?  He  who  is  severe  in  his  words  in  his  condemnation 
of  sinners  in  judgement,  (3)  and  his  hand  is  the  first  to  be  on  him. 
as  though  (he  acted)  in  zeal :  and  he   is  guilty  himself  of  all  kinds 

1  This  is  an  addition  by  the  scribe  under  the  influence  of  the  Odes  of 
Solomon  which  he  has  been  copying. 


xlvi]  PSALMS   OF   SOLOMON  415 

of  sinful  crimes.  (4)  His  eyes  are  on  every  woman  immodestly 
and  his  tongue  lies  when  he  answers  with  oaths.  (5)  In  the  night 
and  in  the  darkness  as  if  he  were  not  seen ;  by  his  eyes  he  talketh 
with  every  woman  in  the  cunning  of  wickedness :  (6)  and  he  is 
quick  to  go  into  every  house  with  joy  as  if  he  had  no  wickedness. 
(7)  God  shall  move  those  who  judge  with  respect  of  persons :  but 
He  lives  with  the  upright,  in  the  corruption  of  his  body  and  in  the 
poverty  of  his  life.  (8)  God  will  disclose  the  deeds  of  those  who 
are  men-pleasers :  in  scorn  and  derision  are  his  works.  (9)  And 
let  the  saints  justify  the  judgement  of  their  God,  when  the  wicked 
shall  be  removed  from  before  the  righteous.  (10)  The  accepter  of 
persons  who  talks  law  with  guile,  (11)  and  his  eyes  are  on  a 
house,  quietly  like  a  serpent,  to  dispel  the  wisdom  of  each  one  by 
words  of  villainy:  (12)  his  words  are  with  an  evil  intent,  with 
a  view  to  the  working  of  the  lust  of  wickedness  :  (13)  and  he  does 
not  remove  until  he  has  scattered  in  bereavement,  and  has  deso- 
lated the  house  because  of  his  sinful  lust:  (14)  and  he  supposes  in 
his  words  that  there  is  none  that  sees  and  judges:  (15)  and  he 
is  filled  with  this  sinfulness ;  and  his  eyes  are  on  another  house 
to  devastate  it  with  words  of  prodigality ;  and  his  soul  is,  like 
Sheol,  never  satisfied.  (16)  For  all  these  things,  let]'  his  portion ' 
O  Lord,  be  before  thee  in  dishonour ;  let  his  going  out  be  with 
groans  and  his  coming  in  with  curses:  (17)  in  pains,  and  in 
poverty,  and  in  destitution,  O  Lord,  let  his  life  be :  let  his  sleep 
be  in  anguish,  and  his  waking  in  vexation:  (18)  let  sleep  be 
removed  from  his  eyelids  by  night :  let  him  fall  from"  every  work 
of  his  hands  in  dishonour,  (19)  and  let  him  enter  his  house  empty- 
handed,  and  let  his  house  be  destitute  of  everything  that  can  satisfy 
his  soul :     (30)  and  from  his  offspring  let  not  one  draw  near  unto 


4i6  PSALMS   OF   SOLOMON  [xlvi-xlvii 

him  :  (21)  let  the  flesh  of  the  hypocrites  be  scattered  by  wild 
beasts :  and  the  bones  of  the  wicked  (lie)  before  the  sun  in  dis- 
honour :  (22)  let  the  raven  pick  out  the  eyes  of  those  who  are 
mcn-pleasers.  (23)  Because  they  have  laid  waste  many  houses  of 
men  in  dishonour  :  and  have  scattered  them  in  lust :  (24)  and  they 
remembered  not  God  ;  nor  feared  God  in  all  these  things  ;  (25)  and 
they  provoked  God,  and  He  was  angered  to  destroy  them  from  the 
earth  :  because  with  crafty  intent  they  had  played  the  hypocrite 
with  innocent  souls.  (26)  Blessed  are  they  that  fear  the  Lord  in 
their  innocency :  (27)  and  the  Lord  will  save  them  from  all  the 
cunning  and  wicked  men  ;  and  he  will  redeem  us  from  every 
stumbling-block  of  the  wicked.  (28)  God  has  destroyed  all  them 
that  work  fraud  with  pride,1  for  a  strong  judge  is  the  Lord  our  God 
in  righteousness.  (29)  Let  thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  be  upon  all  them 
that  love  thee. 

PSALM   XLVII  (XLVIII) 
Psalms  of  Solomon    V. 

(1)  O  Lord  my  God,  I  will  praise  thy  name  with  exultation, 
amongst  those  that  know  thy  righteous  judgements.  (2)  For  thou 
art  gracious  and  merciful,  and  the  place  of  refuge  of  the  poor. 
(3)  When  I  cry  unto  thee,  be  not  thou  silent  unto  me.  (4)  For  one 
does  not  take  spoil  from  the  strong  man.  (5)  Or  who  will  take 
aught  from  what  thou  hast  made  unless  thou  give  it  to  him  ? 
(6)  Because  he  is  man,  and  his  portion  is  before  thee  in  the 
balance  :  and  he  shall  not  add  aught  to  better  it  apart  from  thy 
judgement,  O  God.  (7)  In  our  afflictions,  we  call  thee  to  our 
help  :  and  thou  hast  not  turned  away  our  petition  :  for  thou  art  our 

1  Lit.  excess. 


xlvii]  PSALMS   OF   SOLOMON  417 

God.  (8)  Delay  not  thou  thy  hand  from  us  lest  we  be  strengthened 
to  sin :  (9)  and  turn  not  away  thy  face  from  us,  lest  we  remove 
away  from  thee :  and  to  thee  we  will  come :  (10)  for  if  I  should 
be  hungry,  O  Lord,  unto  thee  will  I  cry,  O  God  :  and  thou  wilt 
bestow.  (11)  For  the  fowl  and  the  fish  thou  dost  feed.  When 
thou  givest  rain  in  the  desert   to  cause  the  grass  to  spring  up, 

(12)  to  prepare  food  in  the  wilderness  for  every  living  thing,  and 
if  they  shall  be  hungry,  unto  thee  will  they  lift  up  their  faces :? 

(13)  kings  and  rulers  and  peoples  thou  dost  provide  for,  O  God : 
and  the  hope  of  the  poor  and  the  miserable,  who  is  it  except  thy- 
self, O  Lord?  (14)  And  thou  wilt  answer  him  because  thou  art 
kind  and  gentle :  and  his  soul  shall  be  satisfied  when  thou  openest 
thy  hand  in  mercy  :  (15)  for  the  kindness  of  a  man  is  with  parsi- 
mony, to-day  and  to-morrow ;  and  if  it  should  be  that  he  repeats 
his  gift  and  does  not  grumble,  he  is  wonderful.  (16)  But  thy 
bounty  is  plenteous  in  kindness  and  in  wealth ;  and  there  is  no 
expectation    towards    thee    that    He    will    be    sparing   in   gifts.1 

(17)  For  over  all  the'  earth  is  thy  mercy,  O  Lord,  in  kindness. 

(18)  Blessed  is  the  man  whom  the  Lord  shall  remember  in 
poverty :  for  that  a  man  should  exceed  his  measure  (means  that) 
he  will  sin.  (19)  Sufficient  is  a  low  estate  with  righteousness2 
(20)  For  those  that  fear  the  Lord  are  pleased  with  good  things : 
and  thy  grace  is  on  Israel  in  thy  kingdom.  (21)  Blessed  be  the 
glory  of  the  Lord,  for  He  is  our  King. 


1  The  Greek  has  been  misread. 

2  The  Syriac  has  omitted  a  sentence  of  the  Greek  by  a  common  transcrip- 
tional error.  Add :  '  And  herein  is  the  blessing  of  the  Lord,  that  a  man  be 
satisfied  in  righteousness '. 

11  E  e 


41 «  PSALMS   OF   SOLOMON  [xlviii-xlix 

PSALM  XLVIII  (XLIX) 
Psalms  of  Solomon  VI. 
(i)  Blessed  is  the  man  whose  heart  is  prepared  to  call  upon  the 
name  of  the  Lord  :  (2)  and  when  he  shall  remember  the  name  of 
the  Lord,  he  will  be  saved.  (3)  His  ways  are  directed  from  before 
the  Lord  :  and  the  works  of  his  hands  are  preserved  by  his  God. 
(4)  And  '  in  '  the  evil  vision  of  the  night  his  soul  shall  not  be  moved  : 
because  he  is  His :  (5)  and  his  soul  shall  not  be  affrighted  in  the 
passing  through  the  rivers  and  in  the  tumult  of  the  seas.  (6)  For 
he  rose  from  his  sleep  and  praised  the  name  of  the  Lord  :  (7)  and 
in  the  quietness  of  his  heart  he  praised  the  name  of  the  Lord  and 
he  made  request  from  the  face  of  the  Lord  concerning  all  his  house. 
(8)  And  the  Lord  hears  the  prayer  of  every  one  that  is  in  His  fear, 
and  every  petition  of  the  soul  that  trusts  in  Him ;  and  the  Lord 
fulfils  it.  (9)  Blessed  is  He  who  doeth  mercy  upon  them  that  love 
Him  in  truth. 

PSALM    XLIX  (L) 

Psalms  of  Solomon  VII. 
(1)  Remove  not  thy  tabernacle  from  us,  O  God,  lest  those  rise 
up  against  us  who  hated  us  without  a  cause  :  (2)  for  thou  hast  put 
them  away,  O  God,  that  their  foot  may  not  tread  the  inheritance 
of  thy  sanctuary.  (3)  Thou  in  thy  good  pleasure  chasten  me,  and 
deliver  us  not  over  to  the  Gentiles.  (4)  For  if  thou  shouldest  send 
death,  it  is  thou  who  givest  it  command  against  us  :  (5)  for  thou 
art  the  merciful  one,  and  wilt  not  be  angry  so  as  to  consume  us 
utterly.  (6)  For  because  of  thy  name  that  encamps  amongst  us, 
mercies  shall  be  upon  us  :  and  the  Gentiles  shall  not  be  able  to 
prevail  against  us.  (7)  For  thou  art  our  strength:  we  will  call 
upon  thee  and  thou  wilt  answer  us :     (8)  for  thou  wilt  be  gracious 


xlix-lJ  PSALMS   OF   SOLOMON  419 

to  the  seed  of  Israel  for  ever,  and  thou  wilt  not  forget  him.1 
(9)  Establish  us  in  the  time  of  thy  help  to  show  favour  to  the 
house  of  Jacob  in  the  day  that  is  prepared  for  them. 

PSALM  L  (LI) 
Psalms  of  Solomon  VIII. 
(1)  Distress  and  the  sound  of  war  mine  ears  have  heard,  the 
sound  of  the  trumpet  and  the  noise  of  slaughter  and  destruction : 
(2)  the  sound  of  much  people  like  a  mighty  and  frequent  wind  : 
like  the  tempest  of  fire  which  comes  2  over  the  wilderness.  (3)  And 
I  said  to  my  heart :  Where  will  [God]  judge  him  ?  (4)  And  I  heard 
a  sound  in  Jerusalem  the  Holy  City.  (5)  The  bonds  of  my  loins 
were  loosed  at  the  report3  (6)  and  my  knees  trembled  and  my 
bones  were  moved  like  flax.  (7)  And  I  said,  they  will  make  straight 
paths  in  righteousness,  and  I  remembered  the  judgements  of 
the  Lord,  from  the  creation  of  the  heaven  and  the  earth  :  and 
I  justified  God  in  all  his  judgements  from  the  beginning.4  (8)  But 
God  lay  bare  their  sins  before  the  sun :  and  to  all  the  earth  were 
known  the  righteous  judgements  of  the  Lord.  (9)  For  in  the 
secret  places  of  the  earth  were  they  doing  evil;  (10)  the  son  had 
connexion  with  the  mother  and  the  father  with  the  daughters  : 
(11)  and  all  of  them  committed  adultery  with  their  neighbours' 
wives :  and  they  made  them  solemn  covenants  among  themselves 
concerning  these  things:  (12)  they  were  plundering  the  Holy 
House  of  God,  as  if  there  were  none  to  inherit  and  to  deliver. 
(13)  And  they  were  treading  His  sanctuary  in  all  their  pollutions, 

1  The  Syriac  has  dropped  the  sentence  :  '  And  we  are  under  thy  yoke  for 
ever,  and  under  the  scourge  of  thy  chastening '. 

2  The  second  Alaph  in  the  text  should  be  Taw. 

3  Greek  adds  :  '  and  my  heart  was  afraid  '.  4  Lit.  from  eternity. 

E  e  2, 


420  TSALMS    OF   SOLOMON  |i. 

and  in  the  time1  of  their  separation  they  polluted  the  sacrifices,  as 
common  meat:  (14)  and  they  left  no  sins  which  they  did  not 
commit,  and  even  worse  than  the  Gentiles.  (15)  For  this  cause 
God  mingled  for  them  a  spirit  of  error,  and  caused  them  to  drink 
an  unmixed  cup'2  of  drunkenness:  (t6)  He  brought  him  from  the 
other  side  of  the  world,  the  one  that  afflicts  grievously  :  (17)  and  he 
decrees  war  against  Jerusalem  and  against  her  land  :  (18)  and  the 
judges  of  the  land  met  him  with  joy:  and  they  said  to  him:  Thy 
path  shall  be  ordered,  come,  enter  in  peace.  (19)  They  levelled  the 
rough  paths 3  for  his  entering  :  they  opened  the  doors  against 
Jerusalem  :  and  the)'  crowned  her  walls.  (20)  And  he  entered 
like  a  father  into  the  house  of  his  children  in  peace  :  and  he  set  his 
feet  '  there '  in  great  firmness:  (21)  and  they  took  possession  of 
the  towers  and  walls  of  Jerusalem.  (22)  For  God  brought  him  in 
assurance  against  their  error.  (23)  And  they  destroyed  their 
princes,  because  he  was  cunning  in  counsel :  and  they  poured  out 
the  blood  of  the  dwellers  in  Jerusalem  like  the  water  of  uncleanness  : 
(24)  and  he  carried  off  their  sons  and  their  daughters,  who  had  been 
(born)  in  pollution,  (25)  and  had  wrought  their  pollution  even 
as  also  their  fathers  had  done.  (26)  And  Jerusalem  defiled  even 
those  things  that  were  consecrated  to  the  name  of  God  :  (27)  and 
God  was  justified  in  his  judgements  upon  the  nations  of  the  earth, 

(28)  and  the  saints  of  God  were  as  innocent  lambs  in  their  midst. 

(29)  God  is  to  be  praised  who  judges  all  the  earth  in  His  righteous- 
ness. (30)  Behold,  O  God,  thou  hast  shown  us  'thy  judgement'4 
in  thy  righteousness,  (31)  and  our  eyes  have  seen  thy  judgements, 
O  God  ;  and  we  have  justified  thy  name  that  is  honoured  for  ever.6 

1  Lit.  blood.  z  Lit.  a  living  cup  (i.  e.  a  cup  of  strong  wine). 

3  Lit.  paths  of  salvation.  *  Cod.  otn. 

5  Correct  the  punctuation  of  the  first  word. 


l-li]  PSALMS   OF   SOLOMON  4*1 

(32)  For  thou  art  a  God  of  righteousness :  who  judgest  Israel 
with  chastening.  (33)  Turn  thy  mercy  towards  us  and  be  gracious 
to  us :  (34)  and  gather  the  dispersion  of  Israel,  in  mercy  and  in 
kindness :  (35)  for  thy  faithfulness  is  with  us :  and  we  are  stiff- 
necked  and  thou  art  our  chastener :  (36)  do  not  desert  us,  O  our 
God  !  lest  the  Gentiles  should  swallow  us  up,  as  though  there  were 
none  to  deliver :  (37)  and  thou  art  our  God  from  the  beginning, 
and  upon  thee  is  our  hope,  O  Lord :  (38)  and  we  will  not  depart 
from  thee,  for  thy  judgements  are  good;  (39)  and  upon  us  and 
upon  our  children  is  thy  good  will  for  ever,  O  Lord  God,  Our  Saviour, 
and  we  will  not  be  shaken  again  for  ever.  (40)  The  Lord  is  to  be 
praised  for  His  judgements  by  the  mouth  of  His  saints:  (41)  and 
blessed  is  Israel  from  the  Lord  for  evermore. 


PSALM    LI  (LII) 
Psalms  of  Solomon  IX. 

(1)  When  Israel  went  forth  into  captivity  to  a  strange  land, 
because  they  departed  from  the  Lord  their  Saviour :  (3)  then  were 
they  cast  out  from  the  inheritance  that  God  gave  them :  amongst 
all  the  Gentiles  was  the  dispersion  of  Israel  according  to  the  word 
of  God,  (3)  that  thou  mightest  be  justified,  O  God,  in  thy 
righteousness  over  our  wickedness :  (4)  for  thou  art  a  just  judge 
over  all  the  peoples  of  the  earth.  (5)  For  there  will  not  be  hidden 
from  thy  knowledge  any  one  who  doeth  wickedness  :  (6)  and  the 
righteousness  of  thy  upright  ones,  O  Lord,  is  before  thee.  And 
where  shall  a  man  be  hidden  from  thy  knowledge,  O  God  ?  (7)  For 
we  work  by  freewill  and  the  choice  of  our  own  souls  to  do  either 


422  PSALMS    OF   SOLOMON  [LI-LII 

good  or  evil  by  the  work  of  our  hands :  (8)  and  in  thy  righteous- 
ness thou  dost  visit  the  children  of  men.  (9)  For  he  who  does 
righteousness  lays  up  a  treasure  of  life  with  the  Lord  :  and  he  who 
docs  wickedness  incurs  judgement  upon  his  soul  in  perdition. 

(10)  For  His  judgements  are  in  righteousness  upon  every  man 
and  his  house,  (u)  For  with  whom  will  the  Lord  deal  graciously 
unless  with  them  that  call  upon  the  Lord?  (12)  For  he  purifies 
the  sins  of  the  soul  by  confession,  (13)  because  shame  is  on  us  and 
our  faces  because  of  all  these  things.  (14)  For  to  whom  will  He 
remit  sins  except  to  those  that  have  sinned?  (15)  For  the 
righteous  thiou  dost  bless,  and  dost  not  reprove  them  for  any  of 
their  sins  ;  for  thy  grace  is  on  those  that  have  sinned  when  they 
have  repented.  (16)  And  now,  thou  art  our  God,  and  we  are  thy 
people  whom  thou  hast  loved  :  behold,  and  have  mercy,  O  God  of 
Israel  ;  for  thine  we  are  :  remove  not  thy  compassions  from  us, 
lest  the  Gentiles  should  set  upon  us;  (17)  for  thou  hast  chosen 
the  seed  of  Abraham  rather  than  all  the  Gentiles,  (18)  and  thou 
hast  put  on  us  thy  Name,  O  Lord  :  and  thou  wilt  not  remove  for 
ever.  (19)  Thou  didst  surely  covenant  with  our  Fathers  con- 
cerning us ;  and  we  hope  in  thee  in  the  repentance  of  our  souls. 
(20)  The  mercies  over  the  house  of  Israel  are  of  the  Lord  now  and 
evermore. 

PSALM    LII  (LIII) 
Psalms  of  Solomon  X. 

(1)  Blessed  is  the  man  whom  God  remembered  with  reproof: 
and  He  has  restrained  from  him  the  way  of  evil  by  stripes  :  so  as 
to  be  purified  from  his  sin,  that  it  may  not  abound.  (2)  For 
he    who   prepares    his    loins    for   beating   shall    also   be   purified : 


lii-liii]  PSALMS    OF   SOLOMON  433 

for  He  is  good  to  those  that  receive  chastening.  (3)  For  the 
way  of  the  righteous  is  straight,  and  chastisement  does  not  turn  it 
aside.  (4)  For  the  face1  of  the  Lord  is  upon  them  that  love  Him 
in  truth,  and  the  Lord  will  remember  His  servants  in  mercy. 
(5)  For  the  testimony  is  in  the  law  of  the  everlasting  covenant ; 
the  testimony  of  the  Lord  is  in  the  ways  of  the  children  of  men,  by 
'  His '  visitations.  (6)  Righteous  and  upright  is  our  God  in  all  His 
judgements,  and  Israel  will  praise  the  Name  of  the  Lord  with  joy. 
(7)  And  the  saints  shall  give  thanks  in  the  congregation  of  the 
People :  and  on  the  poor  the  Lord  will  have  mercy  in  the  gladness 
of  Israel.  (8)  For  the  Lord  is  kind  and  merciful  for  ever :  and  the 
congregations  of  Israel  shall  praise  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  (9)  For 
of  the  Lord  is  the  salvation  upon  the  house  of  Israel,  unto  the 
everlasting  kingdom.2 


PSALM    LIII  (LIV) 

Psalms  of  Solomon  XI. 

(1)  Blow  ye  'the  trumpet'  in  Zion,  the  well-known  trumpet  of 
the  saints :  (2)  proclaim  in  Jerusalem  the  voice  of  the  heralds, 
because  God  is  merciful  to  Israel  in  His  visitation.  (3)  Stand  up 
on  high 3  Jerusalem,  and  behold  thy  children,  who  are  all  being 
gathered  from  the  east  and  the  west  by  the  Lord :  (4)  and  from 
the  north  they  come  to  the  joy  of  their  God  :  and  from  the  far-away 
islands  God  gathered  them.  (5)  Lofty  mountains  has  He  humbled 
and  made  plain  before  them  :  and  the  hills  fled  away  before  then- 
entrance  :    (6)  the  cedars  4  He  caused  to  shelter  them  as  they  passed 

1  Greek,  mercy.  2  Greek,  everlasting  gladness  {evfypoavvr}). 

3  Baruch  v.  5-8.  *  Greek,  the  groves. 


424  PSALMS   OF   SOLOMON  [liii-liv 

by :  and  every  tree  of  sweet  odour  God  made  to  breathe 1  upon 
them  :  (7)  in  order  that  Israel  might  pass  by  in  the  visitation  of 
the  glory  of  their  God.  (8)  O  Jerusalem,  put  on  the  garments 
of  thy  glory  ;  and  make  ready  thy  robe  of  holiness.  For  God  has 
spoken  good  things  to  Israel  now  and  ever.  (9)  May  the  Lord 
do  what  He  hath  spoken  concerning  Israel :  and  concerning 
Jerusalem :  may  the  Lord  raise  up  Israel  in  the  name  of  His 
glory.  May  the  mercies  of  the  Lord  be  upon  Israel  now  and 
evermore. 

PSALM    LIV  (LV) 
Psalms  of  Solomon  XII. 

(1)  O  Lord,  save  my  soul  from  the  perverse  and  wicked  man, 
and  from  the  whispering  and  transgressing  tongue,  that  spake  lies 
and  deceit.  (2)  For  in  the  (cunning)  response  of  his  words  is  the 
tongue  of  the  transgressor  -  of  the  law :  for  he  shows  like  one 
whose  deeds  are  fair,  and  kindles  fire  among  the  people.  (3)  For 
his  sojourning  is  to  fill 3  (set  fire  to)  houses  by  his  lying  talk  : 
cutting  down  the  trees  of  his  delight  with  the  flame  of  his  tongue  4 
that  does  lawlessly.  (4)  He  has  destroyed  the  houses  of  the 
transgressors  by  war :  and  the  slandering  5  lips  God  has  removed 
from  the  innocent,  the  lips  of  the  transgressors :  and  the  bones  of 
the  slanderer  shall  be  scattered  far  from  those  who  fear  the  Lord. 
(5)  By  flaming  fire  will  be  destroyed  the  slanderous  tongue  from 


1  Greek  '  caused  to  rise  '.     Corr.  the  Yodh  of  the  Syriac  note  to  Nun. 

2  The  Greek  of  this  passage  is  obscure. 

3  The  translator  reads  inn\r)<rai  f°r  fV7r/^°r<M' 

4  Cod.  an.     '  °  Lit.  whispering. 


liv-lv]  PSALMS   OF   SOLOMON  425 

among  the  upright,  and  their  houses.  (6)  And  the  Lord  shall 
preserve1  the  soul  of  the  righteous  which  hateth  them  that  are 
evil ;  and  the  Lord  shall  establish  the  man  that  makes  peace  in 
the  house  of  the  Lord.  (7)  Of  the  Lord  is  salvation  upon  Israel 
his  servant  for  ever :  (8)  and  the  sinners  shall  perish  together 
from  before  the  face  of  the  Lord :  and  the  saints  of  the  Lord 
shall  inherit  the  promises  of  the  Lord. 


PSALM    LV  (LVI) 

Psalms  of  Solomon  XIII. 

(1)  The  right  hand  of  the  Lord  has  covered  us :  the  right  hand 
of  the  Lord  has  spared  us  :  (2)  and  the  arm  of  the  Lord  has  saved 
me  from  the  spear  that  goes  through  and  through,  and  from  famine, 
and  the  pestilence  of  sinners.  (3)  Evil  beasts  ran  upon  them  :  and 
with  their  teeth  were  tearing  their  flesh ;  and  with  their  jaw-teeth  2 
were  breaking  their  bones.  But  us  the  Lord  has  delivered  from  all 
these  things.  (4)  But  the  wicked  man  was  troubled  on  account  of 
his  transgressions :  lest  he  should  be  broken  along  with  the  evil 
men.  (5)  Because  dread  is  the  fall  of  the  wicked  :  but  the  righteous 
not  one  of  these  things  shall  touch.  (6)  For  one  cannot  compare 
the  chastening  of  the  righteous  who  have  (sinned)  ignorantly  with 
the  overthrow  of  evil  men  who  (sin)  knowingly.  (7)  For  the 
righteous  is  chastened  3  so  that  the  sinner  will  not  exult  over  him. 
(8)  For  the  Righteous  One  will  admonish  him  as  His  beloved  son  ; 

1  Better  '  and  may  the  Lord  preserve ',  as  in  Greek,  and  so  in  the  fol- 
lowing verses. 

2  Or,  molars  :  rendering  the  Greek  fivXms  literally. 

3  Or  perhaps :  'for  the  righteous  is  chastened  secretly '  (see  Ryle  and  James, 
ad  loc). 


426  PSALMS    OF   SOLOMON  [LV-LVI 

and  his  chastening  is  like  that  of  the  first-born  :  (9)  for  the  Righteous 
One  will  spare  His  saints,  and  their  transgressions  He  will  blot 
out  by  (His)  chastisements.  For  the  life  of  the  righteous  is  for 
ever.  (10)  But  sinners  shall  be  cast  into  perdition:  and  their 
memorial  shall  no  more  be  found.  (11)  But  upon  the  saints 
shall  be  the  mercy  of  the  Lord.  He  will  cherish  all  them  that 
fear   Him. 


PSALM    LVI  (LVII) 
Psalms  of  Solomon  XI I '. 

(1)  The  Lord  is  faithful  to  them  that  love  Him  in  truth  :  even 
to  them  that  abide  His  chastening :  to  them  who  walk  in  righteous- 
ness in  His  commandments :  He  has  given  us  the  law  for  our  life : 

(2)  and  the  saints  of  the  Lord  shall  live  thereby  for  ever.  The 
Paradise  of  the  Lord  are  the  trees  of  life  which  are   His  saints  : 

(3)  and  the  planting  of  them  is  sure  for  ever ;  nor  shall  they  be 
rooted  up  all  the  days  of  the  heaven.  For  the  portion  of  the  Lord 
and  His  inheritance  is  Israel.  (4)  Not  so  are  the  sinners  and  evil 
men,  those  who  have  loved  a  day  in  the  participation  of  sin :  for  in 
the  brevity  of  wickedness  is  th,eir  lust ;  (5)  and  they  did  not 
remember  God  ;  that  the  ways  of  the  children  of  men  are  open 
before  Him  continually  :  and  the  secrets  !  of  the  heart  He  knoweth 
before  they  come  to  pass :  (6)  therefore  their  inheritance  is  Sheol 
and  Perdition  and  Darkness :  and  in  the  day  of  mercy  upon  the 
righteous  they  shall  not  be  found.  (7)  For  the  saints  of  the  Lord 
shall  inherit  life  in  delight. 

1  Lit.  secret  places. 


lvii]  PSALMS   OF   SOLOMON  427 

PSALM   LVII  (LVIII) 

Psalms  of  Solomon  XV. 

(1)  In  my  affliction  I  called  on  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  for 
my  help   I   called  on  the  God    of  Jacob :    and  I   was   delivered. 

(2)  Because   thou,  O   God,  art  the  hope  and  refuge  of  the  poor. 

(3)  For  who  that  is  strong  will  praise  thee  in  truth  ?  (4)  And 
what  is  the  strength  of  a  man  except  that  he  should  praise  thy 
name  ?  (5)  A  new  song  with  the  voice  in  the  delight  of  the  heart : 
the  fruit  of  the  lips  with  the  instrument  attuned  to  the  tongue :  the 
firstfruits  of  the  lips  from  a  heart  that  is  holy  and  just.  (6)  No  one 
that  doeth  these  things  shall  ever  be  moved  by  evil :  the  flame  of 
fire  and  the  anger  of  sinners  shall  not  touch  them,  (7)  when  it 
goeth  forth  against  the  sinners  from  before  the  Most  High  to  root 
up  all  the4 roots  of  sinners:  (8)  because  the  sign  of  the  Lord  is 
upon  the  righteous  for  their  salvation  :  death  and  the  spear  and 
famine  shall  remove  from  the  righteous  ;  (9)  for  they  shall  flee 
from  them  as  death  flees  from  life :  but  they  shall  pursue  after  the 
wicked  and  catch  them  :  and  those  who  do  evil  shall  not  escape 
from  the  judgement  of  the  Lord  :  for  they  will  get  before  them 
like  skilled  warriors :  (10)  for  the  sign  of  destruction  is  upon 
their  faces,  (11)  and  the  inheritance  of  sinners  is  Perdition  and 
Darkness  :  and  their  iniquity  shall  pursue  them  down  to  the  lower 
hell.  (12)  And  their  inheritance  shall  not  be  found  by  their 
children  :  (13)  for  their  sins  shall  lay  waste  the  houses  of  sinners  : 
and  sinners  shall  perish  for  ever  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  judge- 
ment, (14)  When  God  shall  visit  the  earth  in  His  judgement. 
(15)  And  upon  those  who  fear  the  Lord  there  shall  be  mercy 
therein ;  and  they  shall  live  in  the  compassion  of  our  God  :  and 
sinners  shall  perish  unto  eternity.1 

1  Lit.  the  time  of  eternity. 


438  PSALMS   OF   SOLOMON  [LVIII 

PSALM    LVIII  (LIX) 

Psalms  of  Solomon  XVI. 

(i)  When  my  soul  declined  a  little  from  the  Lord,  I  had  almost 
been  in  the  lapses  of  the  sleep  of  destruction  ;  and  when  I  was  far 
away  from  the  Lord,  (2)  my  soul  had  almost  been  poured  out  to 
death,  hard  by  the  gates  of  Sheol  along  with  the  sinners  :  (3)  and 
when  my  soul  separated  from  the  God  of  Israel,  unless  the  Lord 
had  helped  me  by  His  mercy  which  is  for  ever  !  (4)  He  pricked 
me,  like  the  spur  of  the  horse,  according  to  His  watchfulness :  my 
Saviour  and  Helper  at  all  times  is  He:  He  saved  me.  (5)  I  will 
praise  thee,  O  God,  because  thou  hast  helped  me  with  thy  salva- 
tion :  and  hast  not  reckoned  me  with  sinners  for  destruction. 
(6)  Withdraw  not  thy  mercy  from  me,  O  God  :  and  let  not  the 
remembrance  of  thee  remove  from  my  heart  until  I  die  :  (7)  save 
me,  O  God,  from  the  wicked  and  sinful  woman  1  and  from  every 
wicked  woman  who  sets  traps  for  the  simple  :  (8)  and  let  not  the 
beauty  of  a  wicked  woman  cause  me  to  slip,  nor  any  sin  that  is, 
(9)  and  establish  the  work  of  my  hands  before  thee  :  and  preserve 
my  walk  in  the  remembrance  of  thee.  (10)  My  tongue  and  my 
lips  in  words  of  truth  do  thou  establish  ;  anger  and  unreasonable 
passion,  (11)  grumbling  and  little-mindedness  in  affliction  do  thou 
remove  from  me :  for  if  I  shall  sin  when  thou  hast  chastened  me, 
it  is  for  repentance:  (12)  but  by  the  good  will  of  joy  establish 
my  soul  :  and  when  thou  shalt  strengthen  my  soul  whatever  has 
been  given  shall  be  sufficient  for  me  :  (13)  for  if  thou  strengthenest 
me  not,   who  can  endure   thy   chastening  in   poverty?      (14)    For 

1  Cod.  from  wicked  sin  (as  in  Greek). 


lviii-lix]  PSALMS   OF   SOLOMON  429 

a  soul  shall  be  reproved  l  in  his  flesh  and  by  the  affliction  of  his 
poverty:  (15)  and  when  a  righteous  man  shall  endure  these 
things,  mercy  shall  be  upon  him  from  the  Lord. 


PSALM    LIX  (LX) 
Psalms  of  Solomon  XVII. 

(1)  O  Lord,  thou  art  our  King,  now  and  for  ever:  for  in  thee, 
O  God,  our  soul  shall  glory.  (2)  And  what  is  the  life  of  man  upon 
earth  ?  For  according  to  his  time,  so  also  is  his  hope.  (3)  But  we 
hope  on  God  our  Saviour  :  for  the  empire  of  our  God  is  for 
ever  according  to  mercy :  (4)  and  the  kingdom  of  our  God  is  over 
the  Gentiles  for  ever  with  judgement.  (5)  Thou,  O  Lord,  didst 
choose  David  for  king  over  Israel :  and  thou  didst  swear  to  him 
concerning  his  seed,  that  their  kingdom  should  not  be  removed 
from  before  thee.  (6)  But  for  our  sins  sinners  rose  up  against  us  : 
and  they  set  upon  us  and  removed  me  far  away :  those  to  whom 
thou  gavest  no  command  have  taken  by  violence,  (7)  and  have 
not  glorified  thy  honourable  Name  with  praises  :  and  they  have  set 
up  a  kingdom  instead  of  that  which  was  their  pride.  (8)  They  laid 
waste  the  throne  of  David  in  the  exultation  of  their  change.2  But 
thou  wilt  overthrow  them  and  wilt  remove  their  seed  from  the  earth  : 
(9)  even  when  there  shall  rise  up  against  them  a  man  that  was 
a  stranger  to  our  race.  (10)  According  to  their  sins  thou  wilt 
reward  them,  O  God  :  and  it  shall  befall  them  according  to  their 
works.  (11)  And  thou  wilt  not  have  mercy  upon  them,  O  God. 
Uproot  their  seed,  and  do  not  leave  a  single  one  of  them. 
(12)    The  Lord  is  faithful  in  all  His  judgements  which   He  has 

1  Or  {see  note  to  text),  thou  wilt  reprove.  2  Reading  dXXdy/xaror. 


430  PSALMS    OF   SOLOMON  [i.ix 

done  upon  the  earth.     (13)  The  wicked   man  has  devastated  our 
land,  so  that  there  is  none  to  dwell  therein.     They  have  destroyed 
both   young  and   old   and   their   children    together.      (14)    In    the 
splendour  of  his  wrath  he  sent  them   away  to  the  West,  and  the 
princes  of  the   land   to    mockery    without    sparing.       (15)     In    his 
foreign  way  the  enemy  exults,  and  his  heart  is  alien  from  our  God. 
(16)  And  Jerusalem  did  all  things  according  as  the  Gentiles  did 
in  their  cities  to  their  gods.    (17)  And  the  children  of  the  Covenant 
took  hold  of  them  in  the  midst  of  the  mingled  Gentiles  :  and  there 
was  none  amongst  them  that  did  mercy  and  truth  in  Jerusalem. 
(18)  They  that  love  the  assemblies  of  the  saints  fled  away  from 
them :  and  they  fled  like  sparrows  who  fly  from  their  nests  :     (19)  and 
they  were  wandering  in  the  wilderness,  in  order  to  save  their  souls 
from  evil :  and  precious  in  their  eyes  was  the  sojourning  with  them 
of  any  soul  that  was  saved  from  them.     (20)  Over  all  the  earth 
they  were  scattered  by  the  wicked.     Therefore  were  the  heavens 
restrained  that   they   should  not  send  down  rain  upon  the  earth, 
(21)  and  the  everlasting  fountains  were  restrained,  both  (from)  the 
abysses,  and  from  the  lofty  mountains :    because  there  was  none 
among  them  who  did  righteousness  and  judgement :  from  their  ruler 
to  the  lowest  of  them  they  were  in  every  sin.    (22)  The  king  was  in 
transgression  and  the  judge  in  provocation  of  wrath,  and  the  people 
in  sin.     (23)  Behold,  O  Lord,  and  raise  up  to  them  their  King,  the 
Son  of  David,  according  to  the  time  which  thou  seest.  O  God  :  and 
let  Him   reign  over   Israel  thy  servant,     (24)  and  strengthen  him 
with  power  that  He  may  humble  the  sinful  rulers:     (25)  and  may 
purify  Jerusalem   from    the    Gentiles    who    trample   her   down    to 
destruction,    (26)  so  as  to  destroy  the  wicked  from  thy  inheritance : 
and  to  break  their  pride  like  the  potter's  vessel :  to  break  with 


lix'J  PSALMS    OF   SOLOMON  431 

a  rod  of  iron  all  their  firmness :  (27)  to  destroy  the  sinful 
Gentiles  with  the  word  of  His  mouth  :  at  His  rebuke  the  Gentiles 
shall  flee  from  before  His  face  :  and  to  reprimand  sinners  by  the  word 
of  their  heart :  (28)  that  He  may  gather  together  a  holy  people 
who  shall  exult  in  righteousness :  and  may  judge  the  tribes  of 
the  people  whom  the  Lord  His  God  sanctifies :  (29)  and  He 
shall  not  any  more  suffer  sin  to  lodge  among  them  ;  and  no  more 
shall  dwell  amongst  them  the  man  that  knoweth  evil.  (30)  For 
He  knoweth  them  that  they  are  all  the  children  of  God,  and  He 
shall  divide  them  according  to  their  tribes  upon  the  earth  :  (31)  and 
the  sojourner  and  the  foreigner  shall  not  dwell  with  them  :  for  He 
will  judge  the  Gentiles  and  the  peoples  in  the  wisdom  of  His 
righteousness:  (32)  and  He  shall  possess  a  people  from  among 
the  Gentiles  :  that  it  may  serve  Him  under  His  yoke :  and  may 
praise  the  Lord  openly  over  all  the  earth :  (^^)  and  He  shall 
purify  Jerusalem  in  holiness,  as  it  was  of  old  time :  (34)  that  the 
Gentiles  may  come  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  to  behold  His  glory  : 
bringing  gifts  to  her  sons  who  were  scattered  from  her,  (35)  and 
to  see  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  wherewith  He  hath  glorified  her : 
and    He,    the    righteous   King,    taught    of    God,    is    over    them : 

(36)  and  there  is  no  wicked  person  in  His  days  amongst  them, 
because  they  are  all  righteous  and  their  King  is  the  Lord  Messiah  : 

(37)  for  He  will  not  trust  on  horse  nor  on  his  rider ;  nor  on 
the  bow :  nor  shall  He  multiply  to  himself  gold  and  silver  for 
war :  nor  shall  He  rely  on  a  multitude  in  the  day  of  war :  (38)  for 
the  Lord  is  His  King:  His  hope  and  His  strength  are  in  the  hope 
of  God,  and  He  will  have  compassion  (over  all  .  .  .)  (39)  for  He 
will  smite  the  earth  with  the  word  of  His  mouth  for  ever :  (40)  and 
He  will  bless  the  people  of  the  Lord  in  .  .  .  and  delight     (41)  and 


432  PSALMS   OF   SOLOMON  [lix 

lie  is  pure  .  .  .  the  head  of  a  great  people,  to  (confute)  the  rulers 
and  to  destroy  sinners  by  His  word  :  (42)  and  He  shall  not  be 
weakened  in  His  days  from  His  God  :  because  (God  hath  made 
Him  powerful  by  His  Holy  Spirit)  and  wise  in  the  counsel  of 
the  prudent  with  strength  and  righteousness.  (43)  and  with  the 
blessing  of  the  Lord  in  Him,  and  (He  shall  not  be  weak).  (His  hope) 
is  on  his  Lord  and  who  shall  stand  against  Him  ?  (44)  For  He  is 
strengthened  in  His  deeds,  and  is  mighty  in  the  fear  of  His  God  : 
(45)  feeding  the  flock  of  the  Lord  in  righteousness  and  in  faith; 
and  He  will  not  suffer  that  any  one  ...  in  His  pasturage:  (46)  He 
will  gather  them  with  equality :  and  pride  shall  not  be  found  in 
them  that  it  should  rule  over  them.  (47)  This  is  the  beauty  of  the 
King  of  Israel  ...  to  raise  him  up  over  the  house  of  Israel, 
tp  chasten  him.  (48)  His  words  are  more  choice  than  gold,  and 
they  are  precious  in  the  synagogues  to  distinguish  .  .  .  from  a  holy 
pcople.  (49)  His  words  are  like  the  words  of  the  saints  among 
a  holy  people :  (50)  blessed  are  they  who  are  in  those  days  to 
see  the  good  men  of  Israel  in  the  congregation  of  the  people  (which 
God  will  make),  (51)  to  hasten  His  mercies  upon  Israel,  and  to 
redeem  us  from  the  pollutions  of  the  filthy  Gentiles :  for  the  Lord 
is  our  King  for  ever. 


PSALMS   OF   SOLOMON  433 

PSALM    LX 
Psalms  of  Solomon  XVIII. 

(1)  O  Lord,  thy  mercy  is  upon  the  work  of  thy  hands  for  ever : 
(2)  and  thy  grace  with  a  rich  gift  upon  Israel.  (3)  Thine  eyes 
behold  everything  and  there  is  nothing  hid  from  them.  And  thine 
ears  hear  the  hope  of  ...  .  Thy  judgements  are  upon  all  the 
earth  in  mercy :  and  thy  love  is  upon  the  seed  of  Israel  the  son  of 
Abraham.  (Thy  chastisement  is)  upon  us  as  upon  an  only  first- 
born son  :  to  turn  away  the  soul  .  ,.  .  .  which  is  not  instructed 
and  not  ....  (May  God  purify)  Israel  for  the  day  in  blessing  for 
His    mercy  .... 

Caetera  desunt. 


A   NEW  FRAGMENT  OF  THE   PSALMS   OF  SOLOMON 

IN    SYRIAC 

The  first  six  verses  of  the  third  Psalm  are  quoted  on  the  margin  of 
a  manuscript  of  the  Hymns  of  Severus,  and  it  has  been  suggested  that  they 
represent  a  different  translation  of  the  Psalm  from  that  which  occurs  in 
our  two  manuscripts.  The  quotation  is  as  follows  (see  Hymns  of  Severus, 
ed.  Brooks,  Patr.  Or.  vii.  726,  727)  : 

.Li.>&\    Jk*t(    L^iJi^s    JJo    ua^j     -fco/    ka-^*>?    JajaX     .[Jfcoaa**?] 
J»oj*>Joo    oc*    »a^?   ^■&-':0    -o*^-?    R«n*-bw    ;*.V.iUo    .  ;.:*>)    )i«*    Jk«.a^*.L 
J .  10  . .  o  )l^-?o^io    .^J^s  U.^aX    yo  .  .  ,1  UufJ    :  \s^  \^£±  ^so  Jo^U 

Ici^.  ^j^ja.z>  CH.L0.  Ui-*>  ^o  )?>fcoo  *fl  k*i!  ou^j  i.^iLU  .o»^»;  U-* 

11  F  f 


434  PSALMS    OF   SOLOMON 

)oC^/  o^  pAf   )  •  .  »Uo  ^aj    .Ljv>\   j5?io  U-*>  'VfiUf  .00.  L^o 

Here  then  we  have,  as  the  variations  from  our  text  show,  either  a 
revision  of  that  text,  or,  more  probably,  as  Prof.  Nau  suggests,  an  indepen- 
dent rendering  of  the  Greek.  As  the  next  quotation  is  from  the  Wisdom 
of  Solomon,  and  is  introduced  by  the  formula  '  Again  from  the  same '  (fern. ), 
it  is  probable  that  the  extract  from  the  Psalms  of  Solomon  was  incorrectly 
referred  to  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon. 


CONCORDANCE  TO  THE  ODES 
OF  SOLOMON1 


W  1,  1,  11;  8,  23;   9,  5;   10,  4; 

m,  1 ;  19,  2,  4;  23,  18,  22; 
31,  5;  41,  9, 13. 
JUs/  (~*-»)  31,  13. 

•*1  5>  m;  9, 7;  24,  7,  9;  28>  l6; 
31,  2;  33,  9;  42, 10. 

po/  6,  3;  22,  5;  24,  10;  28,  18; 

33,  2. 
)Jjz?  28,  9. 
C*=7  28,  5;  33,  2,  8. 
Jj^/   25,  5. 

Jl*v/  23>  5,  7,  10,  *7,  21. 
Ju?/    16,  9. 

k'?/  9»  1;   !5,  4- 

0/  8,  19;   26,  8,  9,  10. 
^W   7,  18;  8,  21;  15,6;  17,  5,  11; 
23,  10;   28,  13;  38,  4,  7,  15. 

W  28, 16. 

*-/  4,  8;  5,  6;  6,  15;   7,  16;   17, 

8,  10;   18,  7  ;  28,  15;  42,  3. 
»~ol^*7  8,  21. 
j^L-/    17,  n. 
Jfc-i~?  6,  4;   11,  4. 
Jjt~/  4,  1  ;  4i,  8. 


Tl  4,  14;  5,  12;  6,  1;  7,  1,  6  (bis), 
23  (bis);  11,  12,  13,  22;  12, 
2,  5,  7;  M,  1,  9;  I5,  7  (bis); 

17,  6;  18,  11  (bis),  12;  19,  10; 
20,  3  (thrice);  23,  5,  6;  24,  5  ; 
25,  5;  26,  13;  28,  1,  9,  13; 
29,  2  (bis),  3  (bis),  10;  31,  11; 
33,4  5  35,5,'  36>  5  (bis),  7  (bis 
inH);  38,  1  ;  39,  10;  40,  1,  2; 
42,  8,  9,  16. 

?  tj*/  (causative)  18,  2  ;  22,  4;  24,  9; 

31,  Io;  33,  *• 
U-/   23,  10. 

?  U-/  3,  5;   "»  5,  !6;  34,  1,  3- 
Ua-/   13,  2- 
U^i  20,  7. 
JjlX-/   11,  19,  21. 
9  ^*W  (34  times). 

fc-/  7,  3,  ",  17;  8,  18,  20;  9,  4 
(bis),  8;  11,  18;  12,  5,  7,  9; 
13,  2;   14,   1  ;  16,  4;  17,  10; 

18,  8;  19,  2;  20,  1;  21,  4 
(H);  26,  13;  28,  7;  33,  11; 
36,  3;  39,  Io;  40,  6;  42, 
6,  20. 


1  We  have  taken  no  account  of  suffixes  with  substantives  and  transitive  verbs,  but  the 
plural  form  of  substantives  and  the  primitive  and  derived  forms  of  verbs  have  been  noted. 
The  pronouns  oo» ,  **_«,  o©» ,  wot,  in  their  singular  form,  the  relative  »,  and  the 
auxiliary  verb  }oo»  have  been  omitted.  Present  and  past  participles  when  declined  are 
frequently  included  in  the  root  of  the  verb  when  that  root  is  expressed. 

F  f  2 


436 


ODES    OF   SOLOMON 


fc~/  JJ  or  U*^  3,  6;   4,   2,   n  ;  11, 

23;     16,    18;     17,    3;     18,    8; 

21,    4    (B);     24,    9;     34,    1,    3, 

5  (bis);   38,  i4b- 
)oot  fc-/    12.   9 ;    16,    18 ;     17,     10; 

23,    9.    12;    24,    7,    8;    31,    8  ; 

38,  4;   42    12. 
L<W   7.  4  (bis);   28,  t6  (H). 
»  IjJls/    15,  1  ;    16,  1. 
J*~o/    10,  5;   23,  17;   41,  5. 
)fcj^.ao)oo    24,  6. 
Uxaioi    17,  6. 
I*»?    16,  1. 

W  3.4;  4,9;  »,8;  12,6;  18,8, 
10  (H);  31,  11;  33,  5,  12; 
34,  5;  39,  io- 

Ki  JV   23.  1,  2,  3. 

a^    3.  3- 

JoCik/  4.  14 ;  9'  5 ;  IO>  4 ;  ",  24; 

16,  17;  23,  21  ;  33,  10;  36,  3; 
42,  15- 
«oC^/  4.  ! ;  ")  9 ;  J7,  j  ;  i8-  8; 

25,  1  ;  40.  1. 

^r  16, 1. 

j±}  20,  5  (bis). 

^11/  31.6. 

lo^W  21.4. 

|je?  19, 7;  2y, 2;  35, 5- 

Jfcoc/    29,   II. 
ILojLSOOf      l6,    2. 

JLojl*>c7    6,  9. 

jjo/  8,  9;   11,   18;  33,  5;  38,  10; 

42,    15- 

\!  5,  13.  m;  23,  I,  2.  3. 
|j/  (,43  times). 


voj/  3,  2;  5,  5;  6,  18;  7,  1  2  (bis); 
8,  15  (bis);  12,  10 ;  14,  1  : 
'7-  11,13:  i9>5-  22,4,8(bis); 
33>  J3;  38-  i°;  39,  4-  9  (M  \ 
42,  20. 

^   4-13:   6>  r5;    r3>   1 ;    16,  2  ; 

39,  "• 
jul  4,  1  ;   17,  1 1. 
fcj/  (9  times). 
JLfco/  40.  1. 
;j»/    17,11  (bis). 
Ji*W   17,  11  (H). 

)»cu»/    21,2;   22,  4;    25,  i  ;   42,  K). 
&l   3,   5.  8  ;    9,    2;    12,   5;    16.    1  : 

18,  12  ;  28,  3(B) ;   29,  2  ;  40,  1. 

4(B);  42.  15- 
D  W   6,  9;   8,  9;   12,  6;    18,  5,  6,  9. 

10;   20,  3  (bis),  6  (bis)  ;  21,  4 

(bis);    28,   4h,    16;    33,  9;    34. 

1,  2;   38,  14;  39,  12. 
^3/    42,  1  o  (bis). 

1&1  6, 10;  s,  14:  11, 13;  13. 2. 3 ; 

15,  2  ;  16,  16;   17,  4;  21,  6,  9; 

36,  3;  40,  4  (H);  41,  6. 
))*/  8,  10. 
U»o/   7.  2,  13;   11,  3  (bis);   12,  6  ; 

17,  8;  22,  7,  11  ;   23,  15;   24. 

13;  34,  1 ;  38,  7 ;  39.  7,  13; 

41,  it  ;   42,  2. 
JU~»o<>   3,  10;   33,  7,  8,  13. 
«y»o/    7,  I3- 
Jji.*/   6,  10,  1 1  ;   7,   20  ;    11,   12,    13. 

18,  21  ;    15,    10;    16,    10,    16 ; 

33,  3- 

W  38,  6. 


CONCORDANCE 


437 


Jl^»oJJ  7,  17. 

\lf  23,  12;  27,  2  (H);  29,  7;  39, 

7  (bis);  42,  1. 
M*  5,  4;  6,  10;  7,  21  ;  10,  3;   18, 

12;  20,  7;  23,  11,  16;  30,  2,  6; 

33,  6;  37,  3- 
-W6,  8;   7,   13;   8,  2;    16,  16; 

22,  11;   38,  1;   39,  1. 
Jk-Uao  6,  17;  7,  17. 
)»!/  4,   1  (bis);   ii,  18,  23;   18,  7; 

22,  6;  34,  2. 
JUiilV   4,  2;   23,  17. 

o»=>  (20  times). 

o»s  8,  11. 

600  8,  22  (bis). 

«o»r»  24,  7. 

.ooo  (9  times). 

w^  (9  times). 

y*  14,  7 ;  22,  7. 

V»a=>   33,  8,  10. 

U*s   M,  5;   22,  7;  33.  4- 

fc-»U*»   5.  9- 

)Lo»*s   11,  21. 

JfcJLs  18,  7. 

•^   12,  10. 

>Is   10,  5;  22,  3, 

Lc»s   8,  17;   9,  7;   29,  1. 

JU»   31,  9- 

'^s  4,   4;    16,    13;    23,    19  (B); 

42,  14. 
>M^l(?  x5>  9;  23,  19  (H). 
t^=>  11,  23. 
U^j>   19,  6. 
J^*s  22,  12  ;  42,  8. 
>^:»17  28,  9. 


28.  2. 


Uo     22,    12. 

««%->!/   11,  14  ;   20,  8  ; 

Uw"  ii,  15;  3°,  4- 

)lov^.ffl->  7,3;  11,21;  14,3;  17,7; 

19,  1,  11;    20,  9;    25,  12  ;    42, 
16. 

Uusod   11,  16,  24. 
w"  39,  1. 
Jims   8,  9;   20,  3. 
^IkJifloo    20,  3. 

Ju^o  7,   10;    8,   22;    15,   1;    19,  9; 

20,  6;   24,  5;  26,  13;   28,  17, 

18;  33,  13;  38,  J4;  42,  5- 
u^si/   19,  3. 
)io_S>o   17,  12. 
^-..Nxa   29,  10. 
los^s^  22,  3;   29,  5. 
Juu?  >^3  (B  )>Lj\n^)  22,  3. 
jj*   16,  8. 
)i*js  4,  3- 
♦2^   16,  18. 
JiP  (s.)  3,  7  (bis);    7,    15;    14,   1; 

19,  2,  7;    23,  18,  22;  29,  11; 

36, 3;  41,  J3;  42, 15- 

JCo»  31,  4;  40,  1 ;  41,  2;  42,  20. 

Uj/   i^  12,  12;  36,  3. 

Uj/  Jjjs  3,  10:  6,  9;  33,  6. 

JfcJb  33,  6. 

J;s  (v.)  7,  8,  9. 

J^js  7,  24;  16,  12. 

Jk-s»  4,  7;  16,  13- 

ti^  22,  6  (H);  28,  4  (bis);  38,  r7- 

Jfcoias    17,  14,*  38,  2°- 

Jjsis   39,  4. 

)fcv^ofc^    19,  6,  7;   33,  5- 


43« 


ODES   OF   SOLOMON 


»k-s   17.  5  ;  23,  10;   28,  18;  39,  13. 
U~»  »Ur>  39,  1. 


22,  8. 
4.    8  ;      8,    20;     23,    2,    3; 

33.  I3- 
^^,8,  20. 

]^-=^,  *9i lo;  41,  !2. 

JtrJ^  29,  8. 
Ji^^23,  ii,  13,  16. 

f*4»  J7.  9- 
A^  19,  6. 

f^.28,  17(H). 
♦^  11,  2. 

iy^i  11,  1. 

J1-'0^  Mi  3- 

f^  l8>  r4- 
i*^  (64  times). 

il^4»3i,  11;  39,  n. 

fc^  38,  2. 

Jl^  4,  12,  14;   11,  2. 

*^J7  23,  17;  34,  6. 

li*^^  33-  5- 

J-**^  42,  9- 

Uu^  41.  8. 

Jm^  16,  2  ;  36,  7  ;  40,  2  (bis). 

Jfc-*^36,  7- 

U^  26,  4. 

&^  24,  4;   28,  1  (bis). 

)»i^  16,  1. 

J'k*  23>  6- 
U=>^  26,  6. 
U»i^,  22,  9. 
^^  6,  8. 
39-  9- 


)k»*<^>?      7,     IO. 

►^?    17.  5;   29,  7;  38,  1. 
Jois^JO    14,  4. 
Jlcu^j-ao   23,  12;   36,  8. 
)k-»ar>?   30,  4;   40,  1. 
U»?   4,  10;   30,  4;   40,  1. 

"^»    l6>  l8- 

)Laik^?   3.  10;    18,  6,  8. 

.o»>   20,  9  ;  40,  30  (B). 

«o»L/  42,  1 1. 

U?  or  U-?  33,  11  ;  35,  3. 

j?   28,  2  (bis);  40.  4;  41,  7. 

L»?  8,    1;    21,    9;    23,    4;    40,    4; 

41,  7- 

^?  5,  10,  11;  23,  8;  24,3;  25,  11. 
]L>>  40,  5. 

o^-?   7-  I2;    12,  4;   26,  1,  2,  5,  6,  7. 
yOoCik-?   24,  6. 

w.\.>  8,  14,   16  (bis),  18,   20  (bis); 
17,  9,   12,   14;   25,  2;    28.  10; 

42,  20. 

■*\.»    11,21  (bis),  22. 
^»9  (23  times). 

)Lcu3»     20,   4. 
JJ9?i/    41,   9. 

Jjioo?    11,  22  ;   28,  17,  18. 

«^?l/   39,  6. 

Joo»  (s.)   20,  6. 

)«-»?   9»  9- 

~ac?l/  38,  11. 

Jio-ae?   7,  4;    17,  4;    18,  12;  34.  4. 

^>l?   28,  8;  41,  8. 

]luo?l  26,  11. 

m*j(   21,8;  41,  14. 

Uj?    12,  7. 


CONCORDANCE 


439 


U*j+x>  26,  5. 

^±.1  6,  1 1  ;   23,  20. 

kj?  38,  3  (B). 

Jcbw»»   42,  8. 

Jj^>»  21,  1;  38,  3  (H) 

Jo.   11,  20;   13,  1. 
w^p.1/  41,  6. 
)?o»   3,  10;    7,  2. 

bo?©»  3,  2;  6,  2,  16;  8,  16;  17,  15; 
18,    2;     21,    4;     26,    4;     40, 

3(B). 
r**o.   38,  14. 

JU-o.  6,  8. 

^io-.«   22,  7  ;   28,  3  ;   29,  6  ;  34,  6  ; 

42,  9- 
^sa-o.1/  6,  13. 

Uso_.c*.»   28,  3. 

ihe^o^c  4,  3;   ii,  22;    15,  10. 

)laiicu«  4,  5;    8     11;    16,    4;    39, 

5,  13;   41,  1;  42,  19  (B). 
Vao  6,  13;   8,  19;  39,  8;  41,  5. 
Joao.  6,  2,  4;    7,  1  ;    12,  5,  7;    14, 

1,9;  16,  1  ;  28,  1  ;  29,  2;  31,5; 

36,  5;  40,  1,  2;  42,  8,  9. 
J^a^^o*  at  the  end  of  every  Ode. 
^o»  6,  6;  38,  10. 
^.o,  6,   1  ;    7,    14;    10,  6;    17,  4; 

18,  14;   20,  9;   23,  4;   33,  13; 

38>  5;  39.  6,  9. 
Jl^a^o.   12,  5;  31,  2. 
JWi^o.    17,  8;   39,  2. 

U    7,     IO;     12,     13;     16,    3;     28,    3; 
33.   7;    41,   2. 

OJO»    38,   IO. 


vo/«  4,  3;  6,  9,  13;  8,  3,  4,  5,  10, 

11,  12,  22;  9,  7;  11,  18;  12,  8; 

*9.  5;    20.    3;    23,   IO;    24,   Il'u 

14;   28,   13;  3i,  4,  6,  13;  33, 

12,  13;  38,8;  39,  5,  6,  7,  13; 
42,  3  (bis;  B  thrice),  5,  15. 

v«aj«  18,  12,  15;  23,  1,  2,  3;  38,  14. 
^jo»   24,  5. 

T3*  5. 7;  7.  6;  "j  21. 

^3o>/  8,  14;    11,  21. 

^»JL=»  8,  3  ;  see  ^»)  \as. 

*e?J   29,  5. 

jtWt   i7.  2;  25,  12;  31,  5. 

JIoa-?)   8,  5,  21;   9,  10;    20,  4;   25, 

10;  36»  7;  4i.  12. 
^»  7.  5- 
^^   23,  13. 
•**>U/  5,  12;  22,  10;  24,  3;  31, 

10 ;  35.  3;  39.  5- 
Jfc-i>o)  31,  11. 
b^o)  32,  3. 

Uj  9,  11. 

wo?j/   18,  6. 

Jlao>  9,  12;   18,  7;   29,  9. 

iiL^i   15,  2. 

i*»   7.  J7;   l6.  3;  24,  1;  41,  2. 

;_ao7  7,  22  (bis). 

jl^ttj   26,  2. 

Jl**so>   14,  7  ;  26,  3,  8 ;  36,  2  ;  40,  3. 

J»CU»JlSS     l6,    I. 

Jiia-aojoo   7,  17,  22. 

Jj^OjOC     26,    12. 

^>/  7.  3- 

fc.J3»j/     12,    IO. 


44© 

>*.♦)   17.  13. 

U>»)  22,  5;  31,  13, 

ck-/r3,  2,  5;  19,  11  ;  41,  16;  42,  4. 
.p>-  8.  22  ;  31,  11. 


ODES    OF   SOLOMON 


|^ala«»  8,  22. 

|oo~   6,  2  ;    7,  19  :   8,  1,  13;    II,  2; 

12,    12;    14,   6;    16,    2,   3;    17, 

12;   18,   1;   23,  3;   40,  4;  41, 

2,  6;   42,  7,  9. 
>^^I.   19,  7;    22,7;    24.8;    28,  14; 

33.  2;   38,  9  (B  bis),   11,  14; 

39,  3- 
>?^x-l/   7,  21  ;   15,  9  ;  31,1  ;  33,  9  ; 

38,  9  (H  bis);  39,  10,  12. 
}Lw  15,8;  22,  11;  33,  1,  7;  38,9. 
HAL  Cf.  33,  1,  7  ;  38,  9- 
)Ll~  Jl  or  JJ?  7,  i i  ;  8,  23  ;  9,  4  ;  11, 

12  ;  15,  8;   17,  2;  21,  5;  22, 

11 ;  28,  5;  33,  12  ;  40,  6. 
)>iN-w^  38,  9. 
JL=>cu.   24,  8. 
^    12,   8    (bis),   9   (bis);     16,   17; 

28,  9;  36,  6;  41,  14. 

)«-*  4,  5- 

?o.»N->  23,  1  ;  38,  19. 

-*~  4i,  3  (B)- 

-~»  38>  x5- 

JLoy-  7.  1,  2,  17;  15,  1  (bis);  23,  1  ; 

31,  3>  6>  32,  i- 
>«.   28,  13. 
IJL  11,  11 ;  36,  5. 
L*»Lr  22,  11. 
)UL  17,  4;  ^:„  12. 
JU~  31,  3;  41,  16. 


Jl*a*.    36,  5. 

ucu.   7,   25  ;   8.   9  ;    12,   2  :    19.    1  1  : 

24.  13;  29,  7  ;   38,  7. 

Jfcs_.a»»L   19,  10. 

)*~  ;"•  4-  f»  :   7-  5-  19  J  <>•  "  ;   13-  '  : 
1.-.  3;   16,  9;   17,  6;    23,   10; 

25.3(H);  28,8;  38,9;  41,  8; 
42,  11,  17. 
wJu*L/   5,  14  ;   7.  12.  18  ;   11,  1  ;    16, 
8 ;    17.    10 ;     18,    11;     23,    18  ; 

25,  3(B);   28,9;  29.6;  30,6; 

33,  4;  41.  I3- 

joJL.    31,  1. 

islL  7, 18. 

Jk~.j«oo  13,  1. 
•a£~  23,  7;  39,  3. 

ji^cu.  29,  8. 

k~  (v-)  5, 3 ;  6- i8 ;  8-  i6- 22 :  x7- 

M;    34,    6;    38,    16:    cf.    41, 

3(H). 
U*  (a.)  3,  9;  ".  7;  i7-  1  ;  28,  7 

(II);  30.1;  41,  3(H);  42,5.14. 
U~(s.)  3-9;  6,  iS;  8,  2;  9,  4  (bis); 

10,  2.  6 ;    15,   10  ;   22.    10  ;   24. 

8;   26,  9;   28.  6,  7  (B);   31.  7  ; 

38.  3;   40,  6;   41.  3  :    42.  14. 
«a*L  31,  8. 
^Lll?  31,  9. 

U~oo    7,  3;   31.  s. 

S^*I.  16,  4. 
^I*.i/  9.  5;  10.  4. 

1L~  6.    17;    8,    18;    is.  2  :    23.    9; 

29.  9;   32,  3;   39-  '• 
JloikL-   4.  8 ;    16,  14. 
j.j^.N.1.   25,  10. 


CONCORDANCE 


441 


JIoj1^X»~  7,  25  ;  29,  8. 

y^  33. 8- 

pa~tf  3,  11;  5,  7;  38,  15. 
|lao «a ..  7,  8. 

jba^   7,  8 ;   24,  11;   28,  19. 
Jfcoaa-   38,  13. 
J1L  42,  13. 
c^^w   19,  2. 

y-\\+»l(     19,    2. 

Jj*^  4,    10;    8,    16;    19,    i,    3,   4; 

35.  5;  40.  1. 
U&^cu.    19.  5- 
U-  4o,  3  (B). 
jlcu^   19,  1;  28,  15;  38,8.     (Cf. 

translation.) 
U^cu*   24,  4. 

»°iN,»«»    4,  1  (bis);   17,  13;   28,  14. 
.aX-fcs*,/  4,  3. 
Jfcoa*.  7,  1. 
\jtt-  23,  14. 

U-SO*.     38,    12. 

t-  7.  5.  lo;  42,  15. 

Jllu.   7,  10  ;   21,  1,  2. 

^L.(pr.)  4,  9;   24,  18. 

I-QJ-*    17,  4. 

jUfla**    25,   IO. 

Urn**  9,  6. 

)ln»fy>.»    20,  9;    24,  14. 

I**™..    3,   6;   7,   3;    ii,   6;    15, 

17,  12;   20,  7;   23,  4. 
;m.»    24,  11. 
»m«*f    20,  6. 
Ji*m~  4,  9  (bis);   18,  4;   24,  9. 

)kJ^QOCU*     1,5,    IO. 

fj-   23,  13- 


ju»    42,    20. 
Of)L*    IO,  3. 


i~   4,  12;   7,  14;    14,  4;   26,  7. 
>i~   28,  4b. 

,2L-i-  39.  4- 
aa-i-.   12,  5. 

Ui-  7.  23. 

U-*    21,   4. 

■***.lf  5.  8;  9,  3;   18,  13. 
^■•>"*Jo  9.3;  I2.  4.  7;  J5.  5;  l6- 

8.  9.  !9."  J7.  5;  20,  2,  3;  21,5; 
23.  5.  l9",  24,  7;  34.  2;  41,  10. 

jKaJLoo    8,    18;    18,   13;    24,    10; 

29.  8;  34,  i- 

Jia~*~   42,  3. 

Jk.«*i~    14,  10. 

y*~(  5.  5- 

k>cuL~  11,   19;  15,  2;   16,  15,  16; 

18,  6;  21,  3;  31,  1 ;  42,  16. 
Jl»&—  4,  7  ;  23,  8,  9. 
[jIs*  38,  9;  42,  8. 
JbfcJ.  fc**s  42,  9. 

"*^  8.  15;   24,  7;  31,  2. 
>^i/  7,  20. 

U^Q^     24,    7. 

c^   8,  16. 

<**£i  8,  7- 
J     U,J  10,  3;  11,  20. 
Jfc^  28,  12. 
JIcl^   20,   9  (B);    25,   4   (B);    29, 

2  (H);  41,  5. 
)laa*^  4,  6  ;  5,  3  ;  6,  6  ;   7,  22,  25  ; 

9.  5;    IX.    *;    T5.    8;    20,   7, 
9  (H);    23.   2,  4;    24,   13;  25, 


44* 


ODES   OF   SOLOMON 


4  (H);  29,  2  (B),  5;  31,  3,  7; 

33.  1,  10;  34,  6;  37,  4;  41,  3. 
.00*00^   6,  13;  9,  8;    11,   18;    12, 

'3;  30-  7- 
U»a^  32,  1 ;  33>  «• 
^    n,  14;  35-  4(H?),  5;  36.  7- 
VS4  35)  4  (H  ?). 

^  35.  5- 

f^U  4-  6;   33,  12. 

J^ooX^    28,  10. 

Uo^U  10, 5. 

v*l   23-  J4- 

Ui^  7.  20;  28,  11. 

AJ^U    18,  13. 

U^   17,  5;  28,  15  (B);  31,  2;  38, 

4'  5- 
~±il  38,  11. 
U^jo  38,  10,  15. 
)ia^    15,  6;    18,   10,    14;    31,   2; 

38,  6,  8,  10. 

e^  ^s,  15(H). 

t^tf   35,  5- 
-^  42,  3  (B). 

LL   38,  20. 

JLcuU  7,  23;  12,  4;  15,  7;  16,  5, 

17;  18,  16;  29,  3. 
Vso/   1 1,  16. 

\m*~\.    6,    14. 

)rlm  6,  i(?);  22,  7;  38,  16. 

U,./    16,6;  23,  7;   27,  1,  2;  35,  7  ; 

37,  1  ;  42,  1  (bis). 
).-|o    12.  n  ;    15,  5. 
U^U   17.  4;   22,  5;   26,  3;   31,  4; 

33.  ";  38, 15- 


~=>  12.  13;  15.  8;  18,  1  ;  31,  7. 
-?ol  5.  1  ;   7,  25;   10,  5;   21,  7. 
-?o^/   4,  11  ;   31,  13. 

jJUVOiJO     12,   4. 

jkw»ol   26,  6. 
Ujocia.  31,  13. 

^«-  3.  3-  IO,  IJ  >'  4,  7  (bis);  7.  9." 
8,  9,  12  (bis),  14;  9,  7;  12,  6, 
10,  13;  16,  13;  17,  7;  18, 
9  (bis),  10  (bis),  1 3  (bis);  19,  5; 

23,  4(B),  10;  24,  14;  26,  12; 
3°,  6;  38,  7  ;  39-  8;  42, 
3  (B),  8. 

^?°/  7>  3;  33.  *3- 

^mI/   6,  6;   7,   16;   15,   10;   41,  2, 

15- 
V°^*/    6,    18;    7,    12;     12,    13; 

24,  14;  28,  16  (B). 

Jl^,-  6,  6;  7,  7  (bis),  13,  21  ;  8, 
8,  12;  11,  4;  12,  3;  15,  5; 
17,  !2;   23,  4  (bis);   34,  5. 

Jis^.-))  or  JJ?  7,21,23;  11,8;  18, 
11;   28,  13. 

|l^.jo  8,  20;   17,  7;   38,  21. 

)^«-*>  38,  13- 

oS-  4,  3,  9,  13  (bis);  6,  7,  17; 
7,  10,  12,  24 ;  9,  2,  10  ;  10,  2  ; 
15,  7;  I7>8,  12;  19,  5;  22,  4, 
10;  29,  2,  8;  31,  2(H),  5;  35, 
5;  37,  3,  4'  38,  12;  41,  4. 

^ko   9,  2  ;   14,  9. 

^fcoc    14,  9;   24,  9. 

oc**l7  6,  6,  12:  15,  10;  24,  6; 
3°,  6- 

)fc^o.a_»    11,  9;   15.  7;   35.  6. 


CONCORDANCE 
3;    16,   16; 


443 


U>cu    7,    23;    15,    1 

41,  4- 
JfcooiL.  4,  5. 
Ijo.   24,  1. 
Jjo.   28,  1. 
.i>-    19,  6,  7,  10  (bis),  ;    24,  5  ;   36, 

3  ;  4i,  10. 
Jio**X»   28,  16. 
J?a^T  41,  1. 
«a^-   7,  6;   13,  2. 

a\/  3.  Jo;  14,  7- 

Uu    16,  10;    18,  II. 

|iaaax»r   41,  6b. 

Uoo-   8,  6,  20  ;  14,  4  ;  18,  7  ;  19,  5 ; 

22,  7 ;  25,  2,  7,  9;  28,  15; 
38, 20. 

U.vi.i   26,  6. 

Uw.  11,  1, 19. 

Jk-OKa-ao    11,  19. 
)lvia-j-    38,  20. 

^  41,  5- 

J;«a*/   16,  20 ;   20,  10. 

)i*a*   9,  9. 

*^   21,  9. 

^jo/   29,  11. 

li-   23,  19;  31,  7,  12. 

^m.oi    14,  4. 

oW    16,  10. 
Jolol  24,  3. 

»fc-L/  18,  1. 

k»ia-   40,  6. 

^?i-fc-   35,  4  (bis). 

Vwjt*fcs-   21,  5. 

J»V-jc  4,  5  5   23,  9;  28,  19. 


ok>    19,  7. 

J.»U>   21,  4. 

}sls  9,  9;  22,  12;  31,  11. 

•»  5,9;  7,5>  9;  n,  10,  11  ;  19,5; 

21,  4,  7;  3°>  6;  31.  8>  9;  36> 
2,  3,  4;  37-  2;  38.  9,  M  (bis); 

r  39'  8- 
^o*5    20,  I. 

Jjo»o   20,  1. 

JS-KXO     l6,    II. 

Jo*o  7,  6. 

Jfc-;ao  30,  4;  40,  1. 

^ko  4,  5>  !5;  6,  10,  11;  7,  13;  11, 
20;  14,  8,  10;  15,  2,  10;  16, 
18;   17,  6,  7,  11;   18,  7  (bis); 

22,  6;  23,  13,  17;  24,  4;  26, 
4  (bis);  28,  19;  30,  2;  33,  2, 
4  5  34,  3;  35,  3;  38>  8;  4i,  1, 

_  5,  11. 

o^^  ^  6,  18;   28,  12. 

^iVs  13,  4;   14,  1,  4;  35»  2. 

p^sc^o  4,  14;  5,  13;  6,  3,  8,  10; 
7,  16;  11,  22,  23;  12,  13;  17, 
10;    22,   11,    12;    23,    13,    19; 

34,  5;  38,  7- 
Jk\s  38,  9,  11;  42,  8. 
^oi/   17,  1. 
JL^    5,   12;    9,   8,  9,   11;    17,   1; 

20,  7. 
lb  (v.)  6,  9  (bis);  18,  5;   25,  3- 

U*^>  7,  i- 
IlLNo  6,  9. 
IVso   28,  13. 
JkJ^oo   11,  2  ;  20,  5. 
Jlsso  42,  12. 


444 


ODES    OF   SOLOMON 


kaio  28,  5. 

r 

m  I  1      2  2       2. 

juoL/    10.  5  ;    :  7.  14  :    23,  1  7. 
lk.«.a±o  42,  14. 

JkfiOO     1().    1,    2. 
~mol/    24,  5;    25,  8. 
)l^..nf>ol   20,  6  ;   25,  8. 
Jjo»»oo   25,  9. 

L'Cm*0O      l8,    3. 

^1/   38,  14. 

r*°  22> 6  (B);  34-  3- 

Ue.s    1  9,  6  ;    28,  2. 
oio    23,  21  ;    26,  8. 
okoL/    9,   II. 
Jo!S-o    9,  11,  12. 

<nik  (31  times). 

yOoC^.  (20  tinu-s). 

©C^.  (6  times). 

^_.c*X  (once  in  H,  thrice  in  B). 

ooCik  (5  times). 

^  (55  times  in  H  and  57  in  B). 

^  (7  times). 

-X  (10  times). 

yCiaX  (14  times). 

JJ  (118  times). 

JJ»  (with  a  substantive,  i.  e.  '  without*} 
4,  4;  7,  1,  23;  8,  23;  9,  4; 
10,  2  ;  11,  12;  12,  5  (bis); 
i3>  4  1  i5»  6,  10  (bis);  17,  2, 
12;  20,  5,  7;  21,  5;  22,  11  ; 
23.  4;  25,  7;  28,  5,  6;  31,  7  : 
.Vs-  3>  1  3  »  39»  6,  8  ;  40,  6  (bis). 

lilbo  (*>=>»)  4,  8. 


l^-  4,3;  7>  23;  8,  1.  20;  10,  1,6; 
11,  1  ;  16,  2,  13  ;  18,  1  ;  20,  4  ; 
21,  8;   24,  11  ,   26,  2,  4  ;   28,  1, 

2,  19;  3°'  5;   32,  1 ;  34,  1 ; 

36,  7;  37>  2;   38,  14;  41.  10: 

42, 19. 

JLoik^  8,  1  ;   17,  13;  41,  6. 

.*^.   4,  6,   8;   7,  4;    13,  3;   15,   8; 

20,  7;   21,  3;   23,  1,3;   33,  12  ; 

39,  8. 

-*=^>('  3,  1. 

)^.o^^.  8,  9  ;   11,  1 1, 

Ua^\   25,  8. 

to^  3,  2,  6;  4,  11  ;  7,  2,  24;  10,  3; 
11,  2,  9;  12,  9;  13,  4;  14,  1, 
2,  6;  15,  6;  17,  14;  21,  4  : 
23>  l65  25,  1,  6;  26,  2,  4; 
28,  1,  4  5  3I»4»  J3  5  33,  4;  35> 
7  (bis);  37,  1  (bis),  2,3;  41,  2; 
42,  1,  4,  14(B),  15,  17. 

j.\\    1 6,  1 5,  16  ;  41,  7. 

fc^.  see  fc~/  JJ. 

Joot  K*X   24,  9,  12  ;   28,  1  r. 

U^.  40,  3  (B). 

Jjjca^  3s-  3- 

♦    Ju50     II,    21. 

J.**iN.»   18,  4. 

t^o   4,  J3;   5.  3;    28,  18. 

y+x>    4,    11,    13;    5,    7,    14;    6,    3,    5 

(bis);   7,  9,  23;   8,  9  (bis);    11, 

23;    12,  9;   16,  8,   18;   17,  10; 

23,  16;   25,  7;   31,  9;   34,  3.  5; 

38,  5.     See  also  f*~x>  ~%>a. 
U^cjso  (JJ?)    i.-;-  4;    20.  5  ;   39,  6. 


CONCORDANCE 


445 


l^oc  3,   8;    5,    14;    11,    7;   24,   4; 

28,  7  ;  42,  5,  J5- 
JfcsJLso   22,  8  (bis);  42,  14. 

JLa."»  6,  15;   15,  9;   18,  8;   28,  17  ; 

29,  4;   38,  8;  42,  11,  17. 
Jlcuao  Jl»  3,  8  ;  10,  2  ;  15,  10  ;  28,  6  ; 

3r>  7  ;  38-  3;  4°,  6. 

^o    i9>  4- 

W^  3,  7- 
Jfc.a~so   34,  1. 

^j»  7,  16;  9,  9;  11,  17;  14, 
5  (bis);  18,  4,  5;  26,  11  (H); 
31-  I2- 

J^^ao  3,  6,  7  (bis);  4,  2,  7;  5,  1, 
2,  11,  15;  6,  18;  7,  4  (bis), 
5,  6  (bis),  11,  12,  19,  21  ;  8,  14, 
21;   10,  5;   12,  1,  3,  11  ;    14,  2; 

15,  2;  16,  2,  18;  17,  10,  15; 
18,  3,  9,  10,  14;  19,  3,  8,  9; 
21,  2;  23,  9,  16,  17;  24,  i,  6, 
9,  12,  13;  25,  2,  4,  9;  26,  1,  2, 
11  (B);  27,  2;  28,  3,  5,  7,  8, 
9,  11,  12,  14,  17,  19  ;  29,  11 ; 
3°^  x>  3-  5;  3r>  5,  I2;  32,  3; 
38>  4,  5>  x5>  l6;  39.  7  5  4i>  8; 
42,  1,  3  (B)>  5>  *3>  14.  l8>  20. 

)u«  >,!^-5o  7,  10;    16,   3;    28,   3; 

41,    2. 

)Joo  6,  9,  13,  18;   11,  6,  7;   12,  2; 

16,  IO;    28,  15;    30,   I,  4;   40,  2. 

^aao   29,  5,  8. 

^12oU    8,   3;    41,    12. 

)im.Tv>  31,  12. 
[ax>  39,  11  (bis). 
^«o   4,  13;  8,  5. 


JIOCLSO     17,    9. 

^Xao   6,  1,  2  (bis);   8,   2,  4  ;   9,   1  ; 

10,  2  ;    12,  1,  8,  9,   11;   16,  5; 

18,  15;   26,  2,  10;   31,  3  (bis); 

33^  x°;   37>  2;  42,  6,  14. 
IlSjo   11,  6. 
JfcJ^ao    10,  1  ;    12,  8;    15,  9;    16,  7, 

8,    14,    19;    29,   9,    10;    39,  9; 

41,  11,  14. 
JLso  6,  10  ;   11,  2,  23  ;    12,  1  ;   30,  1  ; 

38,  18. 
o>X*3    16,  17. 

wXsol/     19,    3. 

Jlo^XsO-aJso    36,  6. 

Es-tU'N'TiaNn     23,    21. 

J-^jsoa*.    7,    11,    13;    9,   4;    17,    7; 

18,  5>  8;   *9>  5;   23,  4;   26,  7; 

35.  6;   36,  2;   41,  13. 
y±io?   23,  22. 

Jlaa^^o    18,  3 ;   22,  12  ;    23,  12. 
{j»  (140  times). 
^i   38,  10;  (cf.  18,  7). 
^>o  cf.  18,  7. 

«u-»  3>  4;  4»  6;  8,  19;  23,  1, 
2,  3,  10  (bis);  26,  8,  9,  10, 
11. 

Jubo   6,  1. 

Jyso   14,  10. 

))^lb>-ao  22,  2. 

Il^jio   3°.  6- 

Jli^o   22,  7. 

Jiiio    11,  21;    42,  12  (H). 

J»iJO     42,    12   (B). 
Jloi-iiO     28,    15;    31,    12. 


446 


ODES   OF   SOLOMON 


^^>  3»  3,  6,  io;  4,3,  15;  5,  1,  10, 
11,  15;  6>  2,  3.  6>  l8->  7,  2,  3, 
17,  19,  21,  22,  23;  8,  1,  2,  6, 
22;  9,  3,  4,  11 ;  10,  1 ;  11,  1, 
6,  11,  13,  15,  16,  17,  18;  12,  3, 
13;  x3>  !  5  M>  1,  3,  6,  8;  15, 
1,  10;  16,  1,  3,  5,  8,  18;  17, 
16;  18,  3,  4;  19,  1 ;  20,  1,  4, 
7;  21,  1,  5,  9;  23,  4  (B  bis); 
24,  5,  7)  10,  13;  25,  11  (bis); 
26,  1,  8,  11 ;  29,  1,  6  (bis),  10  ; 
30,  1,  2,  5  (bis);  31,  1,  2;  35, 
1,  4,  5  5  36>  r>  2>  3;  37>  !  (B). 
4;  38,  16,  19;  39,  i,  7  (bis),  9; 
40,  2;  41,  1,  3,  5,  7,  16. 

«iio   14,   4;    17,   2 ;    27,   1 ;    37,   1 

(H);  42,1. 
v^so   24,  1  (B);  39,  11. 
Ltao   28,  13. 
w-i-ao/  23,  20. 
36,6. 
9>  3;   J7>  l6>  24>  1  ;  29,  6: 

39,  11 ;  41,  3,  15. 
U^so   25.  8  (B  U**>). 
fofcoo   4,  4  ;   12,  6. 
w-fcoo    16,  11  ;  42,  9. 
Uboo   27,  2;   42,  1. 
^0/   21,  8;   26,  1. 

Uo^io    11,  6;   26,   13;    30,    1,   2; 

40,  2. 
Iiioiio    4,  10. 

•^    33>  4- 
t^U  3J>  "• 
Ir^J  38,  8. 


Jfop  6,  8;   26,  13. 

)1o»o»j   23,  14  ;  39,  1,  8. 

»o*j   40,  4  ;  41,  6. 

»om/    11,  14;  41,  4. 

)^o»j    16,  16;   18,  6;   34,  2;  36,  3. 

Jiwcu   5,    6;    6,    17;    7,    14;    8,    2  ; 

10,  1,  6;  11,  11,  19;  12,  3,  7; 
15,  2;    16,  15;  21,  3,6;   25,  7; 

29,  7;  32, 1 ;  38> ! ;  4i,  6,  14- 

-W   6,  14;    7,   15;    11,   12;   30,  3; 

38,4. 
***jll(    16,  12;   26,   10,  12;   28,  3: 

30,  2,  7  ;   35,  6  ;  36,  1. 
U^   3,  5;    25,  12;   26,  3;   37,  4. 
)la~*j    14,   6;    20,   8  ;    26,    12;    35, 

i(B). 
JW>   35,  1  (H). 

Jfcs— JO     12,   6. 

A£j  40,  I. 

i^j    8,  10,  11,  22. 

i^J  18,  7;   19,  11  ;  35,  2. 

j^jI/   8,  10,  11. 

]~j   42,  7,  8. 

^aj   20,  6. 

ii^ftiio    12,  4. 

Uiscu    3,  6;   6,  3  ;   20,  6. 

•=***■»  4,  13;  5.  3;  7,  4;  9,  7,  10 ; 

11,  4;  14,  3;  15,  6;  17,  4; 
19,  5,  6;  22,  9;  23,  2,  7,  19; 
29,  9;  30,  2;  31,  2  (B),  7; 
41,  1. 

)k-*^->   7-  23. 
>^.°>j   18,  15. 
Uaj   18,  15. 

"^fc^j   5,  5;    6,   16;    9,   6;    12,  6; 
18,  2  ;    37,  2;   38,  15. 


CONCORDANCE 


447 


waaj   28,  17  (B  and  H  on  margin). 
*&aj  6,  8,  15;    7,   17;    28>  6  (H); 

30,  5;  31,  6;  35,  3;  42,  17- 
as/  33,  85   4°,  2J  42,  16. 
U^j   3,  5;  7,  3,  12,  23;  9,  2  (bis); 

20,  5  (bis),  6  ;  21,4;  26,  9  (bis); 

30,  3;  31,  7;  32,  2;  35,  7 ; 

38,  15;  40,  4. 
Jfc^aj   6,   15;    10,    3;    39,   3;   41, 

11,  16. 
o_>    11,  18;  38,  16. 

O-ttf     II,   21. 

Jfc^jJ     38,   19,    20,    21. 

J^oj   30,  3. 
slajII  3,  8. 
)fcoa*j    11,  15. 
28,  6. 


"^>AfiD    31,   12. 

;.^»   7,  12;   18,  12;   28,  9;  38,  8; 

cf.  42,  5. 
isKco/  7,  4;  i7>  6;  34,  5;  42,  10. 
i^  7,  17;  9,  6;   13,  2;  42,  5. 
Ji=L»  5,  2,  10;  29,  1  ;  40,  1. 
jjsaaLao   12,  4. 

31,  10,  11;  42,  13- 
(v.)  8,  1. 
ws^o?   6,  6;  cf.  8,  22;   12,  3. 
w^o   11,  23;  30,  4. 
)U^»  (s.  and  pi.)  7,  10,  17  ;   19,  7, 
10;  23,  7,  15,  19;  25,  5;  38, 
12;  42,  11. 
JJ^axo    14,  9;   16,  7;   23,  14. 
•^b   11,  17;  39>  J3- 
U'w»   38,  2. 


>2o»£D    2  2,  5. 

^W   M,  3- 

IjU^flfcJO    23,  20. 

^W  (sic)  8,  22. 

^IkW  30,  6. 

kucxco   12,  5. 

jve  4,  1  ;    7,  *3,  M;   8,  20;   9,  8, 

10,   11;   18,   7;   20,  8;   25,  7; 

38,  3,  17;  42,  19,  20(B). 

juaiU   10,  6;  28,  5;  38,   16;  39, 

r3- 
Jfcoc^flo   16,  15  (bis). 

^2»da>  33,  3  (bis). 

J,oaao(?)   12,  7. 

^ikW  8,  15. 

w^tt?     41,    Ii;    42,   7. 

^fcu»/  24,  11;  25,  5;  42,  10. 

Jjjlaao   28,  11. 

^x»  15,  10;  38,  1,  18  (B). 

jW   22,  1;   29,  4;   38,  18  (H). 

lnNo«>  35,  7. 

Uaoaojo  38,  8. 

tA^c]^00(     20,  8. 
ha.a>    25,  7. 

ujWl      28,    12. 

JUtflo  7,  20. 

)Ioaa>   6,  14;  8,   1;   11,  6;   12,  2; 

16,   2;    20,  4;    21,  8;   30,  5; 

37,  2;  38,  20;  40,  2;  42,  14. 
);maa    28,  4. 
pftw    26,   12. 

fc^Jifuflm    19,  3,  8. 
)Lcujj»    18,  11. 

M;m   39,  2- 

J3i»     31,    13;     33,    I- 


44s 


ODES   OF   SOLOMON 


ifii&iJBf     iS.   12. 

\A»i»    (<■   and   pi.)    ;,.    9;     18.    12; 

38,  2  (B). 
Ifcoa-i^o    ii,8;    17.  3. 
]^_)kia^^a5    28,  17. 
)lcua*»flD    18.  9. 

UcO.    19.  4- 

4.  2.  15;  7,  9,  12;  11,  1,  20; 
12.  10;  14,  7;  15,  7.'  l6-  r3> 
16;  20,  7;  23,  15;  28,  12; 
29.  2,  9;  36,  5;  38,  13;  42. 
14.  16. 
*   29,  8. 

.k»7  16. 14. 
29, 11. 
11,22;  12, 4. 

8,    r8,     19;     12,    7;     16,    1 
(thrice).  6. 

7.    x  ;    11.   20 ;    16.    12,    13  ; 

18,  5- 
ll,"'^^'"   22.  10  (B). 
JJusa-^  5,  7. 

^-^   23.  J5J  39-  5»  7'  8>  9-  T3- 
ta^   25,  9;   38,  2. 

)LqNV>     39,    2. 

Jl^   7.  9- 

Joo^  6.  4;    7.  14 ;   8,  1 ;   11,  4; 

14.  4  ;  16.  2  ;   23.  16  ;   26,  5,  6, 

7  ;   30-  6;  33.  3. 
i+£L  22,  6. 

)j»*qj^   25,  6  ;  26,  13. 
|j»*^-»   7,  3;   8.  6;   21,  2;   25,  2. 

)kwJ»?JSkaD    21,  5. 

)Lcu»_ij*>  22.  10  (II). 
U^'23,  '5(H). 


JJal^    28,  2. 

JlcsXa-^    7,   1. 

j>^'v  18,  11  ;   29.  10. 

w^l/   23,  20  (B);  39,  12. 

fc^tf   23.20(H). 

U*-^  16, 9. 

U^  5-  5;  6'  r7 ;  IX>  m;  13-  x ; 

14.  1  (bis);   15,  3;  25,  5  (bis). 
i-JS.ll/    3,  II. 
JLoi*.*.  8,  2. 
^^  (v.)  33-  8. 
^/  7-  1. 
"^O^  (prep.)  (63  times). 

^^-  34<  4.  5;  35-  !• 
^J^  ^3?    II,  12. 

l>v>N\    10.  4  ;  19,  5  ;  20,  3  ;  22,  1 1  ; 

33,  12;   38,  11;  41,  15. 
)>v>\  v  7.  11  ;   12,  4,  8  ;   16.  19. 
^\\\   6,  18;  9,  4,  8;   11.   22,  24; 

38,  17  (H);  41,  16. 
V^N\\   38.  1  7  (B). 
^-Na\  v  jtiNnN    10,6;  23,22;  25. 

12;  32,  3. 
^  5,   15  (bis);   7,   20;   8,  6,  21  ; 

10.  6  ;  23,  12  ;   25,  4  ;  38,  4,  5, 

15  ;   41,   11  ;   42,  6,   11,  12,   14 

(II).  16,  18. 
}ntn  v    31,  12  ;  cf.  10,  6. 
),>c>y>  v    10.  5  ;   23.  15  (B);  29,  8. 
J-i^ooj^  5,  5. 

)LsL*»  37.  3. 

■  n*fi<    38.   18  (II). 
,n*ftN?    38,  18  (B). 
Jq-^oJv.  34.  2  ;   42.  12. 

).AJlOCL^.     29,    4. 

32-  i- 


CONCORDANCE 


449 


>l     IO,    2. 
liJCOOO     22,    12. 

J»&*i_V.   24,  3. 

Uj-*-  5>  5;  35>  1;  36>  7- 

|>SaV    11,  I. 

>o°>  v  28,  6  (B). 

Jk-^-a-X  7,  14;   10,  6;  39,  10,  11. 

23.  x5- 
22,  5  (B);  38,  17. 

22.5(H). 
Is^i^c    26,  5. 

l^i-^    5>  5- 

»o;-X   18,  6  ;  23,  8,  20  ;  25,  1  ;  38,  6. 

"%J9j_i«.    39,   2. 

^iJ./    10,  4;    18,  2;   32,  3. 

kuilX   39-  x- 

li^dX  16,  7  ;   25,  6  ;   29,  8. 

?fcoL  28,  5  (H). 

?J^i/   5,9;   28,  5(B). 

»fcsJ>w  9,  5;   n,  9. 

J^fcsJb*  (s.  and  pi.)  4,  10;   26,  13. 

JiioLX   11,  16  ;  41,  10. 

J>Jk3    10,  2. 

)»)a   4,   4 ;    7,    1  ;    8,   2  ;    11,   1,   12, 

23  ;    12,    2  ;    14,  6,   7  ;    16,   2  ; 

17-  13;  37.  3;   38,  *7- 
1^   18.  3- 
Jw^3  22,  9;  39,  3. 
)jtta9   7,  24  (bis);  8,  4  ;   10,  1  ;    12, 

2,  3,  11  ;    16,  5  ;   18,  8 ;   21,  8  ; 

26,  10;   29,  4;   31,  3;  36,  7. 
Jj»a3   28,  1  (bis);  42,  6. 
¥***9i(    3°-  4- 
J^-^3    38,   2. 

**A£lj  8,  19;  39,  8. 


^3    28,  4b;    34,  4. 
*^3    31,  9. 
~^>3    7,  15;    20,  3. 
Juju^ciS   16,  2,  6;  38,  19. 

^3^    25,  I. 
v.l°>?     IO,   3. 

oOSl/    11,  9  ;    33,  6. 
ju&U  15.  5- 

Jjaj&3     14,    2. 

jl^jaxa   23,  21. 

.nmq   23,  13. 

jxa±2>l(     17,  4. 

a&  38,  14  (H). 

|u«J90d     23,    17. 

^3    38,  14  (B). 

Jtos  28,  13. 

|^ot3  28,  1  (bis). 

Jim-*i9    II,  16,  18,  23,  24;    20,  7. 

Djj.3    17,  9  (bis). 

w*i9    24,   I,  4  (B). 

Jfc—v3   24,  4  (H). 

|u£D»OS     20,    6. 

idajiS   11,   14;   15,  9;   17,  4;    22, 
11 ;  25,  4;  31,  5;  42,  13. 

,  15. 
ja^3  8,  22  ;   25,  4  ;   31,  12  ;  38,  2. 
ustst/  8,  22;  9,  5,  12;   14,  5;   17, 
4,  14;  26,  9;  33,  10,  11;  34,6; 

35.  7;  38>  I6;  42,  18. 
Jjsoia  41,  11 ;  42,  18. 
Jjj>»o9  5,  11  ;   7,  16;   11,3;   15,  6; 

17,  2  ;    18,  7  ;   19,   11  ;   21,   2  ; 

25,  2;   28,   10;  31,  13;   34,  4; 

35:  2;  38,  3;  40,  5. 
,a,;.3   3,  4  ;  22,  8. 
£.*3  27,  i ;  35,  7  ;  37,  1 ;  42,  1. 


isojts 


G  £f 


4jo 


ODES   OF   SOLOMON 


^-*s  34,  1 ;  42,  2. 
Jlo^9  7,  3;  27,  3;  42,  2. 

licO-aa^  ■*>     12,    II. 

±*2>U   17-  9;   3Ii  *■ 

~fc^  38, 18(H). 

wfc^/      7,      I3;      16,      IO;      24,     13;      38, 

18(B). 

LU2>    6.  8;    23,   15. 

JlSCl^9   7,  7;  8,8;  9,  3;   12,  3,  5, 

10,  12;   18,  4;   24,  9;    32,    2  ; 

37.  3;  42,  14- 
)c«i^3   12,  1. 
«.fc*3  4.10;  7,24;  8,1  (bis) ;  9,  1  ; 

10,   1  ;    13,   1  ;    14,  8;    16,  5; 

17.  8;  19-  4  5  31*  3;  42,  17- 
*tetf  8,  4;   24,  5;  30,  1;  36,  7. 

L^~3     17,    IO. 

Jk~j   J3-  3- 

Uj   8,  20;  9,  12;   10,  3. 

JL^^I  3'  9;  8-  T7- 

U-^j  6,  14;  9, 4;  14, 4;  i8-  3. 8; 
19. io;  23, 5- 

U*=»j  9-  3- 

U=>j    23.  31. 

Jfco>-Sj    16,  6;  23,  8. 

fc-^   38,  9- 

)-ot.  (s.  and  pi.)  6,  11  (bis);  30,  2. 

JUoj   7,  6. 

^ao  7,  10;  8,  8;   9,  5;    11,   14; 

17.  14;   18,  7;   20,  9;   23,  11  ; 

31-  6;  4i.  3- 
)t\-.o.ao   40,  6. 
JL>oo   16,  17. 


"^isa^   6,  5;   8,  19;    25,  3.  11. 
Dooncn   6,  5- 
L^>.r>ontn    23,  14. 
js&A    22,   8. 
J^.*Ji=>Oi9     l6,    I. 

y>+oU  28,  19. 

y>U>  4,    14;    7,    18  (bis);    8,    21;    9, 

12  ;  14,  5  ;  17.  9  :  20.  9  ;  21,  6; 

28,  18;   36,  2. 
f»*  ^   4,  2;   8,  7,  15;    15,  9;    16, 

18;  28,  5;  31,  1  ;  33.  2;  36.  3; 

41,  15- 

j**+£>  ^-SO    41.   14- 

ys^cu^  ^ao   24,  7. 

jc^     27,    I. 

U?OJ»     4-    2;     19,    2,   4;     23.    22   (H). 

U-r*  4,  1  ;  6,  7;  7,  16  (pi.);  8,  2 
(pi.),  16;  9,  3;  11,  2;  14,  8; 
15,  3;  22.  12  (pi.);  23,  1  (pi.), 
22  (B);   26,  2  ;   31,  5;   32,  3. 

Jio*^   13,  3. 

wclo   8,  22  ;    14.6;   24.  9  ;    26,  11. 

JL>  7,  24;  24,  2;  31,  4;  33,  3;  37- 
1,  2  ;  42,  19. 

U   7-  17- 

xx£>  6.  5;  8,  3,  19  ;  12,  6  (bis);  16, 
13;  l8'  3;  25-  3;  26.  12;  31, 
8,  11  ;   33-  3-  5;   42,  6. 

f^>  5-  13;   39-  10-  ii- 

p^o/  6,  14,  16  ;    15,  2  ;    16,  12  ;    22, 

5;  35>  1 ;  36-  2- 

Y**U   8,  3. 

Uu£    9,    II. 

)^o   23,  6. 
JfcJLjs   14,  8. 


CONCORDANCE 


45 I 


1*l+0    27,  3;    39,    IO;    42,   2. 
lLXj>    39,   4. 

)lo\..\p   12,  5  (bis). 

Uo   11,.  11;   15,  3;   x9>  "J  20,  6; 

23.  3;  33.  I2;  4i>  9- 
joojOfj^j  38,  5;   39,  8. 

U*  33.  5(B);  4?,  15. 
]xaj>  16,  1. 

Ji*  23,   7,   10;    26,  8;    33,  5  (H); 
38,  12. 

OJJ3     II,    6. 

o^  7,  22;  20,  2,  5;  31,  4. 
ojjjI/   19,  1;  33,  7;  42,  1,  17. 
|dW>  8,  7 ;  9,  6 ;   29,  9. 
^sjd  9,  9. 
U»QJ»  36,  8. 

JLl=>»OJ3     20,   2,   4. 

jbi-ija   (s.   and   p].)    6,    15;    7,    19; 
20,  6;   21,  7;  36,  6. 

«t©   22,  9. 

U-**   4,  3;   28,  17. 

U^o  34.  i- 

jl^Afi   23,  6. 

J»l^*is  6,  1;   7,  17;   14,  8;   26,  3. 

U»  6,  8;    18,   12;    23,   21;    36,  4; 

41,  4. 
U=>>o»  36,  4. 
oioit/  38,  18. 
lolbo  woj   4,  8. 
Jlasi  7,  3,  23;   15,  7;   18,  16;  19, 

r  «;  29.  3;  36>  5- 
-»»  17,  7(?)- 
*=>'U  35.  6. 
^»  ^   39.  9- 


ll^»   23,  16  (bis);  36,  2;  42,  13. 

J?j   12,  2  ;   26,  9 ;  40,  1. 

«?»/  4,  10. 

JL99   12,  2. 

<9?»    23,  20;    42,  7. 

S?»l?   28,  8. 

Jso?»  5,  4;  42,  5. 

oc»»l.<>  35,  3- 
oo»;-co  14,  9. 
^o»>   11,  3;    12,  11;    16,   13;   23,   7, 

16;   33,  1;   42,  15. 
^o>»   7,  1  (bis);   16,  13. 

Jo*  11,  7- 

Jicuoj   11,  8  ;  38,  12. 

)e»   11,  12  ;  40,  4. 

Uo»  3,  10;  6,  2,  7;   11,  2;   13,  2; 

14,8;  16,  5;  19,  2,  4;   23,  22; 

25.  8;   28,  1,  7;    29,  10;   36, 

1,8;  40,  4. 
Jk-.o»  6,  7. 

U>»  33,  3- 

U>o»  36,  1  (B),  2. 

)j*>o»   26,  7. 

kooi^o  17,  7  ;  21,  1 ;  22,  1 ;  23,  5  ; 
36,  1  (H). 

booi^o   10,  5. 

lamias  3,  6;  5,  2;  6,  12;  7,  16, 
22;  8,  8;  9,  5;  10,  4;  11,  2, 
9;  12,  4,  11;  17,  7;  18,  1,  14, 
!5;    23,   4  (H),    18;    26,    10; 

28,  19;  29,  11;  31,  4;  32,  3; 
35,  7J  36,  5;  37,  1 ;  39,  8; 
41.  13- 

f+i?    17,    7;    21,    1,    2;    25,    8,    9; 

29,  3;  3i,  4;  36,  ij  37,  i- 


452 


ODES    OF   SOLOMON 


f^iili  7.    20;    8,    5  (bis);     18,    1  ; 
21,  6  ;    24,  11;   39,  11  ;   41,  12. 
f^°*   26,  4  ;    29,  3. 
)f*-»   3,  3  (bis),  5,  7  (bis) ;   5,   1  ;   8, 

r3  (bis);  13. 3;  4°.  r. 

)P~>1/   3-4- 

U*~*    14-  3-  9;    16,    7;    19,   7  ;   20, 

5  (bis);   29,  3. 
]kocL«»  3,  4;  8,  22. 

)ici*ftf  >    12,  9. 

Us— »  3-  :>-  7;  7»  I- 
|j  vi..iy>   3,  6. 
a~ij   18,  3  (H). 
aa-»l/    18.  3  (B). 

U~»  24,  4. 

(— »  II.  15. 

U-»  5.  12;  9,  8;  17,  15,  16;  20,  8 
23,  16,  18  (bis);  24,  1  (B  bis) 
26,  7;  28,  4;  33,  3;  35,  1 
39,  1  ;  42,  13,  20. 

U*»  5-  7 ;  22, 5;  31, 13. 

j&^»*-9    ^ap    11,4. 

fc-*-^*    «r*?    4-    M;    6,    4;    7,    14; 

23,  2,  3;   24,  8;   41,  9. 
Jfcs^oj-so   38,  1. 
i^o»  (v.)  22,  2. 
>OD»/    29,  10  ;   42,  7. 

Jfcs^SOJil.     41,    15. 
\jf     42,    IO. 

*co»    4,   IO. 
UaoflDi  35,  1. 
jtflftojpf   4,  ro. 

>— ^il(   4,  2. 
)j-^»    28,   14  ;    38,   13. 
)fc-^»*.  5-7-8;  9,  4,  5;   12,  4;  18, 
14;  28,  14,  19;  38,  21. 


*»3»(    42.   13. 

«-»!»  17,  9. 

^U    38,  IO. 

Jfc^U  14,  9. 

U~   10,  3,  4. 

)&>».->»    10,  3. 

—^1  6,   7;    7,    19,   24;    14,   8;    17, 

7   (H);    18,    1  ;    21,    7;    26,   4  ; 

36,  2,  4;   41,  1. 
uolU/   38,  19. 
|L« ^1*   17,  7  (B). 

|s~OOa.     I  I,   24. 

)U*.arx*.l  6,  7  ;  10,  4;  11,17;  I2>  4,' 
I4»  5;  16.  5>  20;  17,  16;  18, 
16;  20,  9  (bis),  10  ;  21,9;  26, 
1,  5;  29,  2,  n;  31,  3;  36,  2; 
40,  2  (bis);  41,  16. 

Jk—Jjuk.1   13,  2;   16,  1,  2;  41,  4. 

^Nr>«.    22,  5. 

.  5,  2;    11,  8,  10;    15,  6;    17, 

ir  ;   24.  4;  33,  1.  3-  7;  38,  4- 

14. 
)•*.    11,  10  (bis);   18,  4  (B);  21,  2. 
-?k-*7    x9>  3;  23>  6. 
»?k-*7   23,  6. 
-Q^    13-  3- 

wO*7     22,    7. 

«oU*7   41,  5- 

jlcuCL*.     12,   9,    10. 

MQ*     II,    12. 

fc— >&}   8,  5;    25,  5. 

Jta^iw   31,  2. 
Jc^a*,    11,  5. 
Jlasla*,   4,  9;   21,  5 
Jio*£j*,    1 1,   10. 


CONCORDANCE 


453 


6,  8. 
^cu*.  15,  9;  29,  4;  42,  11. 

-a*-/  3, 4,  7;  6, 9;  26> lj;  2g,  7> 
17;  42, 13- 

)Lcu~ju»,  38,  21  (sic). 

Ut.v    12,  12. 

Jl*.   26,  3;  31,  10;  35,  4. 

lX«    8,  4. 

«-^a.   11,  10;   15,  8;  21,  3. 

)^^  23,  9. 

U^o*,  4,  2;  22,  4. 

J*^*-  39,  !3- 

l^N*  8,  7;    9,  6;    10,   2;    11,  3; 

35,  1  ;  36, 8. 

i,v>\gj>>   24,  8. 

Ui*,  6,  7;  8,  21,  23;   14,5;   15,  8 
16,    20;    18,    1,    16;    20,    10 

22,  6;    23,  22;   25,  11  ;   30,  5 

31.  3;   33,   J3;   39,  7,  8,   J3 
41,  5,  16;  42,  20. 
ojsoU*-?   36,  3. 

Lx-i*   16,  11. 

>**!*,  8,   8;    9,   6;    15,   4;    16,   9; 

23,  io;  33,  Io;  37,  2;  42,  19- 
,»JeU./   24,  2;   33,  4;   38,  5. 
Uai*,  11,  13;   15,  1,  2  ;   16,  15,  16. 
juviivi  6,  13. 

1^*-  4,  5- 
waX   11,  19. 

i^*-   M,  5- 

Ji*ajw  (s.  and  pi.)  7,  2;   11,  20;  30, 

3 ;  34,  3- 
*jW  38,  17. 
^o*.   29,  IO. 

\&~a*.  38-  2- 

tok+,1  11,5',  36,  8;  38,  16;  40,  5. 


Jji*  8,  8,  12;  9,  8;  11,  3,  5;  12, 
1,  2,  12,  13;  14,7;  15,  4;  17, 
5,  7;  18,6,  15;  20,  9;  23,  18; 
24,  10,  12;  25,  10;  31,  2  ; 
32,  2  ;  33,  8  ;  38,  1  (bis),  4,  7, 

10,  15;  39,  IO;  4i,   1,  9,   I5> 

16. 
Ji-iA  9,  11;   12,  3;   18,  3;  31,  11. 
Ji*.   15,  2;  17,  11;   18,  4  (H);  22, 

4;   23,  9,  10. 
Ui*-»  6,  14. 
«»fc**7  6,   11;    17,  3;   22,   11;    26, 

11. 
k.**  25,  7- 

JklOik    11,  22. 

J^flD^    22,   12;    35,  4. 

Uifc^.    38,   16. 

»U/  6,  n;  8,  16;  11,  7;  19,  1  ; 

3°,  7;  38,  I2- 
^fcuoo  6,  12,  13;  30,  2. 
Jlofcsjfcaa  38,  12. 
jd^sa,  31,  10. 
Jaa-K*.    12,  8. 

U^J.  35,  4- 

Ju»t  8,  16;    14,  2;    19,  3,  4. 

wo.ll/   27,  2  (B). 

Jlaooott  24,  5,  7;  31,  1. 

woll/  4,  11. 

])Lol  4,  11. 

oi  4,  J3- 

«a-l/  38,  13;  42,  11. 

ool  9,  7;   25,  3;   33,  1 

k—  fc-^>  34,  4,  5- 

jk^fc—L  22,  1. 

^i?  33-  J3- 


4f)4 


ODES   OF   SOLOMON 


^>IW  40.  5- 

ILal  (s.  and  pi.)   i<£  10;    23,  2. 

w^LL/   42,  2. 

lu^l   3.  2- 

oool    17,  6. 

)o*jo1   41,  4. 

^cL"  17,  8  ;   22,  6. 

U>t  35.  3- 
)j-oi   22,  5. 
Jj^koo   12,  4. 
Juooi    12,  5  (bis). 
I&1.  6,  8. 

^ol/  4,   14;  8,   16;   11,  5;    16,  11, 
12;  38,  17;  39,  10.' 


U*ei  33,  2;  36,  2. 
]f^»i   26,  II  (bis). 
p^U/   26,  11. 
)j_afii^:»fcs_ao    12,  4. 


^->i   19.  4- 

wtCD»i     l6,    2. 

bol  12,  3;  42,  17. 

U>»t   17,  8. 

.»r  6,  16 ;   10,  1. 

j»Uj  35.  7- 

Utl  (s.  and  pi.)  27,  3  ;  34,  1  ;  38,  7 

42,  2. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL   INDEX 

The  order  of  authors  is  alphabetical.  No  notice  has  been  taken  of  the 
casual  references  to  the  Odes  in  books  and  articles  which  do  not  treat 
ex  professo  of  the  subject. 

Abbott  (E.  A.).     Light  on  the  Gospel  from  an  ancient  poet.     {Dialessarica, 
IX),  Cambridge,  191 2. 
The   Original  language  of  the  Odes  of  Solomon.    Joarn.  of  Theol. 

Stud.,  1913,  44-45- 
The  interpretation  of  early  Christian  poetry.    {Dialessarica,  X,  sect.  11). 
Cambridge,  19 14,  372-456. 
Ales  (A.  d').     Les  Odes  de  Salomon.     Eludes,  191 1  (CXXIX.),  753-770. 
Aytoun  (R.  A.).    The  Mysteries  of  Baptism  by  Moses  bar  Kepha  compared 

with  the  Odes  of  Solomon.     Expositor,  191 1,  338-358. 
Bacon  (B.  W.).     The  Odes  of  the  Lord's  rest.     Expositor,  191 1,  193-209. 
Songs  of  the  Lord's  beloved.     Expositor,  1911,  319-337. 
The  Odes  of  Solomon  :  Christian  elements.    Expositor,  1911,  243-256. 
Further  light  on  the  Odes  of  Solomon.     Expositor,  1912,  459-462. 
Barnes  (W.  E.).    The  text  of  the  Odes  of  Solomon.    Journ.  of  Theol.  Stud., 
I9I°.  573-575;  Mid.,  p.  615-618;  ibid.,  191 2,  465. 
An  ancient  Christian  hymn-book.     Expositor,  1910,  52-63. 
Barth  (J.).     Zur  Textkritik   der  syrischen  Oden   Salomos.     Revue  Se'mit., 

191 1,  261-265. 
Batiffol  (P.).     See  under  Labourt. 
Beer,    Realencyklopadie  f  protest.   Theologie   (Erganzungen   u.   Nachtrage, 

XXIV),  1913,  pp.  375-378. 
Bernard  (J.  H.).     The  Odes  of  Solomon,    fourn.  of  Theol.  Stud.,  1910-11 

I-31- 

The   Odes  of  Solomon.     {Texts  and  Studies,   VIII,   3),   Cambridge, 

1912. 
The  Odes  of  Solomon  (two  Cambridge  lectures),  London,  1913. 
In  Spectator,  October  22,  19 10. 


456  ODES   OF   SOLOMON 

Bohmer  (II.).  Die  Oden  Salomos.  Kir c hi.  Rundschau  fur  die  evangelise  hen 
Gemeinden  Rheinlands  und  West/alerts,  1910,  215-219,  238-243, 
266-270,  297-302. 

Boysson  (A.  de).    Les  Odes  de  Salomon.    Revue  prat,  d' Apologe'tique,  191 1, 

497"5°3- 
Brockelmann  (C).     In  Literarisches  Zentralblatt,  191 2,  313-315. 
Bruston  (Ch.)   Les  plus  anciens  cantiques  Chretiens :  les  Odes  de  Salomon. 

Revue  de  The'ologie  et  de  P kilos.,  191 1,  465-497. 
La  seconde  edition  du  texte  des  Odes  de  Salomon.    Revue  de  The'ologie 

et  des  Quest,  relig.,  1912,  74-88,  138-151. 
Les  plus  anciens  cantiques  chrdtiens.    Traduits  sur  la  seconde  edition  du 

texte  syriaque  avec  une  introduction  et  des  notes,  Geneve-Paris,  1912. 
Rectifications   a   la    traduction  des  plus  anciens   cantiques   chrdtiens. 

Revue   de    Thiol,    et   des    Quest,    relig.,    191 2,    440-442,    536-537; 

and  1913,  85-91. 
Quelques  observations  sur  les  Odes  de  Salomon.     Zeitsch.fiir  neutesl. 

Wiss.,  191 2,  111-116. 
Biichler  (A.)     A  study  of  Ode  XI,  in  Abst.  Jour.  Society  0/ Hist.  Theol.  for 

1911-1912,  20-32. 
Buhl  (F.).     Salomos  Oder,  in  Teolog.  Tidskrift  (Copenhagen),  191 1,  iii,  2,  1. 
Bultmann    (R.).      Ein    jiidisch-christliches    Psalmbuch     aus    dem    ersten 

Jahrhundert.     M.fiir  Pasloraltheologie,  Berlin,  1910-n,  23  ff. 
Buonaiuti  (E.).     II  piu  antico  Innario   cristiano   (in   Rivista  storico-critica 

delle  Scienze  teologiche),  19 10,  pp.  188-200. 
Burkitt  (F.  C).     A  new  MS.  of  the  Odes  of  Solomon.    Journ.  of  Theol. 

Stud.,  1912,  372-385;   also  in  Athenaeum,  1912,  12. 
Capelle  (P.).     Le  odi  ed  i  salmi  di   Salomone  (in  Scuola  Catlolica),  1910, 

443-447- 
Chajes  (H.   P.).      nobc   n*B>.      Magyar  Zsidd   Szemle  (Budapest),    1911, 

113-117;  and  Hagoren  (Berditschew),  191 1  (VIII),  24-34. 
Charles  (R.  H.).     A    Church    Hymnal    of  the    first  century,    in   '  Times  ' 

Literary  Supplement,  April  7,  19 10;  also  in  Rn'iew  of  theology  and 

philosophy,  1911,  220-223. 
Cheyne  (T.  K.).     In  Hibbert  fournal,  1910.  206-212. 
Clemen  (C).     Die  neuentdeckten  Oden  Salomos.     Theologischc  Rundschau, 

1911,  1-19. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL   INDEX  457 

Colombo  (S.).     In  Didascaleion,  191 2,  250-262. 

Connolly  (R.  H.).    The  Odes  of  Solomon  :  Jewish  or  Christian  ?   fourn.  of 
Theol.  Stud.,  1912,  298-309. 
Greek  the  original  language  of  the  Odes  of  Solomon.    Journ.  of  Theol. 
Stud.,  1913,  53°-538;    ibid->  44-47  5    #i&,  311-316;    ibid.,  1914, 
464-468. 
Conybeare  (F.  C).     The  Odes  of  Solomon  Montanist.     Zeitschr.  fur  neut. 
Wiss.,  191 1,  70-75, 
Note  on  the  Odes  of  Solomon.     Zeitschr.  fur  neut.  Wiss.,  1913,  95. 
Diettrich   (G.).      Eine    jiidisch-christliche   Liedersammlung.     Reformation, 
1 910,  306  ff.,  370  ff.,  513  ff.,  533  ff. 
Die  Oden  Salomos,  unter  Beriicksichtigung  der  iiberlieferten  Stichen- 
gliederung  aus  dem  Syrischen  ins  Deutsche  iibersetzt  und  mit  einem 
Kommentar  versehen.     {JSJeue  Studien  zur  Geschichte  der  Theologie 
und  der  Kirche,  9.)     Berlin,  19 11. 
Diinsing  (H.).     In  Zeitschr.  fiir  neut.  Wiss.,  191 1,  86-87. 

In  Theolog.  Literaiurzeit. ,  1 9 1 1 ,  731. 
Flemming  (J.).     See  under  Harnack. 

Frankenberg  (W.).     Das  Verstandnis  der  Oden  Salomos.     Giessen,  191 1. 
Friedlander  (M.).    Die  neuentdeckten  Oden  Salomos.    Neue  Nationalzeitung, 

Wien,  191 1,  Nr.  X,  1  f . ;  XI,  2-4;  XII,  2-4;  XIII,  6  f. 
Fries  (S.  A.).     Die  Oden  Salomos,  montanistische  Lieder  aus  dem  zweiten 

Jahrhundert.     Zeitschr.    iir  neut.  Wiss.,  191 1,  108-125. 
Gibson  (M.  D.).     In  Alhenceum,  1914,  530,  559. 

Goguel(M.).    LesOdes  de  Salomon.   R.  Chre'tienne,igi  1,152-161,330-340. 
Gregg  (J.  A.  F.).     The  Odes  of  Solomon.     The  Irish  Church  Quarterly, 

January,  191 3. 
Gressmann  (H.).     Die  Oden  Salomos.     Christliche   Welt,   191 1,  633-635, 
650-652,  674-677,  703-705. 
Die  Oden  Salomos.    Internat.  Wochenschrift,  191 1,  897-908,  949-958. 
In  Deutsch.  Literaturzeit.,  191 1,  1 349-1356,  2896-2902. 
In  ZDMG.,  191 1,  850-852.     See  also  under  Gunkel. 
Grimme  (H.).    Die  neunzehnte  Ode  Salomos,  eine  Rekonstruktion.    Theologie 
und  Glaube,  191 1,  11-18. 
Die  Oden  Salomos,  syrisch,  hebraisch,  deutsch.    Ein  kritischer  Versuch. 
Heidelberg,  191 1. 


45«  ODES    OF   SOLOMON 

Zur  Handschrift  N  der  Oden  Salomos.     Orient.  Literaturzeit.,   191 2, 

492-496. 
In  Theologische  Revue,  1910,  545-547;    191 1,  601-605. 
Grosheide  (F.  W.).      De  Oden  van  Salomo,  in  Gere/.   Theol.   Tijdschrift, 

1916,  69-78  and  119-132. 
Giutzmacher  (G.).     In  Theologie  der  Gegenwarl  (Leipzig),  191 1,  133-136. 
Guidi  (}.).     In  Rivista  degli  Studi  Orientali,  191 1,  456-459. 
Gunkel  (H.).     Die  Oden  Salomos.     Zeitschr.  fiir  7ieut.  Wiss.,   19 10,  291- 
328  (with  H.  Gressmann). 
Die  Oden  Salomos.      Deutsche  Rundschau,  19 13,  25-47. 
In  Theolog.  Liter aturzeit.,  191 3,  10-13. 
Hamilton  (G.  F.).     Confirmation  and  the  Eucharist  in  the  Odes  of  Solomon, 
in  Irish  Church  Quarterly,  Oct.,  19 15;  Jan.,  19 16. 
The  Odes  of  Solomon  and  the  Pseudepigrapha,  in  Internal.  Journ,  of 
Apocrypha,  1916,  12-14. 
Hansen  (H.).     Die   Oden    Salomos.     Der   alte    Glaube,    Hamburg,   1910, 
680  f. 
Die  Oden  Salomos,  in  deutschen   Nachdichtungen,   Giitersloh,   191 1. 
See  also  under  Wohlenberg. 
Harnack    (A.).       Ein    jtidisch-christliches     Psalmbuch     aus     dem     ersten 
Jahrhundert   .    .    .   aus  dem  Syrischen  iibersetzt  von  J.  Flemming. 
Bearbeitet  und  herausgegeben  von  A.  Harnack.     In  Texte  u.  Unler- 
such.,  XXXV,  4,  19 10. 
In  Theol.  I.it.-Zeil.,  191 2,  529. 
Harris  (J.  R.).     The  Odes  and  Psalms  of  Solomon,  now  first  published 
from  the  Syriac  Version,  Cambridge,  1909. 
An  early  Christian  hymn-book.      Contcmp.  Review,  1909,  414-428. 
An  early  Christian  psalter,  London,  1909. 

An  early  Judaeo-Christian  Hymn-book,  in  The  Quest,  19 10,  288-305. 
Doctrine  of  immortality  in  the  Odes.     Cf.  Theol.  Lit.-Blalt,  for  Oct.  24, 

1913- 

The  Odes  and  Psalms  of  Solomon,  published  from  the  Syriac  Version  ; 
second  edit,  revised  and  enlarged,  with  a  facsimile,  Cambridge,  191  1. 
The  thirty-eighth  Ode  of  Solomon.     Expositor,  191 1,  8  ser.,  29-37. 
Two  flood-hymns  of  the  early  Church.     Expositor,  191 1,  405-417. 
Ephrem's  use  of  the  Odes  of  Solomon.     Expositor,  1912,  n  3-1 19. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL    INDEX  459 

Hastings  (J.).     In  Expository  Times,  Feb.,  1910  (editorial  notice). 
Haussleiter    (J.).      Der    judenchristliche    Character    der    Oden    Salomos. 

Theolog.  Literaturblatt,  1910,  265-276. 
Headlam  (A.  C).     The  Odes  of  Solomon.     Church  Quart.  Review,  191 1, 

272-297. 
Honnicke  (G.).    Die  neuentdeckten  Oden  Salomos  in  der  bisherigen  kritischen 

Beurteilung.     Studierslube,  Langensalza,  1911,  297-309. 
Hora  (E.).     Die  Oden  Salomos.      Theologie  una1  Glaube,  1913,  128-140. 
Jordan,  Geschichte  der  allchr.  Literatur.     (Leipzig),  1911,  p.  457- 
Kennedy  (H.  A,).     Harnack  on  the  recently  discovered  Odes  of  Solomon. 

Expository  Times,  19 10,  444-446. 
Kittel   (G.).      Eine   zweite  Handschrift  der  Oden  Salomos.      Zeilsch.  fiir 

neut.  Wiss.,  191 3,  79_93- 
Die  Oden  Salomos :   uberarbeitet  oder  einheitlich  ?     Mit  2  Beilagen : 

1.  Bibliographic  der  Oden  Salomos,  11.  Syrische  Konkordanz.    Leipzig, 

1914;  also  in  Theolog.  Literaturblatt,  1913,  510-515. 
Kleinert  (P.).     Zur    religionsgeschichtlichen    Stellung  der   Oden    Salomos. 

Theologische  Studien  und  Kritiken,  191 1,  569-611. 
Knietschke.     Die  neuentdeckten  Oden  Salomos,  in  Evang.  Kirchenzeitung 

(Berlin),  191 1,  324-327. 
Kiebs  (E.).     Die  Oden  Salomos.     Ein  umstrittener  Fund  aus  urchristlicher 

Zeit.     (Kempten),  1910,  374  ff. 
Spatjudische  Mystik  ?   {Der  Logos  als  Heiland  im  ersten  Jahrhunderi). 

Freiburg  im  B.,  19 10,  59-68. 
Labourt   (J.)    and    Batiffol   (P.).      Les    Odes   de    Salomon.      Une   ceuvre 

chre'tienne  des  environs    de   Fan    100-120.       Traduction   francaise 

(p.     1-38)    et    introduction    historique    (p.    39-121).      Paris,    191 1. 

Reprint  from  Revue  Biblique,  1910,483-500;  1911,5-59,161-197. 
Lagrange  (M.  J.).  In  Revue  Biblique,  1910,  593-596;  and  1912,  464-469. 
Leendertz  (J.  M.).     De  Oden  van  Salomo.     Amsterdam,  19 10. 

In  Theol.  Lit.-Blatt  for  Oct.  24,  1913. 
Leipoldt  (J.).    Die  Lieder  Salomos.    Allgem.  evang.  luth.  Kirchenzeit.,  19 10, 

626-630. 
Lejay  (P.).     In  Bulletin  d'ancienne  litter attire   et   d' ' archeologie    chrehennes, 

191 1,  56-60. 
Lindblom  (J.).     Om  lifvets  ide  hos  Paulus  och  Iohannes  samt  i  de  s.  k. 

Salomos  Oden.     Upsala,  191 1. 


460  ODES   OF   SOLOMON 

Loisy  (A.).     La  mention  du  Temple  dans  les  Odes  de  Salomon.    Zeitschr. 
fiir  neut.  Wiss.,  1 9 1 1 ,  1 26- 1 30. 
Idem  in  Revue  critique,  191 1,  101-105;   1912,  343-345. 
In  Revue  d'hisioire  et  de  litterature,  191 1,  493-501  ;    191  2,  524-576. 
Ludwig.      Kin    altchristliches   Gesang-    und    Gebetbuch    aus   dem   ersten 

Jahrhundert.      Theologisches  Prakt.  (Passau),  191 1,  288-294. 
Marias   (L.).      La    ddcouverte    des    Odes    de    Salomon.     Etudes,    1909, 

807-812. 
Marmorstein    (A.).     Kranz   und    Krone   in   den    Oden    Salomos.     Orient. 

Liter aturzeit.,  1912,  306  ff. 
Marshall   (J.    T.).      The    Odes   and    Philo.      Expositor,    1911,    385-398, 

5I9-536. 
Mead  (G.  R.  S.).     In  The  Quest,  1910,  561-570;  ibid.,  u,  166-169. 
Menzies  (W.  A.).     The  Odes  of  Solomon.      The  Interpreter,   1910-191 1, 

7-22. 
Mingana  (A.).     Quelques  mots  sur   les  Odes  de   Salomon.     Zeitschr.  fiir 
neut.  Wiss.,  1914,  234-253;  and  .ibid.,  1915,  167-190. 
The  Odes  of  Solomon.      Dictionary  of  the  Apostolic  Church,  ii,    191 8 

(S.V.). 

Montgomery  (J.  A.).     The  recently  discovered  Odes  of  Solomon.     Biblical 

World,  1910,  93-100. 
Nau  (F.).     In  Revue  de  V Orient  Chre'tien,  1910,  448;   191 1,   220;  and  in 

foam.  Asiatique,  1913,  228. 
Nestle  (E.).     In   Theologisches  Liter  aturblatt,   191  o,    1-4;    19 1 1,    394  and 
534  f . ;   1912,  202  f. ;  also  in  Theolog.  Litera/urzeitung,  19 10,  6  sq. 
1912,  28  f.,  492,  and  586-588. 
Newbold  (W.  R.).     Bardaisan  and  the  Odes  of  Solomon.     Journal  of  Bibl. 
Literature,  191 1,  161-204. 
The  Descent  of  Christ  in  the  Odes  of  Solomon,    fourn.  of  Bibl.  Liter., 
1912,  168-209. 
Perles  (F.).     In  Orientalist.  Literaturzeit.,  191 2,  26  ff. 
Plooij  (D.).     In   Thcol.  Tijdschrift,   1911-1912,  De  Boom  der  Bitterheid, 
294-303;  ibid.,  pp.  449-462:  De  'Oranten'. 
In  Museum  (Leiden),  1912,  148-150. 
In  Expository  Times,  19 12,  199-203. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL   INDEX  461 

In  Zeiischr.  fur  neut.   Wiss.,  1913,  pp.  222-231:  '  Der  descensus  ad 
inferos  in  Aphrahat  und  den  Oden  Salomos.' 
Preuschen  (E.).     Ein  Ubersetzungsfehler  in  den  Oden  Salomos.     Zeitschr. 
filr  neut.  Wiss.,  1915,  233-235;  ibid.,  1910,  328. 
In   Theolog.  Jahresbericht   (Leipzig),    191 1,    XXIX,    4,   p.   317;    ibid., 
1912,  XXX,  4,  p.  366. 
Reinach  (S.).     Les  Odes  de  Salomon.     Revue  de  Vhist.  des  religions,  19 10, 
1-16,  279-294. 
A  propos  des  Odes  de  Salomon.    Revue  moderniste  inter naiionale,  19 10, 

457"458- 
Sacchi  (E.).     Le  Odi  di  Salomone.     Nuova  Antologia,  191 1,  84-91. 
Schenke    (W.).     De   nylig    fundne    saakaldte    Solomos   oder.      In   Norsk 

Teologisk  Tidskrift  (Christiania),  191 1,  No.  2. 
Schoen  (H.).     Un  Psautier  judeo-chretien  du  premier  siecle.     Mercure  de 

France,  191 1,  774-786. 
Schulthess   (F.).      Textkritische    Bemerkungen    zu    den    syrischen    Oden 

Salomos.     Zeitschr.  filr  neut.  Wiss.,  1910,  249-258. 
Schmitt  (Ch.).     Die  42  Oden  Salomos  (Trier),  1910-11,  417-422. 
Smith  (P.).     Disciples  of  John  and  the  Odes  of  Solomon.     Monist,  19 15, 

161-199. 
Spitta  (F.).    Zum  Verstandnis  der  Oden  Salomos.    Zeitschr.  fiir  neut.  Wiss., 

1910,  193-203,  259-290. 
Die     Oden     Salomos.       M.  fiir     Gottesdiensi     und     kirchl.     Kunst 

(Gottingen),  1910,  245-249,  273-278. 
Die  Oden  Salomos  und  das  Neue  Testament.   M.  fur  Pastor altheologie, 

1910-1911,  91-101. 
Sprengling  (M.).     Bardesanes  and  the  Odes  of  Solomon.     Amer.fournal  of 

Theology,  191 1,  459-461.     Ibid.,  1910,  632-637. 
Staerk  (W.).     Kritische  Bemerkungen  zu  den  Oden  Salomos.    Zeiischr.  fiir 

wiss.  Theologie,  19 10,  289-306.     See  also  under  Ungnad. 
Stolten  (W.).     Gnostische  Parallelen  zu  den  Oden  Salomos.     Zeitschr.  fiir 

neut.  Wiss.,  191 2,  29-58. 
Strachan  (R.  H.).     The  newly  discovered    Odes    of  Solomon   and   their 

bearing  on  the  problem  of  the  Fourth  Gospel.     Expository  Times, 

1910-n,  7-14. 


46a  ODES    OF   SOLOMON 

Tondelli  (L.).     Le  Odi  di  Salomone.     Rome,  191 4. 

Torm    (E ).      Nye   Fund    og    deres    Betydning   for    den    nytestamentlige 

forskening.     In    Teologisk  Tidskrift  (Copenhagen),  1911,(111  2  1). 
Ungnad  (A.)  and   Staerk  (W.).     Die  Oden   Salomos  aus  dem  Syrischen 

iibersetzt,  mit  Anmerkungen.     In  Kkine  Texte,  64.     Bonn,  1910. 
Vaccari  (A.).     Le  Odi  di    Salomone.     Civilta  Cattolica,   191 1,  513-528; 

19 1 2,  22-36. 
Wabnitz  (A.).     Un  Psautier  jud^o-chretien  du  premier  siecle.     Revue  de 

the'olog.  et  des  quest,  relig.,  1910,  351-367. 
Wellhausen  (J.).      Gottingische  Gelehrte  Anzeigen,  1910,  629-641  ;  641  f. 
Wensinck  (A.  J.).     De   Oden  van  Salomo,  een  oudchristelijk  Psalmboek. 

Theologische  Studien  (Utrecht),  191 1,  1-60. 
Ephrem's  hymns  of  Epiphany  and  the  Odes  of  Solomon.     Expositor, 

1912,  108-112. 
Willey  (R.  H.  D.).     The  Odes  and  Psalms  of  Solomon.    Journ.  of  Theol. 

Stud.,  1913,  293-298. 
Wohlenberg  (G.)  and  Hansen  (H.)     In  Schleswig-Holstein-Lauenburgisches 

Kirch  n-  und  Schidblatt,   1910,  45,  47,  69,   81,   93,    105,    113,   125, 

477,  489. 
Worrell  (W.  H.).     The  Odes  of  Solomon  and  the  Pistis  Sophia.    Journ.  of 

Tin ol.  Stud.,  191 1,  29-45. 
Zahn  (T.).     Die  Oden  Salomos.    Nem  Kirchliche  Ztilschr.,  1910,  667-701, 

747-777- 
Zarin  (S.  INI.).     The  newly  discovered  apocryphal  writings :    The  Odes  of 
Solomon  (Russian  title)   in  Hristianskoe  Ctenie  (Petro-rad),    191 2, 
601-626. 
Zwaan  (J.  de).     Een  dichicr  uit  den  tijd  der  Apostolische  vaders.     Onze 
eeuw  (Haarlem),  191 1,  223-246. 
Ignatius  and  the  Odist.     Amer.  Journ.  of  Theology,  1911,  617-625. 
In  Museum,  July,  19 16,  31 1-3 15. 


To  the  above  list  must  be  added  the  following  Reviews,  Notices,  and 
Announcements  of  discovery  of  the  Odes  : 

'EA.0erw  7)  (3ao-i\eia  aov,  6  May,  1909  (J.  M.  Leendertz). 
Kirchlicher  Anzeigerfiir  Wiir/tmberg,  No.  49,  1909  (E.  Nestle). 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL   INDEX  463 

Sitzungsberichte  d.  konig.  preuss.  Akademie,  No.  51,  1909  (A.  Harnack). 

Times  Literary  Supplement,  2  Dec.  1909. 

The  Record,  17  Dec.  1909. 

Rivista  storico-critica  delle  scienze  teoL,  Nr.  7  and  8,  19 10  (U.  Manucci). 

The  Christian  World,  13  Jan.  19 10. 

The  Methodist  Times,  13  Jan.  19 10  (W.  B.  Brash). 

The  Athenaeum,  1910,  62-63;   I9I2>  5'7- 

The  British  Friend,  Jan.  19 10  (R.  S.  Franks). 

The  British  Weekly,  24  Feb.  19 10  (J.  Moffatt),  and  27  April. 

The  Outlook,  2  April,  19 10. 

The  Evening  Bulletin,  13  April,  19 10. 

The  Guardian,  14,  29  April,  3  June,  19 10  (Nairne). 

Great  Thoughts,  7  May,  19 10. 

The  Churchman,  Oct.  19 10. 

The  Amer.  Methodist  Quart.  Review,  Oct.  19 10,  and  Jan.  191 1. 

The  Biblical  World,  1910,  142  (Goodspeed),  and  432. 

Revue  d'histoire  eccle'siastique,  19 10,  623. 

Revue  moderniste,  1910,  418. 

Revue  de  Vhistoire  des  religions,  1910,  109. 

Revue  des  questions  hisloriques,  191 1. 

The  Evening  Bulletin,  13  April,  19 10. 

The  Daily  News,  11  March,  1910. 

Presbyterian  Banner,  2  June,  19 10  (D.  S.  Schaff). 

Theolog.  Rundschau,  Nov.  1910  (W.  Bousset). 

Theolog.  Liter  aturz.,  19 10,  6  f.  (E.  Schiirer). 

Theolog.  Literaturbericht,  1910,  304-306  (Riggenbach). 

Literarisches  Zentralblatt,  1910,  777-781  (G.  Kr.). 

Liter arische  Rundschau,  191 1,  153  f.  (B.  Hake). 

Theolog.  Tijdschrift,  191 1,  89-92  (K.  Lake). 

Revue   of  Theology   and  Phil,    191 1,   334    (V.   Bartlet),   and  July,    191 2 

(T.  H.  Weir). 
Studierstube  (Langensalza),  191 1,  No.  10  (J.  Bohmer). 
Revue  historique,  191 1,  101 ;   1912,  338  (C.  Guignebert). 
Revue  d'histoire  eccle'siastique,   191 1,    185  and  603;     191 2  (L.  Gougaud), 

and  p.  386  (C.  Mohlberg). 
The  A merican  Journal  of  Theology,  1 9 1 1 ,  322. 


464  ODES    OF   SOLOMON 

Bulletin  d'ancienne  litter  at.  et  d'arch.  chre'tienne,  191 1,  152  (J.  Labourt). 

Le  Lien  (Marseilles),  Nov.-Dec.  191 1  (Bruston). 

Theologie  und  Glaube,  191 1,  858  (B.  Bartmann),  and  592  (Peters). 

The  Irish  Theolog.  Quart.,  1911,  498  f.  (J.  MacCaffrey). 

Revue  Benedictine,  1911,  449  f.  (J.  de  Puniet). 

Echo  d' Orient,  191 1,  370  (S.  Salaville). 

Zeiischr.  fur  wissenscha/l.  Theologie,  191 2,  263  (Windisch). 

Historisches  Jahrbuch  (Munich),  191 2,  157  (A.  G.). 

Revue  critique  d'histoire  et  de  litter ature,  1913,  263  (J.  B.  Chabot). 

Nederlandsche  Kerkbode,  191 1,  July  29  and  Aug.  5  (P.). 

Analecta  Bollandiana,  191 1,  torn,  xxx,  fasc.  ii-in,  p.  332  (H.  Delahaye). 

Tlie  Expository  Times,  191 2,  75. 

The  Westminster  Review  for  Jan.  25,  1913. 

Abst.  Journ.   Society   of  Hist.    Theol.    for    1911-1912.       (A.    Buchler    on 

Ode  xi,  and  V.  Bartlet  on  E.  A.  Abbott  and  the  Odes.) 
Journal  of  Theol.  Studies,  19 14,  454  (H.  M.  Slee). 


JAN     5  1984 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


