     ______________________________________________________________________

          Title: The Dialogue of Palladius Concerning the Life of Chrysostom
     Creator(s): Palladius of Galatia/Helenopolis (c. 363/4-c. 431 CE)
                 Moore, Herbert (Translator)
    Print Basis: London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, 1921 (Translations
                  of Christian Literature, Series I: Greek Texts)
         Rights: Public Domain
   Rights Basis: Published 1921; long out of US copyright. Confirmed directly from the
                  Internet Archive scan (identifier thedialogueofpal00mooruoft), fetched
                  and read in full this session.
Source Collection: Internet Archive (archive.org), identifier thedialogueofpal00mooruoft
     ______________________________________________________________________

NOTE ON THIS TRANSCRIPTION: the source is a raw OCR (djvu) text layer from
a scanned physical volume, not a clean digital edition. Runs of 2+ spaces
between words (a systematic OCR-layout artifact of the scan, not a feature
of the printed text) have been collapsed to single spaces throughout; no
word, spelling, or punctuation has been altered. OCR misreads may remain
uncorrected elsewhere in the file; any passage this build quotes verbatim
has been checked by eye against this file directly, not assumed correct
from the OCR alone.




Pe SRN abe ome 
Abe tad συ στους ari 


eectineteteesetandetaineanaaeamadtn 











REGIS 


BIBL. MAJ, 


COLLEGE 





TRANSLATIONS OF CHRISTIAN LITERATURE 


GENERAL Epitors: W. J. SPARROW SIMPSON, D.D., 
W. K. LOWTHER CLARKE, B.D. 


SERIES I 
GREEK TEATS 


ΠΡ DIAROGUE OF 
PALLADIUS 














THT TRANSIATIONS OF CHRISTIANS) 
| LITERATURE. SERIES I [Ὁ 
_GREEK TEXTS _ 


φρο ἐὸν er oe ἔμ 















E 3 
18 OK 
a BD, at , 
“οὶ - κ y 
ee: i e 
2 Lf 
| ui ta 
4 i 
2 
Ὡς 


came’ hae 


THE DIALOGUE _ 


OF PALLADIUS 
CONCERNING THE 
LIFE OF CHRYSOSTOM 

















SR ERLE CMT EMARS CISC EINER HOHNER 


REGIS 
BIBL. MAJ. 


COLLEGB “ἢ 


wih Fes ROSSA KRM νὰν ἐν SSuatgreee = : a — 
ἐς ΤῈ ΒΗ ΩΣ wee ok ets can δ ὃ : jeg ge i eine BE rte 
SIPPLICw νῶν ot eae ἀντ CBU! eel ap Be ON LC RENIN pee ae 






ate 
and 


Cane sty: 











SHEEN 






: ReuRyer μὰ, tee t Tee ie ἢ 
Rae Lio ee 


IGA ATPL. i 








141 SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING FU), 

Ἢ CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE. London} 4(] 

The Macmillan Company. NewYork [14] 
1921 





















CHAP. 


ΨΗΙ, 


XII. 


CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION :— 
(i) THE SUBJECT OF THE MEMOIR . 

(ii) THE TEACHING OF THE DIALOGUE 
(iii) THE AUTHOR . : : ; 
(iv) THE TREATISE . : ‘ : 
(v) THE PRESENT EDITION. é 


INTRODUCTORY . . 

CHRYSOSTOM’S LETTER TO INNOCENT . 
THE EMPEROR OF ROME TAKES ACTION 
THE BISHOP BEGINS HIS NARRATIVE 
THE EARLY CAREER OF CHRYSOSTOM 
THE BEGINNING OF TROUBLE 


THEOPHILUS, THE MONKS AND CHRYSOS- 
TOM . . . . . . 


FIRST EXPULSION OF CHRYSOSTOM . 


INTRIGUES AND VIOLENCE AT CONSTANTI- 
NOPLE . . . . . . 


CHRYSOSTOM’S DEPARTURE, ΑΝῸ ITS 
SEQUEL . : : ; : ‘ 


EXILE AND DEATH OF CHRYSOSTOM . 


A DEFENCE OF CHRYSOSTOM’S ABSTE- 
MIOUS HABITS . . . . 
ν 


PAGE 
- Vil 
ix 
Xiv 


vi 
CHAP. 
XIII. 
XIV. 


aA. 


XVI. 
XVII. 


XVIII. 


XIX. 


XX. 


CONTENTS ὶ 


A DEFENCE AGAINST THE CHARGE OF 
TYRANNICAL DEPOSITIONS . 


THE TRIAL OF ANTONINUS. CHRYSOS- 
TOM’S VISIT TO EPHESUS : 


SIX BISHOPS DEPOSED—-CHRYSOSTOM’S 
WORK UNDONE ‘ . 


PORPHYRIUS . ° ν 


THE VIRTUES OF THE MONKS, AND OF 
OLYMPIAS . ° . . . 


CHRYSOSTOM’S IDEALS Ξ . 


A DEFENCE AGAINST THE CHARGES OF 
PRIDE AND INSOLENCE . . . 


THE SUFFERINGS OF THE SAINTS, AND 
THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD . . 


INDICES :— 
(i) KEY-WORDS TO PARALLEL PHRASES 

(ii) INDEX OF SUBJECTS ᾿ ; 
(ili) PERSONS MENTIONED IN THE TEXT 
(iv) PASSAGES OF SCRIPTURE . ; 


PAGE 


III 
110 


127 | 
132 


145 
154 


165 
173 


201 
204 
207 
210 


INTRODUCTION 


I. THE SUBJECT OF THE MEMOIR 


Tus treatise, obviously written by one who had 
full information, and was an eye-witness of many of 
the incidents which he narrates, is our best authority 
for the life of St. Chrysostom ; we have other “ lives,” 
of no great value, by Theodore, Bishop of Trimithus 
(c. 680), George, Bishop of Alexandria (c. 620), ‘‘ Leo 
the Emperor’’ (c. 900), and an anonymous writer ; 
and accounts contained in the fifth-century Church 
Histories of Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret and 
Philostorgius, the theologian Photius (c. 850), and 
the pagan writer Zosimus, besides a few other refer- 
ences in ancient authors. From these various sources 
we are able to draw not only a record of Chrysostom’s 
life, but also a picture of the man himself; and, 
incidentally, to gather light upon the life of the 
Church in his days, and information as to uses and 
observances, some of which have fallen into desuetude, 
while others are still practised among us. 

The more carefully we study his life, the more 
lovable the man appears, and the more conscious we 
‘are οὗ our debt to him, for the noble standard of 
devotional, ministerial and intellectual Christian life 
which he so fearlessly, faithfully and outspokenly 
maintained,! and bequeathed to us; and the more 
admirable seems his life, by contrast with the lives 
of many of his contemporaries, pagan and, alas! 
even Christian. But he had the defects of his good 
qualities. ‘‘ He was a man who in his enthusiasm 
for virtue was over-bitter, and given to wrath rather 


1 See especially pp. 154, 113. 
vill 


vill INTRODUCTION 


than to modest dealings; from the uprightness of 
his life he took no thought for the future, and from 
his simplicity of character acted without deep con- 
sideration. He used unmeasured freedom of speech 
with those whom he encountered, and as a teacher 
greatly benefited his hearers; but was considered by 
those who did not know him to be arrogant in his 
behaviour.”’ ἢ 

The Dialogue shows us the grounds on which these 
criticisms were based, and the author offers various 
answers to them. ‘“‘ He had qualities admirable in 
a man of action; what could be more precious than 
his generous and sanguine enthusiasm? He lacked 
the command over himself, the coolness and tact, of 
a politician; we shall often notice this; but if he had 
possessed these, would he have been Chrysostom ? ”’ 
(Puech).? 

It is impossible here to deal with Chrysostom’s 
literary work, which is more abundant than that of 
any other Greek Church writer. While at Antioch 
he preached, chiefly during Lent, series after series 
of homilies, or expositions of Scripture, in which he 
dealt with most of the books of the Bible. “I 
think,’’ writes Isidore of Pelusium, ‘‘ that if the divine 
Paul had wished to expound his own writings, he 
would not have spoken otherwise than this famous 
master; so remarkable is his exposition for its con- 
tents, beauty of form, and propriety of expression.” 
Suidas, in the tenth century, says: ‘‘ Since the world 
began, no one has possessed such gifts as an orator: 
he alone merited the name of Golden-mouthed ? and 
divine orator.’”” Most of these homilies were taken 
down by shorthand writers, and apparently corrected 
by himself. There are also extant a large number 
of sermons on special subjects, the most famous of 

1 Socrates, Hist. Eccl., vi. 3. Sozomen has a similar 
judgment. 

2 It is interesting to consider how far he was carried away 
by the malign μὲν ῥδημῖηε of Archdeacon Serapion upon his 
impetuous disposition. 

3 “« Chrysostomos,”’ 


INTRODUCTION 7 ix 


which are the twenty-one ‘‘ On the Statues,” delivered 
at Antioch in 387, when the city was threatened 
with destruction by the Emperor, in punishment for 
a disloyal outbreak; and many treatises on moral 
and theological subjects, including his splendid work 
“On the Priesthood.’ Most of his remains are of 
the period of his life spent at Antioch; at Constanti- 
nople he lacked the time, if not the opportunity, for 
such highly intellectual work. A considerable number 
of spurious works are also attributed to him, includ- 
ing some which were probably forged, or at least 
misreported, by his enemies, in order to enrage the 
Impress against him. 


II. THE TEACHING OF THE DIALOGUE 


Chrysostom’s career is one more exemplification of 
the perennial conflict between the Church and the 
world. The Church is to act as the salt of the earth, 
the city set on an hill, the light of the world, the 
temple of the Living God; her ideals will always be 
too high even for the saints to attain, but it is the 
few who reach forth unto those things which are 
before that raise the average attainments of man- 
kind. Yet she must not break the bruised reed, or 
quench the smoking flax, by pitching her requirements 
too high for the practical use of the ordinary man 
living in the world, and condemning things which 
God hath not condemned. She may neither make 
the heart of the righteous sad, nor strengthen the 
hands of the wicked, by promising them life. 

Thus the problem before the Church at all times 
is to steer her way between the two extremes of 
undue severity and compliant subservience. Hence 
men of different temperaments will form different 
judgments upon Chrysostom’s career. One tempera- 
ment is all for severity, sometimes with the highest 
motives, sometimes, unconsciously it may be, other- 


1 The Homilies on Acts, the Psalms and the Epistles to 
the Colossians and Thessalonians are of this period, 


x INTRODUCTION 


wise ; it demands asceticism in life, rigour in doctrine, 
strictness in the enjoyment of the pleasures of the 
world. Another, with high or (again perhaps uncon- 
sciously) with low motives, thinks that men may 
best be won by being content with a low standard, 
with an eye to the possibilities of the multitude, 
rather than of the few; it seeks to teach that all 
worldly things are gifts of God, richly given us to 
enjoy. The first condemns the second as truckling 
to the world; the second looks upon the first as a 
dreamer of vain dreams. The first rebukes out of 
season as well as in season; the second marvels at 
his want of tact. 

There can be no doubt which is the point of view 
taken in this Dialogue. Records of events which so 
deeply stirred the hearts of men are naturally coloured 
by the prejudices of their writers; it is hard to 
believe that all the denunciations of Chrysostom’s 
enemies contained in the treatise were truly deserved. 
The strong common sense shown in Chrysostom’s 
writings, though sometimes obscured by extravagance 
of expression and ignorance of economic. laws, in 
regard to the riches, the pomps and the vanities of 
the world, generally preserved him from the bitter- 
ness with which his disciple denounces them. But 
those who fall short of our author’s ideal have 
“leaped upon the ministry,” dealt deceitfully with 
the word of God, and perverted the Christian teach- 
ing. No language is too strong; the priest who has 
not the virtues of the monk is worthy only of a 
company of satyrs, or a priesthood of Dionysus. 
True, ‘‘ the sword could not be blunt, or the bold 
word be left unspoken,” and Chrysostom did indeed 
“lift up his voice more clearly than a trumpet.” 
Yet in spite of Palladius’ defence of Chrysostom’s 
zeal, it is difficult to rise from the study of the 
various records without forming the conclusion that 
in regard to Eudoxia he spake unadvisedly with his 
lips; it seems impossible to doubt that the charges 
of comparing her publicly to Jezebel and Herodias 


INTRODUCTION ΧΙ 


were founded on fact. Because his eloquence had 
stirred the populace to reform, and he had the 
support of many warm friends, he thought himself, 
like Savonarola in later days, strong enough to attack 
her; and the shining of his light in the midst. of a 
crooked and perverse nation was extinguished for 
ever. Was he right or wrong? We answer the 
question according to our respective temperaments. 
Yet whatever be our judgment, we know that the 
world does, after all, respect high ideals, and uncon- 
sciously is raised by them, though it may seem to 
go on its own way, and prefer to join in the 
censure upon the outspoken tongue. Chrysostom’s 
life and death were not in vain. 

So far as we can judge, making all allowances for 
the prejudices of our author, Theophilus’ motives 
were not good, but evil. Chrysostom, like Cranmer, 
appealed to an cecumenical council, which never was 
held, and never can be held. ‘‘ This world is a 
wrestling-ground,’ and Palladius sees that there is 
no such rough-and-ready way to solve our problems. 
We are come to the general assembly of the first- 
born, which are written in heaven; but we are also 
come to God, the Judge of all. 

But the world is not only a spiritual force, seductive 
and attractive, continually tending to drag the ideal 
down to its own level. It has also its coercive power ; 
its rulers bear the sword, and can help forward or 
restrain the work of the Church. Its good-will may 
be won by “tables” or by “ flattery,” but always 
with disastrous results. We find Chrysostom and 
the monks, no less than Theophilus and Atticus, 
appealing to the civil power, and using it, not as an 
impartial judge between conflicting parties, but asa 
means of forwarding their respective views of the 
doctrine and discipline of the Church. But Chrysos- 
tom found at last that the sword borne by the 
temporal power is two-edged. Theophilus’ party 
gained the upper hand, by a dexterous use of the 
selfish passions which animate rulers and subjects 


ΧΙ INTRODUCTION 


alike; and the Church never regained her position 
as a power for righteousness. No check was left 
upon the absolutism of the Emperor, henceforth 
supreme in Church and State. No Ambrose said to 
him, “ Thou hast imitated the guilt of David; imitate 
him also in thy penance; ᾿᾿ no Hildebrand could raise 
the swan-like cry, “1 have loved righteousness and 
hated iniquity, therefore I die in exile.” But as the 
world advances in its conceptions of the worth of 
the individual, and of his rights and liberties, abso- 
lutism becomes impossible, and the long-pent-up 
forces at last break out in revolution, the more 
savage in proportion to the repression of the past. 
“Though the wheels of God grind slowly, yet they 
grind exceeding small.’ Our author, like other early 
historians, may or may not have been right in 
attributing various disasters to the Divine wrath at 
the judicial murder of Chrysostom; we see God’s 
Hand in greater things than these. A meeting of 
forty discontented bishops in a suburb, fourteen 
hundred years ago, may seem of small importance 
to us; but it was one of the first steps to the placing 
of the Church, like the State, under the heel of 
the Emperors—the conception which has preyailed 
through the centuries in the [astern Church. 

A certain nameless bishop is represented as paying 
a visit to Rome, where he has a conversation, lasting 
several days (p. 148), with a deacon, Theodorus, who 
has heard only one side of the story, emanating from 
Chrysostom’s enemies, and wishes to know the truth, 
both as to the facts, and as to the cavils at Chrysos- 
tom’s personal character, embodied in the charges 
brought against him at The Oak. Other persons are 
present during the discussion (pp. 6, 60, 119, 165), one 
of whom joins in fora moment; and the final result is 
that Theodorus rejects the disparaging accounts he 
has received, and utters an eulogy upon the martyred 
saint. The supposed date of the Dialogue is shortly 
after Chrysostom’s death, as the news of it which 
has reached the deacon needs confirmation (p. 33). 


INTRODUCTION xiii 


The events referred to in the Dialogue may be 
arranged in historical order thus :— 


A.D. PAGE 
344-347. Chrysostom born at Antioch . ae 

His education : : “Ὁ Ὁ 
370. Baptized . : νι es 2 
373. Enters monastery near Antioch : ας |: 
381. Ordained deacon at Antioch Σ So SD 


386. Ordained priest at Antioch . 40 
398 (Feb. 26). Ordained bishop at Constantinople 42 
Reforms in the Church and in the 


city ; : . 44 ff, 

399. Healing of the schism at Antioch . ae 

400. Revolt of Gainas . ; : δ ΠΕΣ 

Eusebius’ accusation of Antoninus 117 ff. 

401 (Jan.). Visit to Ephesus : ᾿ ee a 

Deposition of six bishops ‘ » FSF 
Theophilus’ condemnation of Origen- 

isi, : 54 

402. Arrival of the monks at Constantinople ee: 

403. The Synod of The Oak : : . 65 ff. 

First expulsion of δ διὰ es ; eee A 

Theophilus’ intrigues. . 74 ff. 


404 (Easter—April 16). Tumult in “the Church ‘ 81 
Chrysostom’s letter to 


Innocent . . 10 8, 

Attempt upon hislife. 177 

(June 20). Second expulsion . : . 85 fi. 
Burning of the Church . ᾿ς 58 


Reception of the news at Rome 21 ff. 
Deputation of Western Bishops 28 ff. 
Cruel treatment of Chrysostom’s 


supporters : ; 174 ff. 

(Sept.). Arrivalat Cucusus . : Meee! 

407 (June). Removal to Pityus . ig 
(Sept.14). Death ., : : ‘ τ ΝΒ 


Accounts are introduced of Olympias (p. 150), of 
Porphyrius (p. 133 ff.) and of various monks (p. 145). 
The charges brought against Chrysostom which are 


XIV INTRODUCTION 


met are those of eating alone (pp. 98, 112), of deposing 
sixteen bishops (p. 116), of excessive outspokenness 
(p. 160), of personal attacks upon individuals (p. 163), 
and of haughtiness and insolence towards clergy 
(p. 165). The author also moralizes at great length 
upon various subjects, which will be found in the 
General Index. 


ΤΗ Tue AuTHoR 


The treatise as it stands is anonymous, but it is 
generally attributed to Palladius, Bishop of Helen- 
opolis. Its present title is ‘‘ An historical dialogue of 
Palladius, Bishop of Helenopolis, held with Theodorus, 
Deacon of Rome, concerning the life and conversation 
of the blessed John, Bishop of Constantinople, the 
Golden-mouthed.”’ And in the margin the words are 
added, ‘‘In other (copies) it is written, Bishop of 
Aspona.” 

Thus the title represents, not that Palladius of 
Helenopolis, or of Aspona, is the writer of the treatise, 
but that he is the nameless bishop who takes the 
chief part in the Dialogue. Yet this is nowhere 
stated. He is described simply as a member of 
John’s synod (pp. 7, 66), from the east (p. 6), though 
not of Constantinople (p. 150), who had suffered on his 
behalf (p. 173). Nor can it be intended to identify 
the bishop with Palladius; it is asserted that it is 
the bishop’s first visit to Rome (p. 6), yet within a 
few pages (p. 25) that Palladius of Helenopolis had 
been one of the first who brought to Rome the news 
of the troubles. He is represented as an old man 
(p. 33), while Palladius was not forty-five years old 
at the time of Chrysostom’s death. There is nothing 
except the title to suggest that the interlocutor is 
Palladius, who is always spoken of in the third 
person—a fact which some have supposed to forbid 
the idea of his being the author. The same argu- 
ment would show that Boswell was not the author 
of the Life of Johnson. In fact, it is quite clear 
that the bishop of the Dialogue is an entirely 


_ INTRODUCTION XV 


imaginary person. Yet George tells us that he has 
made extracts from “ the Dialogue of Bishop Palladius 
with Theodore,” without naming his diocese; Theo- 
dore of Trimuthus also regards him as the bishop 
of the Dialogue. Neither of these writers had better 
information than we possess; they simply aecepted 
the statement of the title as we have it. 

Palladius, Bishop of Helenopolis (Drepanum, in 
Bithynia), is known to us as the author of the Lausiac 
History, an English translation of which, by W. K. 
Lowther Clarke, is published in the present Series; 
this consists of a number of brief biographies or 
anecdotes of worthies, chiefly monks, whom he had 
known, or of whom he had heard, during his life as 
a monk in the desert, or in the course of his travels. 
The Introduction to this work states that it was 
compiled for the same purpose of moral instruction 
which is alleged for the Dialogue. He was evidently 
a friend of Chrysostom, who writes to him from 
Cucusus, asking for his prayers, and saying that he 
ceases not daily to be anxious for his welfare (Ep. 
113). The History shows that he was consecrated 
Bishop of Helenopolis after leaving the desert, in the 
year 400, ““having become embroiled in the disturbance 
connected with the blessed John’’;? the Dialogue 
gives us the account of his journey to Ephesus 
(p. 125 ff.), of his visit to Rome (p. 25), his voyage to 
Constantinople (p. 29), and his exile to Syene 
(pp. 174, 178). On his return, he lived for two years 
in Galatia, and (in 417), as Socrates ὃ informs us, he 
was translated as bishop to Aspona, in Galatia. 
Two years later he wrote his Lausiac History, and 
_ some time between 420 and 430 he died. 


1 The statement in D.C.B., that John sent his “ grateful 
thanks’’ to Pinianus, Palladius’ host at Rome (L.H., lxi. 5), 
is incorrect. The thanks are sent (Chrys. Epp. 1 57-160) to 
the four bishops of the delegation. The letters and the History 
both confirm the accounts given in the Dialogue of the visit 
to Rome and its sequel. 

* Path, ἐς H., XX¥XVv. 12. 

~ wah, 36. 


Xvi INTRODUCTION 


IV. THE TREATISE 


The only manuscript copy of the treatise appears 
to be one of the eleventh century (Bigot in error says 
the seventh) in the Medicean Library at Florence; 
the Life of Chrysostom by George contains copious 
extracts from the work, by which our text may be 
checked. It was first edited, with a Latin transla- 
tion, by Emeritus Bigot, in 1680. It is written in 
late Greek, many words being used in senses unknown 
to classical authors, and grammatical mistakes are 
frequent. The historical order of events is dis- 
regarded, as it is the chief object of the author, not 
so much to write a biography, as to set forth an 
ideal, to stimulate his readers to follow the good 
example of the saint, and to warn them against 
improperly seeking the priesthood (p. 173). 

It is cast in the form of a dialogue, a recognized 
method of presenting a moral treatise. Chrysostom’s 
famous work On the Priesthood is so written; 
the “liberal education’”’—-of which Palladius both 
here and in the Lausiac History speaks with admira- 
tion—which he had received certainly included the 
dialogues of Plato, and it was natural to him to use 
this vehicle of thought. Palladius’ love for his 
master led him to follow his example; but he had 
not his knowledge of Plato, or his ability, and at 
times the Dialogue is somewhat wearisome, and the 
form unsuitable to the subject. He cannot do two 
things at once—give a memoir of a good man, and 
compile a moral treatise; when he introduces long 
accounts of historical incidents, and, above all, the 
letter to Innocent (p. 10), he makes a wide departure 
from the methods followed in the Platonic dialogues 
which have a similar purpose to his own, such as 
the Apology of Socrates and Crito. We forget that 
we are reading a dialogue, and have a sense of 
annoyance when the deacon interrupts with his 
jejune questions and remarks. 

The titles of ancient writings are frequently 


INTRODUCTION XVii 


unreliable. I take it as probable that something of 
this sort occurred; the original heading was simply 
‘“‘ An historical dialogue of Palladius ’’—that is, ‘‘ by 
Palladius.”” Some copyist, noticing that the chief 
interlocutor was a bishop, and that “ Palladius, 
Bishop of Helenopolis,’’ was mentioned in the treatise, 
supposed that the indication of authorship was meant 
to identify the imaginary character in the Dialogue, 
and took upon himself to add the rest. Then a 
later scribe, who knew that Palladius, the author of 
the History, had been translated to Aspona, inserted 
the correction. The title ‘‘ Golden-mouthed,” at 
least, is unquestionably an addition; it took the 
place of “ John” in common parlance at a later 
time—about the middle of the fifth century. This 
addition casts suspicion upon the rest of the heading. 
But why should Palladius of Helenopolis have been 
picked out as the interlocutor from all the Eastern 
bishops mentioned, unless there was a tradition, or 
more probably written evidence in the heading as it 
then stood, specially connecting a Palladius with the 
treatise, not as interlocutor, but as author? There 
certainly was such a tradition; in a list of eighteen 
persons who wrote on the life of Chrysostom, con- 
tained in a ‘“‘ very ancient codex’? examined by 
Petavius, ‘‘ Palladius, Bishop of Helenopolis,” is in- 
cluded; Photius says that ‘‘ Palladius was a bishop, 
and wrote of Chrysostom’s doings in the form of a 
dialogue.” | 
- Palladius was by no means an uncommon name 
at the time; Dom Butler finds eleven persons who 
bore it. If the author was named Palladius, the 
question arises: Was this Palladius the Bishop of 
Helenopolis, the author also of the Laustac 
History, or another man of the same name? Bigot © 
goes so far as to suggest that another Palladius 
succeeded the Lausiac author at Helenopolis, and 
wrote the Dialogue. 

The learned Benedictine, Dom Cuthbert Butler, 
Abbot of Downside Abbey, to whom we owe an 

B 


ΧΥΗΪ INTRODUCTION 


edition of the Lausiac History (Cambridge, 1904) 
which for accurate scholarship and. minute research 
ranks with the finest works of the kind ever issued, 
forms the conclusion that both writings have the 
same authorship (in his monograph Authorship of the 
Dialogus de Vita Chrysostomt, Rome, 1908). Barden- 
hewer says? that “ the author of the Lausiac History 
is easily identified with the biographer of Chrysos- 
tom,” though, for reasons which he does not. give, 
he adds that “‘ he must not be confounded with the 
Bishop of Helenopolis.’’ He had not the advantage 
of reading Dom Butler’s work, which shows con- 
clusively that the Lausiac History was written by 
this bishop. 

Abbot Butler first weighs the evidence of style, 
and admits that there is a wide difference, not only 
in vocabulary, but also in use of phrases and manner 
of diction generally. We know that an author is 
usually rather proud of a telling word or phrase, and 
is apt to repeat it again and again; and every one 
has little tricks of expression, which are apt to occur 
all through his various works. About seventy words 
in Dom Butler’s Index appear in the Dialogue; but 
many even of these are common in Patristic literature, 
and a great many curious words, as well as a great 
many characteristic expressions and phrases, are 
found in the one, not in the other. Mr. Clarke 
remarks that a distinguishing feature of Palladius’ 
style is his incessant use of the particle οὖν; this is 
not the case in the Dialogue. The Dialogue abounds 
in grammatical mistakes; the author continually for- 
gets the construction with which he began one of 
his long sentences, and changes the subject in its 
course. Few such errors occur in the simpler narra- 
tives of the History.2, The Dialogue has many more 
quotations from Scripture, even in proportion to its 
length (219, as against 50), This is partly because 


1 Patrology (Shahan’s Transl.), p. 381. 
? But cf. Pall., L. H., Prologue, thirty-eight lines without 
@ full-stop. 


INTRODUCTION xix 


in the non-historical portions the author is justifying 
Chrysostom’s actions by scriptural precedent; but 
while the quotations in the History are brief, in the 
Dialogue they are sometimes very lengthy, Only 
eight are common to both treatises, though in two 
other cases words from the same context are quoted 
to the same effect. 

On the other hand, Butler tells us that Dr. Zéckler 
speaks of “‘ the essential similarity of style,’ ἢ and 
that Dr. Preuschen considers the dissimilarity not 
sufficient to disprove common authorship, The reader 
of one constantly meets with strange words, or uses 
of words, or phrases, which recall the other; he feels 
that the writer who devised, or appropriated, one set 
of words or expressions was capable of doing so with 
the other. If we do not find so many “ tricks of 
expression ’’ as we should expect, we certainly find 
a large number. 

Butler prints side by side thirteen such noteworthy 
phrases, showing a remarkable amount of similarity. 
I have collected about seventy more, which may be 
found through the key-words given in my Index L.; 
many other verbal coincidences might be added. 
Further, Butler brings out a still more striking point : 
that both authors (if they be two) use the same 
expressions about the same persons and things. I think 
that any reader who takes the trouble to compare, not 
only the words and usages of words, but the phrases 
and passages in which they occur, in the respective 
treatises, will see how unlikely it is that two separate 
authors should have used so many identical expres- 
sions and descriptions, Even one who does not know 
Greek will agree that so many characteristic phrases 
occurring alike in Coriolanus and in Cymbeline would 
be a strong argument for identity of authorship. 

Style, however, is largely a matter of taste; Abbot 
Butler’s scholarly instinct leads him to attach more 


i This is especially noticeable in the passages in the 
Dialogue which deal with the life of monks, the subject of 
the History. Dr. Reitzenstein agrees with Dr, Zoéckler. 


XX | INTRODUCTION 


weight to the comparative use of Scripture texts. 
In both treatises the quotations are made freely, 
more particularly in the Dialogue, variations being 
introduced which are not found in any existing MS. 
It must not be supposed that ancient writers habitually 
“ verified their references.”” There was no Authorized 
Version in those days, and the discovery of a number 
of passages in the cumbrous roll-volumes of manu- 
script Scriptures, undivided into chapters and verses, 
without the help of a concordance, would require great 
time and trouble. We have to compare the use of 
Scripture by ancient writers with that of a preacher, 
rather than with that of a writer, of to-day. 

But we know that the monks, of whom Palladius 
was one, devoted much of their time to committing 
the sacred writings to memory (pp. 131, 149); many 
knew whole books by heart (Pall., L. H., xi., xxvi., 
XXXvVii.). Quotations may thus be regarded as toler- 
ably well representing MS. texts; at least, it is 
generally more or less clear when a variation is due 
to defective memory, when to difference in the 
original documents. Thus our author gets into 
trouble over his quotation from Ezek. xxxiv., in 
which he evidently trusted to his memory; the two 
long passages from Deut. xxxill. and Ezek. ix. present 
but slight variations from the text, and one of these 
(Deut. xxxiii. 16, 17) is of such a nature as to suggest 
that it was found in the text the author used. 

Dom Butler points out that in both treatises 
St. Matt. xi. 18 is combined with St. Matt. xxi. 32, 
and that in each case the quotation is prefaced with 
“in reproach.” Also that St. Mark ii. 16 is combined 
with St. Matt. ix. rr; both in a manner which has 
no MS. support or literary parallel. Both quote 
1 St. John ii. 18, with the remark that “it was the 
last hour 400 years ago.” It is almost incredible 
that this should be mere coincidence. 

Here again I have carried Dom Butler’s argument 
further. An examination of the O.T. quotations in 
the two treatises shows that where such variations 


᾿ἸΝΤΕΟΌΌΟΤΙΟΝ χχί. 


occur from the text of the LXX known as “B” 
(which Dr. Swete considers nearest the original 
version) as are obviously not due to lapse of memory, 
but are confirmed by MSS. which we possess, these 
variations are all found in one, or both, of the MSS. 
known as “‘ Aleph” or “A.” ? It would certainly 
be strange that, with the multiplication of copies of 
the Septuagint which must have taken place by 
A.D. 400, two different writers should have stumbled 
upon the same texts.” It is specially remarkable 
that in one text (Ecclus. viii. 9) inaccurately quoted 
from memory in both treatises, exactly the same 
alteration of words, and exactly the same alteration 
of order, appears in both. Is not this just what we 
find in the habitual misquotations in which a preacher 
of to-day is found to persist ? 

Again, the author of the Dialogue, like Palladius 
of Helenopolis, has seen Egyptian temples (p. 36) ; he 
has conversed with Hierax (p. 145); he is one of the 
forty bishops who struggled on Chrysostom’s side; he 
is full of admiration for monks; he knows the same 
people—Isidore, Ammon, Dioscorus, Chronius, Maca- 
rius, Olympias.? Finally, the knowledge of Palladius’ 
doings shown by the writer is extraordinary, if he 
was other than Palladius himself. In four passages 
he gives a vivid and minute account of incidents in 
which ‘ Palladius of Helenopolis”’ is stated to have 
taken part: the deputation to Constantinople (p. 29), 
the incidents connected with the Synod of The Oak 


1 Cambridge Companion to the Bible, p. 31; Oxford Helps 
to the Study of the Bible, p. 25. 

2 I do not mean that the writer or writers must have 
possessed actual copies of either of the MSS. mentioned; 
there were doubtless many other ‘copies of the original 
translation, with more or less numerous variations. For 
instance, two quotations are made—Ps. cxix. 51 and Prav. 
xi. 4—which are omitted in ‘‘B.’’ Both occur in “A”; 
but the first, at least, must have been in many other copies, 
as without them the eight verses of the stanza would have 
been deficient. 

3. In- both treatises acquaintance is shown with the writings 
of Evagrius, one of Palladius’ companions in the desert. 


ΧΧΙΪ INTRODUCTION 


(p. 66 ff.), the mission to Ephesus (p. 125 ff.), and the 
journey of the Eastern bishops (p. 178), which continues 
the narrative of the deputation. Only the account of 
the death-bed scene approaches these; details of this 
he would easily obtain. And he not only uses the 
same literary devices as in the History (such as “a 
soldier told me,” ‘‘ they say,”’—p. 178—“‘ it is said ’’) 
when recording incidents of which he was an eye- 
witness; but once (p. 29) he forgets that he is writing 
anonymously, and passes,like the author of the History, 
from indirect to direct narration, as St. Luke does in 
the Acts. We note that in both treatises proverbs and 
sententious observations are frequent, and that in 
both an inordinate amount of space is devoted to 
food and drink—or abstinence from them. 

It is, of course, possible that some later writer 
“edited ᾿᾿ the original work. It may be fanciful to 
suggest that pains seem to be taken to avoid the 
use of the particle ‘‘ therefore,” as though the author, 
or his editor, had deliberately substituted other con- 
necting words; the particle appears at times in 
several sentences together, as if the self-imposed rule 
had been forgotten. But we may account for the 
difference of style which has led some to deny to 
the author of the History the authorship of the 
Dialogue, by considerations of the difference of 
subject, the lapse of time, and the likelihood of his 
employment of an amanuensis. 

There is no need to argue the probability that the 
smaller work preceded the greater, since the design 
of both is stated to be the same—to edify readers 
by setting before them high examples of the Christian 
life. When the author found that the brief records 
of the History proved of interest and value, he would 
naturally try to do the same thing on a larger scale 
with the life of a single man, the most eminent 
Christian of the day. He could not write a lengthy 
treatise at Syene, if only for the want of “ prime 
parchment ”’ (p. 173), and is not likely to have done 
so during his stay in Galatia, with his mind dis- 


INTRODUCTION Xxili 


tracted by current events, and his uncertainty as to 
his future. The reference to Theophilus (who died 
in 412) on p. 190 does not necessarily imply that he 
was still alive; on the other hand, the mention of a 
collection of Chrysostom’s writings, especially of his 
letters (p. 100), seems to demand a certain lapse of time. 

Palladius wrote his History, as we saw, when he 
was about fifty-three years old. He had gone about, 
like Herodotus, with a notebook—mental, if not 
material—from which he afterwards drew his narra- 
tives and tales. Probably he had often rehearsed 
them in conversation, as men do, to fellow-travellers, 
and to little knots of friends interested in the monkish 
life, in the winter evenings, and wrote them down 
much as he had told them by word of mouth. Hence 
the “simple and natural air’ of which Tillemont 
speaks. But in the Dialogue he is setting himself a 
more serious task. He is aiming at the standard set 
him by his models, Plato and Chrysostom himself ; 
the author of a chatty volume of reminiscences 
naturally adopts a more grandiose style when making 
a solid contribution to literature. But he had not 
the gifts to do this successfully; he falls into the 
“more affected style of a man who has some taint 
of naughty rhetoric’’? (Tillemont). His mind had 
been widened, and his vocabulary enlarged, by his 
intercourse with men, since the days when, as a monk, 
he had conned over the materials of his History ; 
but the expressions which he had used of his friends 
were still connected with them in his mind. 

But more. He had lived a hard life; after thirteen 
years of ascetic toil as a monk, he had travelled 
through Palestine, to Constantinople, visited Rome, 
suffered on Chrysostom’s behalf, endured a trying 
journey to Syene, and there spent six years in exile. 
What had been the effect of these years of hardship 
upon his health, and especially upon his eyes, in the 
sand and glare of Egypt? 


1 Dom Butler finds some trace of this in the History. 
The seeds of naughtiness were awaiting development. 


XX1V INTRODUCTION 


We have spoken of the kind of grammatical errors 
which are frequent in the Dialogue; are they not 
just such as might be expected to occur if a man 
who was more or less accustomed to writing for 
himself was dictating to an amanuensis? Not being 
able to see his sentences as they rolled from his pen, 
his thoughts wandering while the scribe committed 
them to paper, he would be very likely to fall into 
such mistakes. In several. places where the text 
needs correction, the slips seem to be due to mis- 
hearing as much as to mis-copying; in one passage 
especially (p. 108) the words are thrown down almost 
at random, as if the reciter had gone too fast. 

“My conclusion,” Dom Butler is good enough to 
write to me, “has been accepted by the great 
majority of the critics, though a Dutch professor, 
AEngenvoort, has contested it.” I venture to hope 
that the additional evidence which I have collected 
may have the same effect upon the Dutch professor 
as the arguments of the imaginary bishop in support 
of the scholarly divine whom he held in honour had 
upon the deacon. “ But if any one can speak more 
truthfully,” by tracing the vocabulary of the author 
elsewhere in Patristic literature,! “‘ I will welcome him 
as a corrector of error and a lover of the brethren.” 

In any case, the author is so clearly a contemporary, 
and in many cases a careful eye-witness, of the events 
which he narrates, that his work may be regarded 
as a reliable authority for the life of the saint.? 


V. THE PRESENT EDITION 


I have followed Bigot’s text, as given by Migne 
(Pair. Gr., vol. xlvii.), though where Migne offers a 


1 There are many parallel expressions in Isidore of Pelusium, 
or whose authorship something more might be said. 

2 Since this book was in print, Abbot Butler has again 
dealt with the question of unity of authorship, with greater 
fulness and detail, in an article in The Journal of Theological 
Studies for January 1921, which all Greek scholars interested 
in the subject should by all means study. 


INTRODUCTION XXV 


good emendation or conjecture, I have not scrupled 
to avail myself of it, without necessarily calling 
attention to the matter in the notes. 

The notes are somewhat more full than those 
generally given in this series of translations. It is 
my hope that the attraction of St. Chrysostom’s 
name, and the simplicity of a biography as compared 
with a theological treatise, may secure a wider circle 
of readers from among those who do not make 
theology and Church antiquities their special study. 
I have therefore given some information upon points 
of history and Church life which such readers may 
not have leisure to investigate for themselves. I 
have referred to other writers of the time, where 
their records amplify, or explain, events in the 
Dialogue, and given a certain number of quotations 
from Chrysostom’s writings, to show how far the 
author’s thoughts were directly influenced by them. 
Also I have given references to the Lausiac History— 
not by any means so fully as would be possible, but 
to. keep in the reader’s mind the question of author- 
ship, by showing a few of the resemblances which 
justify the assignment of both treatises to the same 
author, 

The numbers at the top of the page refer to the 
pages in Migne’s text. I have provided headings for 
the chapters and for divisions within the chapters 
for the convenience of the English reader. 

An excellent Life of Chrysostom was published by 
Dean Stephens (John Murray, 1880), which supersedes 
an earlier Life by Neander (1848). St. Jean Chrysos- 
tome, by Aimé Puech (Paris: Lecoffre, 1913), a slighter 
work, combines French insight with French grace of 
style and phrase, while Dom Chr. Baur has published 
(Louvain, 1907) a ‘‘ very complete and conscientious ” 
study of Saint Jean Chrysostome et ses euvres dans 
Vhistowre littératre. 





“ὦ 





THE DIALOGUE OF 
PALLADIUS 


CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY 


The Sin of Self-seeking in Spiritual Things 


Tue gifts of God,! my excellent brother Theo- 
dorus, seem to me to fall into three classes. Some 
are common to all, and not apportioned to indi- 
viduals, while others are common to all, yet appor- 
tioned. The third class consists of those which are 
not common to all, nor apportioned to individuals, 
nor unapportioned, but given as a special privilege 
to those to whom they have been given. 

Deac. Your opening observation sounds reason- 
able; please tell us the kind of gifts you assign to 
each class. 

Bish. The gifts which are essentially noble, with- 
out which life would be wretched, are common to all, 
and not apportioned. 

Deac. For example, father ? 

Bish. First, the God of all, together with His 


1 The exordium is framed on the lines of Plato’s Republic, 
in which some apparently irrevelant remarks lead up to the 
real subject. Palladius makes clear from the beginning his 
object in writing (p. 173), not only to tell the story of Chry- 
sostom’s life, but to encourage and warn against clerical 
ambition and greed (pp. 40, 87, 121, etc.), which led his 
enemies to bring about Chrysostom’s downfall. 

I 


2 INTRODUCTORY [5 


Only-begotten Son, and the Holy Spirit, is common 
to all, and not apportioned; every one who wishes 
can by contemplation possess Him in His entirety, 
without material aids.1 Next to God, there are the 
divine scriptures, and the supra-mundane powers. 
Besides these, the sky, the sun, the moon, and ail 
the host of stars, and the air itself, are common, and 
not apportioned; they are shared in their entirety 
by all. We need not give further illustrations of 
the class of unapportioned gifts. The land was at 
one time common to all, and unapportioned, and so 
were the streams of water; but since the mad craving 
for possessions became intensified in the souls of 
lovers of pleasure, the weightier elements of earth 
and water came to be apportioned.? 

Deac. What you say is very clear; complete 
your account of the second class, that of apportioned 
gifts. 

Bish. 1 will; we cannot leave the web of our 
subject incomplete. Well, gold, and silver, and 
every sort of metal, and timber, and in short every 
kind of raw material, are common to all, yet appor- 
tioned; for they are not at the unreserved disposal 
of every one who likes. 

Deac. Again a very satisfactory account. I am 
wondering if you will not be hard put to it to demon- 
strate your third class, of special gifts. You laid it 
down, that there are some gifts which are neither 
common to all, nor apportioned, but are the special 
privilege of those who are worthy of their bestowal. 

1 As our text stands, it is God Who is “ without experience 
of things.”” The meaning is, no doubt, that of Chrysostom, 
de Bapt., xi., ‘‘ There is no need to cross the sea, or traverse 
mountain ranges; sitting at home, with reverence and com- 
punction, you may find Him.” Cf. Wisd. vi. 14. 

2 “He made some things to be common, as the air, the 
sun, the sky .. . distributing all things equally, as to 
brothers. He made other things to be common, as baths, 
markets, cities . . . but strife comes in when men use that 
cold word, ‘ Thine, mine.’ . . . Necessary things are common, 
but we do not observe their community even in the least 
things. How then can the possessor of wealth be a good 


6] SELF-SEEKING IN SPIRITUAL THINGS 3 


So make youf final flourish, and then tell us where 
you have come from, and the facts in regard to 
which we desire to learn the truth. 

Bish. If it lies in my power, and if I have the 
requisite knowledge of these matters about which 
you wish to inquire, I will not hesitate, and will add 
nothing; but first, I suppose, I will pay off the 
debt 2 owing from my argument as best Ican. Well, 
you will find that there is no apportionment in 
virginity, and in the unmarried state generally; these 
do not belong to the class of gifts common to all, 
or to that of those which are apportioned. Not 
every one who desires it is unwedded, but he who 
is able; for many married people long that they 
might be in the virgin state, but cannot attain to it, 
as they are already in wedlock. At the Olympic 
games, the herald calls him who wishes to run, but 
crowns only the victor; so it is with chastity, as the 
gospel says. Peter, you remember, raised the ob- 
jection to the Saviour’s teaching, that “If the case 
of the man be so with his wife, it is not good to 
marry’’; and the Saviour answered, ‘“ But it is 
not for all men to receive this saying, but they to 
whom it is given.’ Do you see, that it is not for 
all, but for those to whom it is given? 

Deac. 1 expected that you would have some 
difficulty in your demonstration of the special gifts, 
but it appears that you have won us to your view 
by your forcible and scriptural language. 





man?’ (Hom. in 1 Tim, χὰ). In his sermon on the very 
day of his ordination as priest, Chrysostom spoke strongly 
against riches: ‘“‘ Every rich man is an unjust man, or the 
heir of an unjust man.’ Palladius follows his example at 
the beginning of his treatise. 

1 As a writer, making an ornamental flourish at the close 
of his work. The deacon is impatient of the sententious 
exordium, as he does not know the circumstances which make 
it appropriate. - 

2 “Since I promised above to tell of ..., I am con- 
strained to pay the debt.” Pall., L. H., Ἱχι 1. 

3 Matt. xix. 10,.11 (freely quoted). 


4 . INTRODUCTORY | [6 


Illustrations from the Old Testament 


Bish. As you have grasped this, I’ will enrich? 
my argument with other scripture proofs, so that 
evil-minded people may be persuaded to give up 
grasping at what they cannot get. We find that in 
the divine scriptures the priesthood is not common 
to all, nor apportioned, but is the special privilege of 
those who are worthy of it. Thus the great-souled 
Paul declares in his instructions to the Hebrews: 
“For no man taketh to himself the honour, but he 
who is called by God; so also Aaron,” he says, “‘ did 
not glorify himself, to be made a high priest.” ? 
For there were six hundred thousand men, many of 
them full of zeal; but one, Aaron, was proclaimed 
high priest, and the miracle of the rod which put 
forth nuts convinced the mass of the people that 
the priest was chosen of God. Some, however, in 
their ignorance of what is good, were bitten with 
the lust of vain reputation, and supposing that this 
was one of the common or apportioned gifts, leaped 
upon the office as self-ordained priests. They re- 
ceived the reward which their madness deserved ; 
they made the very ground upon which their gather- 
ing was held bear witness to their wilfulness. It 
was Dathan and Abiram who were enamoured of 
the dignity, like men looking upon an harlot; they 
and their dupes were plunged into destruction be- 
neath the earth, and found their places of assemblage 
to be their unexpected tomb. : 

Next, Uzzah, unmindful of the events I have 
mentioned, was led by the lust of power to fall in 
love with the office; and one day, as the ark was 
being carried along the road upon a wagon, it hap- 
pened that the ox which drew it jolted and shook 
the ark. Uzzah, who was in attendance, took hold 
of it with his hand, to prevent the coffer from being 


1 Lit. “anoint.” Cf. “‘ Almsgiving anoints the soul” 
(Hom. in John 1xxxi.). 
2 Heb. v. 4 (freely quoted). 


7 ILLUSTRATIONS OF SELF-SEEKING 5 


overturned. God saw it, and it pleased Him not, 
as it afforded a precedent to headstrong persons; 
He prevented this, by smiting Uzzah even unto 
death, as a warning to posterity to refrain from such 
folly. 


An Illustration from the New Testament 


Long afterwards, after the advent of Christ, Simon 
Magus, of the village of Gethae,! a cunning professor 
of the teaching opposed to the truth, really a bad 
man of wicked life, hit upon a subtle plan 3 to satisfy 
his lust of power; afraid, apparently, of the punish- 
ment which befel these men of old time, he did not 
wish to reap as they reaped, through sowing as they 
sowed. So he hid the wolf in the sheepskin, and 
approached the apostles with flattery, offering them 
money, so as not to seem to grasp what he was 
wrongfully anxious to buy, and saying what we 
should expect of him and his like. ‘‘ Take this 
money,’ he said, “and give me the power of your 
high office, that on whomsoever I lay hands, he 
may receive (the gifts of the) 3 Holy Ghost.’?4 And 
he had been baptized into the name of Jesus! The 
answer of the apostolic band was this: ‘‘ Begone, 
man; the grace of God does not allow itself to be 
5014. And as he continued knocking at the door 
with his appeals, they said again: ‘‘ Why buy that 
which you can get for nothing, if you live worthily 
of it?’’ But as he considered the burdens of the 
life, and his own unwillingness to bear them, and 
the uncertainty of the matter,’ he again produced 
the money from his purse, thinking to ensnare the 
disciples of the Saviour by deceit. He Who takes 


1 So Just. M. Fragm. Gethae was a Samaritan village. 

2 τ΄ Acted as a Sophist’’; the word in 2 Pet. i. 16. Cf. 
Acts vii. 19. Sop. 38. 

3 As Dr. Westcott shows (on John vii. 39), ‘‘ Holy Spirit ” 
without the article refers to His gifts, not His Person. 

4 Acts Vili. Ig. 

5 As there is no tangible proof of the bestowal of a spiritual 
gift, he wished to ensure it by a tangible gift on his part. 


6 INTRODUCTORY [7 


the wise in their own craftiness! expressed His 
indignation at this by the mouth of Peter. “ Thy 
money perish with thee, because thou hast thought 
to purchase the gift of God with money.” Yet He 
offered him the medicine of repentance, applying oil 
to his ailment, in His long-suffering. ‘‘ Repent,’ He — 
said; ‘“‘it may be that the thought of thine heart 
shall be forgiven thee. For I perceive that thou art 
in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.” 
For God, in His love of souls, wills not the destruction 
of offenders. ei ca 


The Characters in the Dialogue Introduced 


Now, then, that I have explained my first remarks 
to the best of my powers, Theodorus of noble name, 
and deacon of the mysteries of the truth, ask us 
what you wanted to find out. 

Deac. Where have you come from to give us? 
your company ? 

Bish. From the east. You may be sure of that, 
for I have never seen Rome before.* 

Deac. What particular object brought you here ? 

Bish. My desire for your peace. 

Deac. Is our peace different from yours ? 

Bish. No, it is not different, but one and the 
same; the peace which the Saviour has given from 
heaven, saying to His disciples, ‘‘ My peace I give 
unto you.” And to confirm His gift of grace He 
repeated, ‘‘ My peace I leave to you.” 4 ‘The word 
“give”’ He applies to His own work, “‘leave’”’ to 
the Holy Spirit’s; in the Spirit, through Christ, they 
are to reveal to the Gentiles the knowledge of the 
Father. But the sad condition of the poor East is 
like that of a man with his limbs paralyzed, who 
finds that the vital forces make their way to the 

1 r Cor. iii. 19, quoting Job v. 13. 

5. Others are present, besides Theodore (pp. 60, 165). 

3. Palladius of Helenopolis obviously had visited Rome 
before (p. 25). He is not represented as the “ bishop” 
of the Dialogue, who is a purely imaginary person. 

4 John xiv. 27. ; 


fi) 2 TH BEACONS SEORY 7 


healthier parts of his body. Her limbs are para- 
lyzed and unable to perform their proper functions, 
because concord has fled from her; most of us, her 
champions and lovers, have become exiles from our 
country, as we cannot live in our native land safely 
and quietly, on account of our attachment to the 
truth. We venture to hope that we may spend 
among you the few days of life that still remain to 
us in accordance with the gospel. 

Deac. It seems to me that you have been sent to 
us, excellent father, by divine providence; for I 
find that your sorrow is in tune with our troubles. 
I think that you must be a member of the synod of 
John the bishop of Constantinople. 

Episc. That is so. 

Deac. J urge you then, as in the presence of God, 
to give us a really true account of events there, the 
details of which we are anxious to hear; remember- 
ing, that if you tell us anything contrary to the 
truth, you will have God as your inquisitor and 
judge, and will be convicted by us as well, when we 
learn the discrepancy. For it is not one, or two, 
or three, or ten persons, but more, who have given 
us accounts of what has happened at Constantinople ; 
nor were they casual travellers, but some of them 
bishops, and presbyters, and members of the monastic 
order. As you may wish to have a short statement 
of the part the Roman Church has played, I will 
give you some information on the point. 


How the News reached Rome 


The first to arrive here was a reader! from Alex- 


1 The order of “ readers ”’ is first mentioned in the third 
century; the custom of allowing laymen to read the Scrip- 
tures was probably taken over from the Jewish Church. 
In the East they read only the Old Testament lections and 
the Epistles, announcing, “‘ Thus saith the Lord,’’ while the 
deacon responded, “‘ Let us attend,’’ which Chrysostom (Hom. 
in Act. xix. 5) complains that many did not do. They read 
from the pulpit in the nave, not from that in the chancel; 
Sozomen says that Chrysostom, in order to be the better 
heard, preached “ sitting in the reader’s pulpit.” 


C 


8 INTRODUCTORY [8 


andria, with letters from Pope t Theophilus, notifying 
us that he had deposed John: Upon reading this letter, 
the blessed Pope Innocent was somewhat 3 troubled : 
he condemned the impetuosity and pride of Theo- 
philus, as he had not only written on his own single 
authority,? but also had neglected to make it clear 
why he had deposed him, or who had joined him in 
the sentence of deposition. He thus found himself 
in difficulty; he was disinclined to answer the letter, 
as the case was so obscure. Meanwhile, one Eusebius, 
a deacon of the Church of Constantinople, who was 
staying in Rome upon ecclesiastical business, came to 
Pope Innocent, and presented written memorials,* 
adjuring him to wait for a short time, to see the - 
unmasking of the plot. Three days® afterwards 


1“ Papa.” Until a.p. 230 the Bishop of Alexandria 
was the only one in Egypt; he was called ‘“‘ Abba,”’ “‘ Father,” 
the title common to all bishops. ‘“‘ But in the time of Hera- 
clius,’? when other Egyptian bishops were appointed, ‘the 
Patriarch of Alexandria was called Baba ὁ (i. e. ‘‘ Ab-abba,”’ 
“grandfather ’’). Thus Eutychius (Ann., cxi.). Athanasius 
(Apol. c. Ar. 69, de Syn. 16) regards the title as belonging 
to the Bishop of Alexandria only; but Tertullian speaks of 
any bishop who pronounces absolution as ‘“‘ benedictus 
Papa,’’? and Jerome gives the title to Athanasius, Epiphanius, 
Augustine, etc. Later, the linguistic origin of the title was 
forgotten, and it was supposed that ‘“‘ Papa’”’ was a special 
title of dignity given to the Bishops of Alexandria because 
they ruled such an important see; hence it was also given 
to the Bishops of Rome, and in time claimed by them as 
their peculiar privilege. CE. Di 52. 

Theophilus, after spending his youth among the recluses 
of the desert of Nitria, became secretary to Athanasius, was 
priest at Alexandria, and bishop in 385. Jerome, among 
others, greatly admired him as a learned and vigorous man; 
the more so, probably, as sharing his views upon Origenism. He 
died in 412, and was succeeded by his nephew, the famous Cyril. 

2 ““Not’’ seems to have aap Gut of fhe text... Not 
a little troubled.”’ 

3 Without the support of his synod. 

4 “Libelli’?; frequently in this treatise for ‘‘ memorials 
of complaint,’ “‘accusatory documents”’; here, “of peti- 
tion,’’ as in Conc. Eph., Can. VIII. 

5 These “‘ three days”’ present a difficulty. Theophilus 
arrived at Constantinople in June; the last events recorded 
in the letter occurred at Easter. How, when nine months 


8] HOW THE NEWS REACHED ROME 9 


arrived four bishops of John’s party, all devout 4 
persons—Pansophius of Pisidia, Pappus of Syria, 
Demetrius of the Second Galatia, and Eugenius of 
Phrygia; they delivered two letters, followed by a 
third, one from Bishop John, one from forty other 
bishops in communion with John, the last from John’s 
clergy. All three letters agreed in their representa- 
tion of the disturbance caused by ignorant persons. 
The substance of John’s letter ? was as follows :— 





had elapsed, did the two communications arrive so nearly 
together? We must not suppose that either party would 
be in haste to communicate with the Bishop of Rome. There 
was no love lost between the three sees; the record of Rome 
was not without taint of heretical leanings, and neither the 
Bishop of ‘‘ New Rome,” nor the successor of St. Mark, on 
the throne of the largest province in the world, would welcome 
interference from ‘‘ beyond the boundaries,’’ even if the 
canons did not discountenance it. Moreover, Chrysostom 
would know that his ejection might be regarded by Innocent 
as a personal matter, which did not concern the Church as a 
whole, while Theophilus would have to acknowledge defeat. 
But when Theophilus saw some prospect of ultimate suc- 
cess, he would be anxious to secure as much support as 
possible, and would hope by a formal notification to prejudice 
Innocent’s mind (always prepared to be jealous of the rising 
power of Constantinople) against Chrysostom; while in the 
sacrilegious occurrences at Constantinople, Chrysostom had a 
ground for appeal, for the benefit of the whole Church, in 
offences committed against her Lord, not against himself. 
Had he wished to bring the matter to Innocent’s attention 
earlier, it would have been easy for him to instruct Eusebius 
to make the statement officially, which he made on his own 
account, on hearing of Theophilus’ communication. 

1 The word means “‘ cautious,”’ ‘‘ circumspect’’; so “ care- 
ful in religious matters,’ rendered ‘‘ devout” in Luke ii. 
25; Acts viii. 2, etc. It is approximating to its later use as 
a title of a clergyman, equivalent to our “ Reverend.” 

2 This letter is given among the “‘ Epistles of Chrysostom,”’ 
but can hardly be what he actually wrote. The author pro- 
fesses to give only the substance of it; the style is his own, 
though some of Chrysostom’s phrases occur. Possibly 
Chrysostom wrote in Latin, which Palladius has freely 
translated, just as Sozomen translates Innocent’s answer. 
The letter ends, in harmony with the chronology, with the 
Easter services held in the open air; a forgery would have 
probably betrayed some knowledge of later events. Photius, 
with some hesitation, thinks it is Chrysostom’s own work, 
especially on account of its rhetorical style. 


10 CHRYSOSTOM’S LETTER TO INNOCENT [8 


CHAP EMI. ἢ 
CHRYSOSTOM’S LETTER TO INNOCENT 


The Urgent Need for Action 


“To my Lord the reverend and most holy Bishop 
Innocent, John sends greetings in the Lord. 

“Your piety! has doubtless heard, before the 
receipt of this letter, of the daring illegalities com- 
mitted here; for the magnitude of the crime has left 
no part of the world in ignorance of the cruel tragedy. 
Rumour has carried the news to the furthest bounds 
of the earth, and caused everywhere much grief and 
sorrow. But as the circumstances call not only for 
lamentation, but for remedial action, and considera- 
tion of the steps to be taken to stay this furious 
tempest raging within the Church, we thought it 
necessary to instruct my most honoured and devout 
lords,” the Bishops Demetrius, Pansophius, Pappus, 
and Eugenius, to leave their own Churches, and to 
face the dangers of a long sea voyage, and set out 
for a lengthy absence from home; to fly to your 
love, and explain all the facts clearly, so as to arrange 
for the speediest possible redress. With them we 
have sent the most honoured and _ well-beloved 
deacons 8 Paul and Cyriacus.4 These persons shall 
take the place of a letter, and quickly inform your 
love of what has happened. 


1 Phrases such as ‘‘ Your love,”’ ‘“‘ Your gentleness,’ are 
constantly used by early Christian writers as complimentary 
terms of address, some of which we retain, as ‘“‘ Your 
reverence,’’ ‘* Your holiness,’’ etc. 

2 “Tam dead to my lords the bishops.” Pall., L. H., xvi. 

8 Deacons were frequently deputed to represent bishops 
even at general councils. The diaconate was not regarded 
as a step to the priesthood, but as a distinct and generally 
life-long office, with its special duties and privileges. 

4 Sozomen (viii. 26) gives a Greek translation of Innocent’s 
letter to Chrysostom, exhorting him to patience, which he is 
sending by ‘‘ Cyriacus the deacon.” 


9] THEOPHILUS REVEALS HIS HOSTILITY 11 


Theophilus reveals his Hostility 


“The fact is, that Theophilus, to whose hands 
has been entrusted the bishopric of the Church of 
Alexandria, on representations made against him to 
our most pious king,! was commanded to appear 
before him alone; but he arrived with a large com- 
pany of Egyptians, as if anxious to show, from the 
very beginning, that he came for war and conflict. 
Next, on landing at the great and godly city of 
Constantinople, he did not go to Church, according 
to the rule which has prevailed from ancient times, 
or have any dealings with us, or join with us in con- 
versation, in prayer, or in communion, but came off 
the ship, hurried past the porch of the Church, and 
went somewhere outside of the city to lodge. We 
repeatedly invited both him and his companions to 
make their stay with us (indeed, we had everything 
ready, including rooms and all proper accommoda- 
tion); but both they and he refused the offer. We 
were much perplexed at this conduct, as we could 
not find any reason for such undeserved enmity ; 
none the less, we did all that could be required of us, 
and acted correctly, continually inviting him to 
confer with us, and to say why he, at the very outset, 
kindled such a conflict, and caused offence to so 
important a city. But as he still persisted in re- 
fusing to state his reason, and his accusers were 
urgent, the most pious king commanded us to go 
across to his lodging, and hear his statement of his 
case; for he was charged with violence and murder, 
and countless other crimes. : 


Chrysostom’s Correct Attitude 


“We, however, had too much respect and honour 
for the laws laid down by the fathers,? and for Theo- 


> Areas; 4. King Ξ * Pmpetors” “The Bast. had no 
such objection to the title basileus as the West had for rex. 
For the reason for the summons, see Ῥ: 62. 

* Implied in Canons V. and VI. of Nicewa.* Canon II. of 
the Council of Constantinople (381) explicitly forbids such 


12 CHRYSOSTOM’S LETTER TOINNOCENT [9 


philus himself; and we had in our possession his 
own letter,! in which he said that cases ought not 
to be taken beyond the boundaries [of a province], 
but the affairs of each province should be dealt with 
in that province.” We therefore declined to try the 
case, and even protested most vigorously. 


Theophilus Secures his Expulsion 


“But Theophilus seemed to think he was dealing 
with his old enemies; he summoned my archdeacon 3 





interferences, using Theophilus’ term ‘“‘ beyond the boun- 


daries.’”’ ‘‘ The bishops of the east shall administer the east 
ὉΠ Ὁ" 
ΡΟ ΟΥ; 69: 


9. *Eparchia,”*: the Roman ~ Province,” ΟΝ - which. there 
were thirteen, each with its governor and council, under 
whom were the governors of the respective districts and 
cities, with their councils. The Church followed the civil 
division into provinces, with their metropolitans or patriarchs, 
and their synods, under whom were the local or suffragan 
bishops. ' Another word, “‘ dioecesis,’? was used sometimes 
for the whole civil ‘‘ province,’ but more often for a smaller 
‘‘administrative division ὁ; Cicero speaks of ‘‘ my dioceses ”’ 
(ad Att. v.21; vi. 2). The same indeterminateness attaches 
to its Church use; sometimes it means a “ province’”’ (Conc. 
Const. Can: 110} > sometumes <a! diocese = (Caonce Nic. 
Cans ΧΕ for: which“ parcecia “> (our “parish Ὁ.) was 
also used (p. 57, πὴ): 

3 The archdeacon in the ancient Church was one of the 
seven deacons (in the Church of Rome there were forty-six 
priests, but the number of deacons was kept to the number 
of Apostolic appointment), chosen either by virtue of seniority, 
or by election by the other deacons, or appointed by the 
bishop. He attended upon the bishop at the altar, ordered 
the other deacons and inferior clergy, acted for the bishop 
in his absence, or during a vacancy in the bishop’s chair, 
and assisted him in managing the Church revenues, etc. ; 
his position being so important that he was frequently the 
bishop’s successor. Hence if the deposition was actual, it was 
quite in order for the communication to be addressed to 
the archdeacon, as in charge of diocesan affairs. 

Stephens speaks of “‘ John, Archdeacon of Constantinople.”’ 
With the most diligent search, I can find no mention of ° 
such a person. We read of a deacon John, deposed by 
Chrysostom either for murder or for fornication, who acted 
as his accuser at The Oak (p. 64); and Photius tells us 


9] THEOPHILUS SECURES HIS EXPULSION τὸ. 


in a very high-handed manner, as if the Church was 
already a widow,! and had no bishop, and through 
him brought all the clergy over to his side. Thus 
the Churches were in a state of disorder; the clergy 
attached to them were led astray,? and persuaded 
to present memorials against us, and egged on to 
become our accusers. Having succeeded so far, he 
sent and called us to come before him for judgment, 
although he had not cleared himself of the charges 
brought against him; a thing distinctly contrary 
to the canons and all the laws of the Church. But 
as we were aware that we were not to come before a 
judge (we would have appeared ten thousand times 
before a judge!), but before an enemy and a foe, 
as his actions before and afterwards showed, we sent 





that John, a deacon, brought forward twenty-nine charges 
against him, the first being that he had deposed him from 
his office for flogging his own servant—evidently alluding 
to the same person. But I cannot anywhere find him called 
archdeacon. The archdeacon appointed by Chrysostom was 
Serapion, or Sarapion (so p. 175), “‘an Egyptian, swift to 
wrath, prompt to insolence,”’ whose indiscretion and arrogance 
added greatly to Chrysostom’s unpopularity, and who no 
doubt acted as his agent in his reforms. In the presence of 
a number of clergy, he said to Chrysostom, ‘‘ You will never 
subdue these mutinous priests until you drive them all before 
youas witha single Το (cf. p. 32,n.).. Owing to hisisolated 
life, Chrysostom mistook his character, and attributed his 
intolerant severity to holy zeal and loyalty towards himself. 
Leo’s life of Chrysostom says that Serapion, “‘ through envy 
and the instigation of a woman, stirred every stone to arouse 
hatred and stumbling-blocks against the divine shepherd ”’ ; 
but as Chrysostom afterwards made him Bishop of Heracleia 
(p. 70, n.), the words here cannot mean that Serapion turned 
against him, but that the communication gave the discon- 
tented clergy, full of hatred towards Serapion, an opportunity 
of rallying against both him and the bishop. One of the 
charges brought against Chrysostom at The Oak was, that 
he had ordained Serapion presbyter. 

1 Almost a technical term for a vacancy in a see; so in 
Can. Chalc. XXV. Eudoxia claimed to have “restored 
the bridegroom ”’ to Constantinople (Chr., Seym. de red., iv.). 

2 The word in 1,Cor. xii. 2. But possibly “arrested ” 
(even with violence as in Acts xii. 19, cf. Gen. xxxix. 22, 
LXX) is the meaning, as the Churches are said below to be 
‘‘left shepherdless.”’ 


14 CHRYSOSTOM’S LETTER TO INNOCENT [τὸ 


to him the Bishops Demetrius of Pisinum, Eulysius 
.of Apameia, and Luppicianus of Appiaria, and the 
priests Germanus and Serus; we answered with be- 
coming moderation, and said that we raised no 
objection to a trial, but to trial by an open enemy 
and foe. Seeing that he had as yet received no 
charges against us, and had from the first acted as 
he had, and dissociated himself from Church, and 
communion, and prayer, and was bribing? accusers, 
winning over our clergy, and leaving Churches with- 
out shepherds, how could he with justice mount the 
judge’s throne, which in no sense belonged to him? 
For it was out of order for an Egyptian bishop to 
act as judge in Thrace,” when he himself was under 
accusation, and an enemy and foe of the accused. 
Yet he was unabashed by all these considerations, 
and persevered in his design; when we declared that 
we were ready to clear ourselves of the charges in 
the presence of a hundred or of a thousand bishops, ' 
and to prove our innocence, shown by the very fact 
of our offer, he would not allow it. In our absence, 
in spite of our appeal to a synod, and our request 
for a trial (it was not a fair hearing, but open hostility, 
that we wished to avoid), he admitted our accusers, 
and set free offenders whom I had placed in confine- 
ment, and without waiting for them to clear them- 
selves of the charges against them, accepted their 
memorials, and drew up minutes. All this was con- 
trary to rule, and canon, and order. In fact, to make 
a long story short, he left no stone unturned, until by 


1 Or, “ Anointed (as wrestlers) for a campaign of calumnia- 
tion.”? But the word is frequent in this treatise for “‘ greas- 
ing the palm,” especially by bribes, as below, and p. 55. 

2 The author is quite correct in speaking of the province 
of Thrace in conjunction with that of Egypt, not of the see 
of Constantinople. The province of Thrace contained six 
dioceses, stretching right up to the Danube; the mother see 
was that of Heracleia, the old civil capital. The Council 
of Constantinople (Can. III.) ordered that the Bishop of 
Constantinople should have honorary pre-eminence, next 
to the city of Rome, “ because it is New Rome,” but Con- 
stantinople is still a single diocese in the province of Thrace. 


το] EXPULSION AND RETURN το 


sheer force and tyrannical action he drove us from 
the city and the Church. 


Chrysostom’s Expulsion and Return 


“Late one evening, when I was being escorted 
᾿ through the streets by the whole of the populace, I 
was arrested by the city governor’s agent?! in the 
middle of the city, dragged away by force, and put 
on board a ship, which set sail by night; when I 
was summoning a synod for a just trial. Who could 
hear of these doings without shedding tears, though 
he had a heart of stone? But, as I said before, 
they call not. only for lamentation, but for redress; 
I therefore appeal to your love, to arise and grieve 
with me, and do all you can to stay these evils. 
For there is more yet. Even after my departure, 
Theophilus did not put a stop to the lawless doings 
of his party, but girded himself for further action. 
Our most pious king expelled those who had so 
‘shamelessly and unrighteously intruded themselves 
upon the Church, and many of the bishops, when 
they observed the lawlessness of my opponents, 
retired to their own homes, so as to avoid their 
attacks, as they would an universal conflagration ; 
while we were recalled to the city and to the Church, 
from which we had been unrighteously expelled, 
thirty bishops introducing us, and our most reverent 
king sending a notary for the purpose.2 Then Theo- 
philus, for no rhyme or reason known to us, at once 
went off like a runaway slave. 


The Emperor summons a Synod 


“Upon our re-entry into the city, we petitioned 
the most reverent king to summon a synod to exact 


a Cutiosns ~ > the ὁ Cunmus.” “was. the responsible 
guardian to whom was entrusted the care of minors and 
women (cf. our word “‘curate”’): so ‘‘Curiosus”’ is any 
functionary employed by a superior official, in this case 
the “comes” (p. 41), for a public duty. 

3 Chrysostom anticipates the charge of ‘‘ re-entry upon his 
Own initiative ”’ : 7Q). 


16 CHRYSOSTOM’S LETTER TO INNOCENT [τὸ 


retribution for all that had been done. Conscious 
of his guilt, and afraid of conviction, when the royal 
letters had been issued throughout the realm and 
gathered the whole episcopate from every quarter, 
at dead of night he secretly flung himself into a boat, 
and so made off, taking all his party with him. 
Even so, we could not let the matter drop, in the 
confidence our good conscience gave us, but renewed 
our request to the most pious king. He did as 
became his piety, sending a despatch to Theophilus, 
requiring him to return at once from Egypt, with 
all his followers, to give an account of what had 
taken place, and not to think that his unrighteous — 
proceedings, conducted in our absence, with one side 
only heard, and contrary to so many canons, were 
sufficient to exculpate him. 


Chrysostom’s Second Expulsion 


‘But he paid no attention even to the royal 
letters, but stayed at home, pleading in excuse a 
possible uprising of the people and an unfortunate 
outburst of zeal, on the part, presumably, of some 
of his supporters; although before the king’s letter 
was issued this same people had loaded him with 
abuse. But we will not labour this point now; we 
only mention it to show that his actions proved his 
guilt. 

‘““ However, even after this we did not rest, but 
persisted in our claim for a trial, with proper inquiry 
and response; for we were ready to prove our 
innocence, and their outrageous lawlessness. Now 
he had left behind some Syrians, who had accom- 
panied him, his fellow-actors in the whole drama. 
We were ready to face these before a judge, and 
repeatedly pressed our application, claiming that 
either minutes of the proceedings should be given 
us, or the memorials of our accusers, or at least that 
the nature of the charges, or the accusers themselves, 
should be made known to us; we were granted none of 
these requests, but were again expelled from the city. 


11] SACRILEGE AT CONSTANTINOPLE 17 


Acts of Sacrilege at Constantinople 


‘How can I tell you what followed, a tale more 
harrowing than any tragedy? What words can 
express it? What ears can hear it without a 
shudder? While we were pressing the requests I 
have mentioned, a strong body of soldiers invaded 
the Church, on the Great Sabbath,! when evening 
was fast closing in, forcibly expelled all the clergy 
who were with us, and surrounded the chancel ? with 
arms. Women who were in the houses of prayer,? 
unrobed in readiness for baptism on that day,* fled 
naked in face of this savage attack, not even allowed 
to clothe themselves as womanly decency requires. 
Many of these were even thrown outside injured, and 
the fonts ὅ were filled with blood, and the holy water 
dyed red from their wounds. 


1 The Sabbath in the ‘‘ Great Week,’’ Easter Eve. So 
called first in the Epistle of the Smyrnzans on the martyr- 
dom of Polycarp. ‘‘ Why do we call it the ‘ Great week’? 
Not because its hours are longer, but because in it unspeak- 
able blessings came to us. Even emperors order cessation 
from business, and prisoners are freed at this time” (Hom. 
in Gen., xxx.). Eusebius (Vit. Const., iv. 22) speaks of the 
pomp of the vigil, and the multitude of candles lighted. It 
was a tradition that Christ would come at midnight, as He 
did upon the Egyptians; therefore the people were not 
dismissed before midnight, in expectation of the second 
Advent. 

ae emia, the place to which you go up’’; the east 
end of the churches being raised above the nave floor. Here 
stood the altar, and the seats or ‘“‘ thrones”’ of the bishop 
_ and clergy, and the lectern, from which the Gospel was read 
(as distinct from the ‘‘ambo”’ in the nave, from which the 
lector read less important scriptures, cf. p. 7, n.). 

83 The word is in the genitive, ‘‘ women of the oratories,” 
or, as we should say, ‘‘ women members of the congregation.”’ 

4 Gregory Nazianzen speaks of persons who postpone 
baptism, saying, ‘“‘I wait till Epiphany, that I may be 
baptized with Christ; I choose Easter, that I may rise with 
Christ; I wait for Whitsuntide, that I may honour the 
Holy Ghost.’? Later Councils actually ordered that, except 
for urgent reasons, all catechumens were to be baptized at 
Easter; though this probably included the fifty days of 
Pentecost following Easter Day. 

5 Thewordin Johnv.2. Soin Socr. vii. 17, and frequently. 


24, δὰ 


18 CHRYSOSTOM’S LETTER TO INNOCENT [11 


“Even this was not the end of the horror; the 
soldiers then entered the chamber in which the sacred 
vessels were kept, some of them, we know, being 
unbaptized,t and saw all that was within; in the 
turmoil the most holy blood 3 of Christ was poured 
out upon the garments of the women of whom I 
spoke. It was exactly like a barbarian man-hunting 
raid. The people were driven out into the country, 
and all the laity fled from the city; high festival 
though it was, the churches were emptied of their 
congregations, and more than forty bishops, in com- 
munion with us, were driven out, with the laity, for 
no possible reason. Everywhere, in the market- 
places, the houses, the country districts, were cries, 
groans, wailings, lamentations, and streams of tears ; 
no part of the city escaped these calamities. Law- 
lessness reached such a pitch, that not only the actual 
victims, but even those who had not actually suffered 
as we did, were distressed in sympathy with us, 
including not only our fellow-believers, but heretics, 
Jews, and Greeks,’ as well; everything was in a state 
of disturbance, and confusion, and lamentation, as if 
the city had been captured by force of arms. And 
all this wickedness was done against the wishes of 
the most pious king, under cover of night, at the 
instigation of bishops, who were not ashamed to 
have corporals 4 marching in front of them, instead 
of deacons. 


The Injury to the whole Church 
“When day came, the whole city moved outside 


x“ Uninitiated ’’ into the ‘“‘ mysteries’? of the faith, 
which included the Creed, the Lord’s Prayer, and the Sacra- 
ments. Chrysostom (in Matt. xxiii.) speaks of the Eucharist 
held with closed doors; all the ancient liturgies contain the 
proclamation of the deacon, “‘ Let none remain who is a 
catechumen, a hearer, or an unbeliever.’’ 

2 The elements were obviously ‘‘ reserved ’’; in this case 
for the midnight mass. Cf. p. 57,n. 

3 2.e. pagans. 

4 Lit. “‘ camp-officers,”’ 


11] AN APPEAL FOR HELP “19 


the walls, and kept the feast under trees and thickets, 
like sheep scattered abroad. I leave you to imagine 
all that followed; for, as I said, it is impossible to 
go into all the details in words. It is especially 
hard, that even now we have not seen the end of 
all this long series of crying evils, or even any prospect 
of it; on the contrary, the evil spreads every day, 
and we are a laughing-stock to every one—though 
it would be more true to say that no one, even the 
most hardened offender against law, laughs—but, as 
I said, every one laments this new form of lawless- 
ness, the very crown?! of evils. Who can tell the 
disorders of the other Churches? For the trouble 
has not been confined to Constantinople, but has 
extended into the east. When some evil matter dis- 
charges from the head, all the limbs are corrupted; 
in the same way, now that the evil has begun in this 
great city, disorder has made its way everywhere, 
like water from ἃ spring. Everywhere clergy are in 
revolt against bishops, and as for the lay congrega- 
tions, some are split up into factions, others are 
likely to be so; everywhere we find the throes of 
evil, and the undoing of the whole world. 


An Appeal for Help 


“With the whole of the facts before you, my most 
learned and reverent lords, show, we pray you, the 
courage. and zeal which we expect of you, so as to 
check this flood of lawlessness which has burst upon 
the Churches. For if these proceedings become a 
precedent; if it come to be within the powers of all 
who wish, to invade other provinces, however distant 
from their own, and expel whom they will, and to 
do on their own authority whatever they will; be 
sure that everything will go by the board, and 
_implacable 2. war will overrun the whole world. 

1 “Colophon,” “finishing stroke to a _ writing.” So 
Chr., Hom. in Ps. cxxiv., “‘death is the Colophon of 


ills,’? and elsewhere. 
2 So Chr., de Comp., i. 5. 


20 CHRYSOSTOM’S LETTER TO INNOCENT (11 


Every one will expel his neighbour, and be expelled 
in turn. To prevent such universal confusion, I beg 
you to declare in writing, that these lawless proceed- 
ings, transacted in our absence, and with only one 
side heard, while we raised no objections to a fair 
trial, have no force (as indeed, from their very 
nature, they cannot), and that those who have been 
guilty of such lawlessness lie under penalty for 
breach of ecclesiastical law; while to us, who have 
not been arrested, nor convicted, nor shown to be 
guilty, grant that we may have the benefit of your 
customary good services,! and of your love, and your 
help in every way, as heretofore. 


Request for a Trial 


“ But if these grievous law-breakers, even now, 
are willing to declare the charges on the strength of 
which they undeservedly expelled us, let the docu- 
ments be presented to us, the memorials of our 
accusers be produced, and an unprejudiced court sit ; 
so let us be tried, and make our defence, and let us 
show ourselves guiltless, as indeed we are, of the 
allegations brought against us. For their present 
proceedings are beyond all order, and all ecclesiastical 
law and canon. Such outrages have never been 
known even in heathen courts of justice, or even in 
a barbarian court. Scythians and Sarmatians would 
never have decided a case after hearing one side 
only, in the absence of the accused, when he raised 
no objections to a trial, but only to personal hatred, 
and when he asked for judges to any number, 
declaring himself to be innocent, and was ready in 
the presence of the whole world to clear himself of 
the charges, and to show himself to be absolutely 
guiltless. 

‘Take all these points, I pray you, into con- 
sideration, and make full inquiries of our most 
reverent brother lord bishops; and take such steps 


? Or, “ Your letters’ (“‘ grammaton ”’ for “ pragmaton’’). 


1) ἸΝΝΟΓΕΝΙΕ CALES FOR A SYNOD 21 


as commend themselves to you. In so doing you 
will render service not only to us, but to the general 
welfare of the Churches, and you will receive your 
due reward from God, Who unceasingly works for 
the good of the Churches. I address this letter also 
to Venerius, Bishop of Milan, and to Chromatius, 
Bishop of Aquileia. Farewell in the Lord.” 


CEA PIER ΤΙ 
THE EMPEROR OF ROME TAKES ACTION 
Innocent calls for a Synod of Inquiry 


In answer to this letter, the blessed Pope Innocent 
sent to each party a formal letter,! declaring himself 
to be in communion with them both, at the same 
time nullifying the judgment supposed to have been 
given by Theophilus, and stating that another synod, 
in which full confidence could be placed, of western 
and eastern bishops, must be summoned,? first the 
friends, and then the enemies, of the respective 


1 Lit. “‘The equal things of the communion.” It was 
usual for bishops to send to one another portions of the 
consecrated elements as a sign of unity and good-will. 
Irenzus refers to this custom (Euseb. v. 24); Can. XIV. of 
Laodicea forbids such sendings, on the feast of Easter, to 
other dioceses. But ‘‘ equal things’’ is commonly used in 
later Greek for “‘ copies,”’ ‘‘ documents in prescribed form ”’— 
in Latin, ‘“formatz epistole.’”? The eleventh canon of 
Chalcedon deals with such “letters of commendation ”’ 
(cf. 2 Cor. iii. 1, Rom. xvi. 1) carried by travellers; described 
as ‘‘letters of peace,” or ‘‘ letters of communion,” guaran- 
teeing that the bearers were members of the Church. This 
will be the sense here. The letter would be akin to the 
“letters of peace’’ sent from the west to Flavian (Soz. 
vili. 25); see p. 50, and the first words of the letter below. 

2 Innocent’s letter in Sozomen to the clergy of Constanti- 


nople urges the need of a synod, though not with these 
stipulations. 


22. EMPEROR OF ROME TAKES ACTION [12 


parties to retire from the assemblage, since as a 
general rule neither of these gives an unprejudiced 
verdict. 

After a few days, Peter, one of Theophilus’ priests, 
arrived, and with him Martyrius,! a deacon of the 
Church of Constantinople, who presented letters from 
Theophilus, and what professed to be certain minutes ; 
in which it appeared that John had been condemned 
by thirty-six bishops, of whom twenty-nine were 
from Egypt, seven from other parts. Pope Innocent 
read these minutes, and finding that the charges 
were not serious, and also that John had not been 
present in person at his conviction, renewed his 
denunciation of the mad fury of Theophilus, in 
issuing, like an evil discharge, a hasty sentence against 
an absent man. He dismissed them, therefore, with 
letters expressing his censure, and besought God with 
prayer and fasting, that the breach of unity in the 
Church might be closed, and brotherly love be 
cemented. The tenor of his letter was as follows :— 


‘“ Brother Theophilus, we recognize both you and 
your brother John to be in communion with us; we 
expressed our views to this effect in our previous 
letter. And now, without departing from this our 
determined policy, we can only write to you again 
the same message, however many letters you may 
send us. This is, that unless a proper judgment 
confirms these childish proceedings, it is impossible 
for us, without reason given, to separate ourselves 
from communion with John. If then you are sure 
of your verdict, meet a synod assembled as Christ 
ordained,? and there openly state your accusation 
under appeal to the canons of Nicea? (for the 


1 A panegyric of Chrysostom by “ Martyrius, Bishop of 
Antioch ἡ’ (Migne, xlvii.), seems to be his work. 

* Matt, svi 9; ch. + Cor. ν Ὁ 

3 “ We write, that we must be led by the canons laid down 
at Nicza, which alone the Catholic Church ought to follow ”’ 
(Innocent’s letter in 802, viii. 26). The fifth canon prescribes 
that persons excommunicated by the bishops of a province 


13] A FOUL CHARGE 23 
Church of Rome accepts no other canon); so you 
will stand on firm ground against all cavil.”’ 


Further News Arrives 


A little time slipped by,! and then a priest of 
Constantinople, Theotecnus by name, arrived, pre- 
senting letters from John’s synod, of twenty-five © 
bishops or rather more; in which they advised us, 
that John had been expelled from the city? with 
the help of the military, and sent into exile at 
Cucusus, and that the church had been burnt. 
Innocent gave him letters of communion,’ addressed 
to Bishop John and to those in communion with him, 
begging them with tears to be patient, as he could 
not help them owing to the hostile action of certain 
persons with power to do wrong. 


A Foul Charge 


A short time afterwards a second messenger arrived, 
a mannikin, ugly in appearance, difficult to under- 
stand; Paternus was his name. He said that he was 
a priest of the Church of Constantinople; he was in 
. a state of furious excitement, and showed his hostility 
by his behaviour. After loading Bishop John with 
abuse, he presented letters from a few bishops, 
Acacius, Paulus, Antiochus, Cyrinus,® and Severianus, 
and some others, in which they laid against John the 
false charge of having set the church on fire. The 








(‘‘ eparchia,’? as above, p. 12) may not be admitted to com- 
munion by other bishops; but that to prevent undeserved 
excommunications, two synods shall be held in each province 
each year, at which inquiry shall be made into doubtful 
cases. Hence Chrysostom refused communion to the Tall 
Brothers (p. 60). Innocent’s proposed synod would go 
further, being of the whole Church, not of a single province; 
here Theophilus, having excommunicated Chrysostom, would 
have to justify his action. ' 

1 τοῦθ past on horseback. .S0 m1. ΒΔ Hs vi. 7. 

2 Chrysostom’s second expulsion (p. 89). 
ὁ Declaring himself to be still in communion with them 
p. 21). 

4 Or, “‘ his appearance.”’ » See 1.120. 


D 


24 EMPEROR OF ROME TAKES ACTION [13 


story seemed to us so palpably false, that John did 
not even offer any defence in an important synod; 4 
Pope Innocent treated it with contempt, and did not 
think it worthy of an answer. 


Chrysostom’s Friends denounced by Imperial Edicts 


Bish. Beso good as to give me your attention, 
that I may tell you the exact facts; for most truly, 
as Elihu says to Job, ‘‘ The spirit of my belly con- 
strains me’”’ 2—meaning by “‘ belly,’”’ his mind, filled 
with words. 

Deac. I must first insist upon making complete, 
as well as accurate, my account of all that has 
happened among us, most excellent father. Only 
then can I begin to put my questions to you. Well, 
after a few days the bishop of the Synadi 3 arrived ; 
he carried no letter, but was qualified to give a 
harmonious narrative. He said that he had left 
Constantinople in consequence of the threat conveyed 
in the royal edict, containing the order that “if any 
one is not in communion with Theophilus and Arsacius 
and Porphyrius,* he is to be restrained from exercise 
of the episcopal office; and further, if he appears to 
hold property in money or goods he shall be deprived 
Ofit.. = 
, Later News 

Cyriacus was followed by Eulysius, Bishop of 
Apameia, in Bithynia, who presented letters from 
fifteen bishops of John’s synod and from the venerable 
Anysius, Bishop of Thessalonica; in which the fifteen 

1 This could only be by proxy or by letter, as he went 
straight into exile (p. 90). A synod was held after the first 
expulsion (p. 73, n.), which the deacon may have in mind, but 
the author is not concerned with his accuracy. The lack of 
logical sequence in the sentence may point to corruption in 
the text. δ ΠΟ ΧΈΚΗ 18. 8 Cyriacus; p. 89. 

4 Bishop of Antioch (p. 13 ff.). For Arsacius, cf. p. 30. 

Ὁ 4.e. Chrysostom is a heretic. Theodosius, father of 
Arcadius, had issued such edicts in regard to the Arians. 
George tells us that Chrysostom obtained the same from 
Arcadius. The leaning of the Church upon the civil power 
has always proved disastrous. Cf. p. 196. 


13] LATER NEWS 28 


bishops described the pillage which had occurred, and 
was occurring, all over Constantinople, and Anysius 
declared that he abided by the judgment of the 
Church of Rome. Eulysius’ account agreed with 
that of Cyriacus. 

A month later, Palladius, Bishop of Helenopolis, 
arrived, without letters, saying that he too had fled 
from the fury of the civil authorities; he was able 
to add point to his account by producing a copy of 
the edict, containing the order, that “‘ the house of 
any one who conceals, or receives into his house, 
under any pretext, a bishop or priest in communion 
with John, is to be confiscated.” 

After Palladius arrived Germanus, a priest, and 
with him Cassianus,? a deacon, of John’s party, both 
discreet men, presenting letters from the whole of 
John’s clergy. They wrote that their Church had 
been subjected to violence and tyranny; their bishop 
had been expelled with the help of the military, and 
sent into exile through a plot formed by Acacius of 
Berea, Theophilus of Alexandria, Antiochus of Ptole- 
mais, and Severianus of Gabala. They also presented 
a receipt, showing that they had deposited with the 
magistrates, as witnesses to the deed, namely, Studius 
the city prefect, Eutychianus, chief of the guard, 
John the city treasurer, and Eustathius, chief of 
police, and keeper of the records, valuables in gold, 
silver, and clothing, by way of clearing Bishop John 
of the charges laid against him.® 


1 Innocent states in his letter (in Sozomen) that he writes 
in answer to letters brought by these two. 

* Cassian had lived long among the monks of Egypt, and 
was ordained deacon by Chrysostom, for whom he had a 
great admiration. His writings are our best authority for 
the monastic life of the time, and were ordered to be studied 
in the Benedictine monasteries. He afterwards settled at 
Marseilles, where he founded a monastery for each sex, and 
took a leading part in the discussions upon grace and free- 
will, originated by the Pelagian heresy, evoking two treatises 
from St. Augustine. 

. § The third charge at The Oak: “that he had sold a 
great quantity of the treasures of the Church.”’ 


20 EMPEROR OF ROME TAKES ACTION [14 


After these came Demetrius, Bishop of Pisinum, 
for the second time, from a long journey through the 
east. He announced that the Roman Church was in 
communion with Bishop John, as shown by letters 
from Pope Innocent, and brought letters from the 
bishops of Caria, in which they declared their adher- 
ence to the communion of John, and from the bishops 
of Antioch, appealing to the love of order of the 
Roman Church, and lamenting the ordination of 
Porphyrius, as illegally and impiously performed. 

Last of all came the priest Domitian, steward } of 
the Church of Constantinople, and one Vallagas, a 
Nisibian priest, who related the troubles of the 
monasteries of Mesopotamia, and presented memo- 
randa from one Optatus,? the prefect, showing that 
respectable women of the upper classes, deaconesses 
of the Church of Constantinople, were publicly brought 
before him, and compelled either to communicate 
with Arsacius, or to pay two hundred pounds in gold 
to the treasury. As for the treatment of anchorites — 
and virgins, I dare not speak of that. They could 
point to ribs scraped upon the rack, and mutilated 
ears. 


1 The revenues of the Church were originally entrusted to 
the bishop, to be by him distributed among the clergy and 
poor; this he did through the deacons, and especially the 
archdeacon. But as the Church grew in wealth and extent, 
“stewards ’’ were appointed, always from among the clergy. 
Conc. Chalc., Can. XXV., XXVI., prescribe that during a 
vacancy in a see the revenues of a Church shall be managed 
by the steward, “‘ that the administration of the Church 
may not be without witnesses, and the property of the 
Church be wasted, and the clergy exposed to σαν 5. Theo- 
philus advanced two monks to be stewards (p. 54); in his 
canonical epistle he orders that stewards are to be chosen 
by the clergy. 

2 A pagan, and bitter opponent of the Faith, who suc- 
ceeded Studius as prefect of Constantinople. He tried by 
torture those accused of the burning of the church; Eutropius, 
a reader, died under it. .Tigrius (p. 176) and Serapion (p. 175) 
were similarly treated; Olympias was brought before him, 
and after a lively passage of arms heavily fined, for refusing 
to communicate with Arsacius. 


15] HONORIUS’ LETTER 27 


Honorius Intervenes 


Pope Innocent could restrain himself no longer ; 
he sent a letter to the pious King Honorius,! submit- 
ting in detail the main points of the letters. His 
reverence was deeply moved by this statement, and 
ordered a synod of the western bishops to be sum- — 
moned, which should pass an unanimous resolution, 
to be transmitted to him. The bishops of Italy 
accordingly met, and petitioned the king to write to 
his brother and fellow-king Arcadius, that he should 
command a synod to be held in Thessalonica. This 
would enable those from both hemispheres, east and ' 
west alike, to attend without difficulty, and so secure 
that a full synod, characterized by good judgment 
rather than by numbers, should issue an indisputable 
resolution. His reverence was so much inflamed by 
this letter, that he wrote to the Bishop of Rome; 
that he had sent five bishops, two priests, and one 
deacon, of Rome, to convey his letter to his brother. 
The import of this letter was as follows :— 


Honorius’ Letter to Arcadius 


“This is the third time that I write to your 
gentleness, begging you to take measures for redress 
in regard to the plot against John, Bishop of Con- 
stantinople, and so far as it appears, nothing has 
been done. Once more, then, I address you, by the 
hands of the bishops and priests, in my anxiety for 
the peace of the Church, upon which the peace of 
your kingdom depends, urging you to be so good as 
to command that the bishops of the east shall meet 
at Thessalonica. 1 may add that our bishops of the 
west have made careful choice of messengers, beyond 
the influence of malice or deceit—five bishops, two 
priests, and a deacon, of the greatest Church, that 
of Rome. Be so good as to hold them worthy of 

1 Theodosius, dying in 395, bequeathed the empire of the 


west to Honorius, his younger, that of the east to Arcadius, 
his elder, but feebler son, 


28 BISHOP BEGINS HIS NARRATIVE [15 


all honour, so that either they may be convinced 
that Bishop John was justly expelled, and instruct 
me to separate from communion with him; or else, 
if they prove that the bishops of the east were 
deliberately influenced by malice, they may induce 
you to break off communion with them. To show 
you the mind of the westerns in regard to Bishop 
John, I append two of the various letters they have 
addressed to me, which are of the same import as 
the rest; those of the bishops of Rome and of 
Aquileia. But what I specially press upon your 
gentleness is, that you require the presence, however 
unwilling, of Theophilus of Alexandria, who is alleged 
᾿ to be the chief cause of all the trouble; that so the 
bishops assembled in synod may meet with no hin- 
drance in deciding upon the peaceful settlement which 
our times require.” 


CHAPTER..1V 
THE BISHOP BEGINS HIS NARRATIVE 


The Deputation from Rome 


So the holy bishops Aimilius of Beneventum and 
Cythegius, and Gaudentius, with the priests Valen- 
tianus and Bonifacius and others, took charge of the 
letters of Innocent and the Italian bishops, Chromatius 
of Aquileia and Venerius of Milan and the rest, and of 
a memorandum from the synod of the whole of the 
west, and were despatched to Constantinople at public 
expense,t accompanied by Bishops Cyriacus, Deme- 

1 So Chrysostom is brought from Antioch to Constantinople 
(p. 42); as it was by the order of the Emperor, conveyance 
was provided for them. The bishops were similarly brought 
to the Council of Nicea (Synthema, Lat. “ Tessara,” a ticket 
given to soldiers for their rations, to delegates to a friendly 
city entitling them to hospitality, etc.). 


Thi ΤΕΝΡΑΙΜΕΝΊ OF ΤΗΝ DELEGATES. 120 


trius, Palladius, and Eulysius. The memorandum 
was to the effect that John ought not to come up 
for judgment until his Church and rights of com- 
munion were restored to him; so that he might take 
his place in the synod of his own free will, without 
any excuse for ignoring the summons. 


The Despiteful Treatment of the Delegates 


They arrived safely at Constantinople, but returned 
after four months, reporting proceedings ! which re- 
called Babylonian oppression. “‘ We coasted Greece,” 
they said, ‘‘and reached Athens; where we were 
detained by some wretched officer, who at once put 
us under the guard of a centurion, and forbad us to 
proceed to Thessalonica,’’ where they ? proposed to 
commence their mission by presenting the letters to 
Bishop Anysius. ‘‘So he embarked us,” the narrator 
continued, “‘ in two ships, and sent us off. A violent 
storm from the south came on, and we were three 
days without food, crossing the Atgean Sea and the 
straits, and at the twelfth hour of the third day 
anchored before the city, near the suburb of Victor. 
Here we were arrested by the harbour masters, by 
whose orders we did not know, and taken to the 
outskirts of the city.2 We were confined in a fortress 
in Thrace, called Athyra, near the sea, to our absolute 
torture ;* the Roman envoys together in one small 


1 Innocent’s letter in Sozomen states that he has learnt 
the facts from Bishops Demetrius, Cyriacus, Eulysius, and 
Palladius, ‘““who are with us at Rome.’”’ Our author is 
thoroughly conversant with the facts. 

2 The Greek alternates between the first and third persons. 
This can be well understood, if Palladius is describing his 
own experiences, and occasionally forgets to preserve his 
anonymity by using the third person. The same feature 
occurs in Pall., L. H., v.1. The accuracy of detail in the 
record (cf. pp. 66, 126, 178), where Palladius is stated to be 
present, has much bearing on the question of the authorship 
of the treatise. 

Pod, tne: Pack paris. ,. Cle p, 92. 

4 The words can hardly bear their literal sense, ‘‘ there 
put on the rack.” 


30. BISHOP BEGINS HIS NARRATIVE Τὺ 


building, Cyriacus and his companions in others, 
without even a slave to wait upon us. We were 
asked for our letters, but refused to surrender them, 
maintaining that it was impossible for us as delegates 
to present the letters of the king and the bishops to 
other than the king himself. As we persisted in our 
refusal, we were visited first by Patricius, a notary, 
then by various others, and last of all by a company 
captain named Valerianus, a Cappadocian, who broke 
the thumb of Bishop Marianus, and carried off the 
sealed letter of the king, with the other letters. 

“On the following day, messengers were sent to 
us (whether by members of the royal court, or by 
Atticus, who was reported to have leaped upon the 
throne of the Church, we do not know), offering us 
three thousand cash,? and urging us to accept their 
offer, and to communicate with Atticus, and say no 
more about the case of John. We refused the offer, 
and continued in prayer, that if we could do nothing 
to bring about peace, we might at least return in 
safety to our Churches—such was the ferocity we 
observed in them. That this should be so, God the 
Saviour made clear to them by various revelations. 
Paul, the deacon of the holy Emmelius, a very gentle 
and sensible man, while on the ship, saw a vision of 
Paul the apostle, saying to him, ‘ Take heed how ye 
walk, not as fools, but as wise, knowing that the 
days are evil.’ The dream was a warning against 
their various unprincipled efforts to persuade us to 
pervert the truth, by bribes and flattery.” 


1 If the report meant that he had succeeded in his aim, 
it was not true. Arsacius, brother of Nectarius, was ap- 
pointed, and occupied the throne for a year (p. 90), when 
Atticus succeeded him. 

2 “Nomisma,’’? Lat. ‘“‘nummus.”’ A thousand nummi or 
sestertii made a sestertium, worth about £8. 

ΒΕ v.35, το. 


16] THE AUTHORS OF THE MISCHIEF 31 


Return of the Delegates 


“Captain Valerianus came again,’ our informant 
said, “‘and placed us on board a very poor vessel, 
with a guard of twenty soldiers drawn from different 
ranks, after bribing the skipper, so it was rumoured, 
to get rid of his episcopal passengers, and packed us 
from Athyra at a moment’s notice. So we sailed 
for a long distance, and were like to lose our lives, 
when we moored off Lampsacus;} there we were 
transhipped, and on the twentieth day brought up 
at Hydrun? in Calabria. As to the whereabouts of 
the blessed Bishop John, or where were the Bishops 
Demetrius, Cyriacus, Eulysius, and Palladius, who 
had accompanied our bishops upon their mission, 
they could tell us nothing.” ! 


The Authors of the Mischief 


Bish. Come now, you have had your say, most 
reverent sir. Now give me your attention, and listen 
carefully to what I have to tell you; and 1 will 
make known to you point by point the public dis- 
turbances, worthy of a company of satyrs, which have 
characterized the whole tragedy, and the sources from 
which the delirium arose, and the point at which 
our enemies expected to stop—but they have not 
stopped yet. Well, the fountain-head and beginning 
of all the troubles, | suppose one must say, was the 
devil, the hater of good, who always opposes 
the reasonable ? flocks of Christ, pitilessly harassing the 
experienced shepherds with various kinds of torments, 
just as the King of Egypt treated the male children 


1 Lampsacus, on the east coast of the Dardanelles. The 
journey to Hydrun was much longer, but Palladius was not 
with the western bishops, and makes no remarks upon it. 
He would naturally be interested to learn whether they had 
reached Italy safely, and where. Dramatic propriety forbids 
the subsequent doings of Palladius and his companions being 
known as yet in Rome; the story continues on p. 178. 

2 Otranto, in South Italy. 

SOL... tational “(Acyixals)* cf... ROM. ii, τ ret. i, 2; 
where it almost = “ spiritual.”’ 


42 BISHOP BEGINS HIS NARRATIVE _ [16 


of the Jews, and seducing the impostors, the false 
shepherds, with the deceits of earthly pleasures. 
The channels conveying the foul effluence, as all the 
round world knows, are Acacius,! Antiochus,? Theo- 
philus, and Severianus,? who are called what they 
are not, and really are what they cannot bear to be 
called; and some of the clerical order, two priests 
and five deacons, some of them gathered from the 
unclean, some from the malicious—I do not know if 
one can safely call such people priests or deacons. 
Then there are two, or at the most three, from the 
royal court, who strengthened Theophilus’ party, 
lending them the support of the military; and three 
women, besides those who are well known, widows, 
left wealthy, possessed of money made by extortion, 
to the loss of their own salvation, husband-baiters 
and disturbers of the peace. The three are Marsa, 
wife of Promotus, Castricia, wife of Saturninus, and 


1 Bishop of Bercea, who had been sent to Rome, on 
Chrysostom’s initiative (Soz. viii. 3), to secure the recognition 
of Flavian as Bishop of Antioch by the Western Church. 
He seems to have been about eighty years old, a man of 
great ability and influence. 

2 Bishop of Ptolemais; he had visited Constantinople, and 
being a learned and eloquent speaker (Sozomen adds the 
interesting note that he was “ called by some Chrysostom ’ ), 
‘‘ departed to his own cy, having gathered much money’ 
(Soz. viii. τοὶ: 

3 Bishop of Gabala, a friend of Antiochus, who, hearing 
of Antiochus’ success at Constantinople, thought to do the 
same. He spoke with a rough Syrian accent, but prepared 
a stock of sermons, and on his arrival was welcomed by 
Chrysostom, and found favour with the court. When 
Chrysostom went to Ephesus (p. 125) he entrusted the see to 
his charge; but he only tried to please the people, and to 
win them from their affection for their own bishop. Arch- 
deacon Serapion took every opportunity of showing his dis- 
like for him, and reported his doings to Chrysostom, even 
distorting a remark made by him into a denial of the faith; 
whereupon Chrysostom expelled him from the city. At 
Eudoxia’s earnest request he was recalled, and each made 
a public profession of reconciliation, but Serapion never 
forgave the insult. 

4 Two curious words, apparently of the author’s own 
coinage. 


17] THE THESIS. ΟΝ TRUIH 33 


Eugraphia,! an absolute maniac. For very shame, I 
will say no more. These are the men and the women, 
sluggard-hearted in the matter of the faith, who have 
formed themselves into a kind of drunken regiment, 
united in their hatred of Christian teaching, and 
have organized a flood of destruction against the 
peace of the Church. 


Theodorus desires the Truth, and Nothing but the Truth 


Deac. understand. Now then, father, I beg you 
to tell us, as in the presence of God, why they hated 
Bishop John, and what grounds he had for persist- 
ently vexing such highly placed people; and let us 
know where he began his career, and how he reached 
the episcopal throne of Constantinople, and how long 
he held office, and his character, and how he came 
to his death, if it is true that, as we hear, he has 
fallen asleep.2 True, the man is universally held in 
respect and honourable memory; still, I make it a 
rule not to believe hastily in rumours, until their 
truth is confirmed by those who have sufficient 
knowledge to bestow blame or praise. 


The Tests of Truth 


Bish. I commend your love of accuracy, most 
truth-loving gentleman and man of God, Theodorus, 
but I do not accept your distinction. You ought 
to have been satisfied (excuse a personal remark) 
by the sight of my white hairs,* and by the office 
I hold, that you had the truth laid before you; but 
as you have not done so, but a second time call God 
to be my judge, do promise me an unprejudiced 
hearing, at least from now, and let me not pipe my 
chants to no purpose. I know what is written in 

1 Friends of the Empress Eudoxia (see p. 65). © 

2 The words show the supposed date of the Dialogue. 

3 In 407, the year of Chrysostom’s death, Palladius would 
be only about forty-three years old. But as he does not 
represent himself as being the bishop of the Dialogue, the point 
does not affect the question of authorship. 


34 BISHOP BEGINS HIS NARRATIVE [τ 


the divine law—‘ The Lord shall destroy all them 
that speak leasing,’ 1 and in the apostle John, ‘‘ He 
who speaketh a lie is not of God,’ ? and again in 
David, ‘‘ For the mouth of them that speak lies is 
stopped.” ? It is true that a liar does harm to the 
man who believes him; but it is also true that he 
who believes him does wrong to the liar, by being 
ready to trust him. As both are equally guilty, let 
neither of us do wrong to his neighbour. It is a 
virtue in a speaker, to speak the truth, and a virtue 
in a hearer, to test unrighteous statements; for the 
Scripture says, “‘ Be ye reliable money-changers,” 4 
rejecting the spurious from among the genuine coins. 
We are not to receive everything we hear merely 
because it rings true,® but to weigh it by the testi- 
mony of the facts, whether it be spoken or written, 
with a good conscience, and in the fear of God. 
Grave is the danger from ears and tongue; this is 
why God, the good artificer, has caused the tongue 
to be guarded by two lips, and fixed the rampart 
of the teeth within, as a secure defence to moderate 
its activity (as it is written, “‘ Set a watch, O Lord, 
before my mouth, a door of confinement about my 
lips, that I offend not with my tongue ᾽᾽),6 while He 
has bored the channel of the ears in spiral form. 
The significance of this shape is, that words do not 
enter too quickly, as the time occupied by their 
winding course is sufficient to deposit the crass 
matter of falsehood, and the sludge of malice, which 
are left upon the walls of the orifice. Not that these 


Εν, Os 

2 An inference from John viii. 44, 45, 1 John ii. 22, 23. 

dt o-oo ett ORE 

4 One of the “‘ agrapha, non-scriptural sayings ’”’ attri- 
buted to our Lord, frequently quoted by the Fathers; e. g. 
Clem. Alex., Sivom. vii. 90; Euseb., H. E. vii. 7; Cyr. Alex. 
in Joh. iv. 3; Clement. Homil. ii. 51; Const. Apost. ii. 36. 

> The alteration of one letter in the text gives this mean- 
ing; “‘ with boasting ”’ gives no sense. It is not enough for 
a statement to be plausible, and couched in pleasant language ; 
it must be tested by facts. 

® Ps, Xxxix. 1, cxli. 3. 


29 164 99 


18] GREY HAIR NO CRITERION OF TRUTH 35 


were the only organs upon which He bestowed His 
care, as though they were the only ones that trip; 
we find that He has set veils before the eyes, like 
window curtains, to keep them from admitting the 
death of licentiousness, to which the prophet bears 
witness in the words, “‘ Death ascended through the 
doors.” 1 


Grey Hair no Criterion of Truth 


Deac. If our inquiry dealt with ordinary matters, 
most holy father, your appearance would have been 
enough to guarantee the truth of your account; but 
as we are in quest of the truth, in a matter which 
involves no small blame in this world, and con- 
demnation in the next, when rulers and peoples are 
gathered before the awful tribunal, pardon me, my 
dear sir, if I do not accept your white hairs as 
evidence. Many bad men have reached old age, men 
who have not whitened their souls with virtue, but ἡ 
wrinkled their bodies with the lapse of time; such 
as were the false priests at Babylon, and Ephraim, 
in Jeremiah,? of whom the Word cries in reproof, 
“Ephraim is a silly dove, having no heart; grey 
hairs have blossomed forth upon him, but he himself 
knoweth it ποι ὃ And again, more severely, 
‘““ Ephraim is a cake not turned, and strangers have 
devoured his strength.’ 4 

And I must add, at the risk of being prolix, who 
is whiter, or more amiable, than Acacius of Berea, 
whom you and your friends accuse of being the rebel 
chief, and the leader of the revolutionaries in mis- 
behaviour? Yet his very nostrils bore a crop of 
long white hairs, when he visited Rome to bring the 
formal announcement of the ordination ® of John. 


τ ΘΠ: 1 oe 

2 Jer. vil. 15, “Τ have cast out the whole seed of Ephraim.”’ 

© F105. νι 0) ΤΊ. 

© 10S τ, 8; Ὁ. 

> The same words are used in Greek for what we term the 
“ Consecration ”’ of bishops as for the “‘ Ordination ”’ of other 
clergy. Two words are generally used by ancient writers: 


36 ΘΒΊΙΒΠΟΡ BEGINS HIS NARRATIVE [18 


Bish. Now I know for certain, that you are a 
reliable money-changer; you are not content with 
the look of the tent-skins, but insist upon full know- 
ledge of the man who lives inside. The temples of 
the Egyptians,! we know, are very large, and glory 
in the magnificence of their stones, but have within 
them apes, and ibises, and dogs, which pass as gods; 
while our Lord and God, in making known to Samuel 
His will as to the appointment of a ruler for Israel, 
instructs him not to look upon the condition and 
moulding of the body of clay, with the words, “‘ God 
seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh upon the 
countenance, but God upon the heart.’?2 Hence 
those who follow the example of God,’ in everything 
search out what lies beneath the surface. So I gladly 
trust myself to you, now that 1 have found that your 
scales are free from bias. Those two Babylonians, 
who were old in body, but perfect infants in their 
clownish minds, if they had believed in the resurrec- 
tion of the dead,* would have been fortified in wisdom 
against falling in love with Susanna, the wife of 
another man; and further, if they had possessed 
the fear of God, they would not have interwoven 
false accusations with their licentiousness.> The 





“laying on of hands,” and “ stretching forth of hands ’’— 
properly expressing ‘‘ show of hands ”’ in voting, so of appoint- 
ments generally. Hence itis used on pp. 59, 138 of the appoint- 
ment of civil governors. The Apostolic Constitutions (11. 41) 
say that “‘a presbyter lays on hands, but does not stretch 
forth hands ”—“ gives a benediction, but does not ordain ""-- 
with the implication that the power of appointment, as in 
the State, has passed from the people to the higher authority. 
Generally the terms are used with little distinction; our 
author uses “stretching forth” only. For another word, 
ἐν catastasis,”’ properly ‘‘ appointment,” see pp. 42, 153. 

1 A small point confirming Palladius’ authorship; his 
residence in Egypt had made him acquainted with these. 

4-1 Sam. Xvi.«7. 

ge 0) ee ae oe 

4 “ Tf I see you seizing the property of others, and otherwise 
transgressing, how shall I believe you when you say that 
there is a resurrection ? 5“ (Hom. in 1 Cor. 111}. 

5 “The history of Susanna,” in our Apocrypha, is in one 
MS. of the LXX. chap. xiii. of Daniel. 


18] CHRYSOSTOM’S BIRTH 37 


misuse of youth is a sure proof of dishonour in old 
Aner 


CHAPTER V 
THE EARLY CAREER OF CHRYSOSTOM 


Chrysostom’s Birth and Early Years 


Tuts John was (yes, he has fallen asleep) by birth 
a man of Antioch, the son of honourable parents, 
his father 3 holding the office of military commander 
in Syria; an elder sister was the only other child. 
He was gifted with unusual ability, and was carefully 
trained in letters,? for the ministry of the oracles? of 


1 The text is corrupt, “‘ misuse,”’ lit. “ higgling ὁ (“‘ hand- 
lige decertrally, an Coripiing, 2 Con 1 τὴ). 1 bave 
followed Bigot’s correction of the nom. “ dishonour”’ to a 
genitive; but as we prove the present by the past, not vice 
versa, I should prefer to change the nom. “ misuse’”’ to a 
genitive, and render, ‘‘ Dishonour in old age is a sure proof 
of the misuse of youth.” Cf. p. 145. 

2 Secundus, ‘‘ Magister militum et equitum,’’ who died 
shortly after his son’s birth, leaving his wife Anthusa a widow 
at the age of twenty. 

8 He was taught rhetoric by Libanius, a famous sophist, 
not only a pagan, but a resolute opponent of the Faith; 
philosophy by Andragathius. ‘“‘ If I desired the smoothness 
of Isocrates, the massiveness of Demosthenes, the sublimity 
of Plato, I must remember St. Paul’s words (2 Cor. xi. 6). 
‘‘All these things I put aside, with all outward adornments ”’ (de 
Sacerd. IV. vi. 37). But these things were part of himself, 
and his literary remains show that he could not “ put them 
aside.”’ ‘‘ What wives these Christians have,’’ Libanius 
said, in reference to Anthusa. He would have wished 
Chrysostom to succeed him as head of his.school, “‘ had not 
the Christians stolen him.’”? Symeon and the Vita Anonyma 
Say, with some detail, that he went to Athens to study. 
This, and the miracles they attribute to him later, may be 
put aside by Savile’s consideration, that it is strange that 
writers, centuries later, should know things which his con- 
temporaries did not. 

4 Rom. iit: 2; 1 Pet. iv. 11. 


38 EARLY CAREER ΟΕ CHRYSOSTOM [19 


God. At the age of eighteen, a boy in years, he 
revolted against the professors of verbosities; and a 
man in intellect, he delighted in divine learning. At 
that time the blessed Meletius the Confessor, an 
Armenian by race, was ruling the Church of Antioch ; 
he noticed the bright lad, and was so much attracted 
by the beauty of his character, that he allowed him 
to be continually in his company. His prophetic eye 
foresaw the boy’s future. He was admitted to the 
mystery * of the washing of regeneration, and after 
three years of attendance 3 on the bishop, advanced to 
De reader.” 

But as his conscience would not allow him to be 
satisfied with work in the city, for youth was hot 
within him, though his mind was sound, he turned to 
the neighbouring mountains; here he fell in with an 
old.man named Syrus,‘ living in self-discipline, whose 
hard life he resolved to share. With him he spent 
four years, battling with the rocks of pleasure. When 


2 Or, ‘‘ Sacrament” (p. 57, n.).. The postponement of his 
baptism was probably due, not, as often was the case, to the 
fear of sinning afterwards, but to the disturbed state of the 
Church of Antioch, where dissensions between the orthodox 
and the Arians were almost continuous. Anthusa would 
hesitate to present her son to one of whose orthodoxy there 
was any doubt. 

2 The word in 1 Cor. ix. 13. Such attendants were later 
organized into the order of Acolytes, “ followers,” next to 
that of sub-deacons in the Latin Church; their duties being to 
light the candles, and attend with the wine for the Eucharist. 
Some think that they accompanied the bishop wherever he 
went. Theophilus apparently took one such with him to 
᾿ Constantinople (see p. 68), where he is called ‘‘ young servant,” 
like Elisha’s ‘‘ minister’ in 2 Kings vi. 14. 

3 Chrysostom’s teachers were Carterius and Diodorus, 
Bishop of Tarsus, who held a kind of “ Scripture study 
school,” called by Sozomen “ asceterion,’ for young men. 
Chrysostom persuaded two other of Libanius’ students, 
Theodorus and Maximus, afterwards Bishops of Mopsuestia 
and Seleucia respectively, to renounce the world, and in the 
case of Maximus, to break off his engagement to a lady he 
dearly loved, and devote themselves to Christian service. For 
4 TCaGer Of: pa, 

4 George says, “‘ Hesychius, a Syrian.” 


19] CHRYSOSTOM AS DEACON AND PRIEST 39 


he found it more easy to master these, not so much by 
toil as by reason,! he retired to a cave by himself, 
in his eagerness to hide himself from the world, and 
there spent twenty-four months, for the greater part 
of which he denied himself sleep, while he studied 
the covenants? of Christ, the better to dispel ignor- 
ance. Two years spent without lying down by night 
or day deadened his gastric organs, and the functions 
of the kidneys were impaired by the cold.? As 
he could not doctor himself, he returned to the haven 
of the Church. 

And here we see the providence of the Saviour, 
in withdrawing him by his infirmity, for the good of 
the Church, from ascetic toils, and compelling him by 
this obstacle of ill-health to leave the caves.* 


Chrysostom as Deacon and Priest. 


Next, after serving the altar for five years, he was 
ordained deacon® by Meletius. By this time his 
brilliant abilities as a teacher were famous, and the 


1 “T was in the full vigour of my age, and needed, not 
discourse, but bodily hardships.’’—Pall., eos Pree 4. 

Chr. tells us in his De Sacerdotio, that Anthusa desired, by 
consideration of her widowhood and her sufferings for his 
sake, to restrain his enthusiasm for the ascetic life; it was 
_probably after her death that he entered upon it (A.D. 374-5), 
as George and Vit. Anon. say. 

2 The Old. and New Testaments—more correctly ‘‘ Cove- 
nants.” 

* He never recovered his health; see pp. 98,125: “ I havea 
cobweb body ” (Ep. iv.). 

4 He never lost his admiration for the ascetic life. ‘“‘ Monks 
in monasteries live a life suitable to heaven, and no worse than 


that of angels, free from quarrels and anxieties.”’ “But his 
sound common sense showed him that there was not one 
standard for the monk, another for the citizen. ‘‘I do not 


prescribe that a man should take to the mountains or the 
desert, but that he be good, and sweetly reasonable, and 
sober, while dwelling in the midst of the city.” τ ἈΠ the 
precepts of the law are common to us and the monks, except 
in regard to marriage” (in Matt. vii.). 

5 In 381, at the age of thirty-six; he wrote his treatises 
On the Priesthood and On Virginity during his diaconate, 


E 


40 EARLY CAREER OF CHRYSOSTOM [19 


people found in intercourse with him sweet refresh- 
ment from the bitterness of life; Bishop Flavianus ἢ 
therefore ordained him presbyter. For twelve years 
he was a shining light in the Church of Antioch, 
lending dignity to the priesthood there by the strict- 
ness of his life; some he salted with sobriety, some 
he illuminated by his teaching, some he refreshed 
with draughts of the spirit. Thus all was fair sailing 
under the steersmanship of Christ, when the blessed 3 
Nectarius,? bishop of the Church of Constantinople, 
fell asleep. Immediately a crowd of people who were 
not called for rushed forward to secure the supreme 
position—men who were not men, presbyters by 
office, yet unworthy of the priesthood; some batter- 
ing at the doors of officials, others offering bribes, 
others again going on their knees to the populace. 
_ The orthodox laity were much disturbed by all this, 
and importuned the king with petitions for an 
experienced priest. 


1 Meletius died in 381, during the Council of Constantinople, 
leaving a rival bishop, Paulinus. It was said that six of the Ὁ 
leading clergy of Antioch had agreed, that on the death of 
either of these, they would recognize the survivor as sole 
bishop. Yet Flavian, one of the six, was consecrated, and 
the schism continued. Socr., vi. 3, says that ἡ on the death of 
Meletius, Chrysostom left his party, nor did he communicate 
with Paulinus, but lived in retirement for three years; on 
Paulinus’ death he was ordained priest by Evagrius, 
Paulinus’ successor’’—whose episcopate was very brief, 
Flavian’s title being hereafter recognized. Sozomen does not 
name the bishop who ordained him, but Socrates is in error. 

7 06s ene tates: 

3 A man of senatorial rank, chosen as Bishop of Con- 
stantinople by the Emperor, being only a catechumen, and 
consecrated “‘ while still wearing the white vestments of a 
neophyte” (Soz. vii. 8); though such a departure from 
Apostolic rule (1 Tim. v. 22) was forbidden by the second 
Canon of Nicea. Cyprian, Ambrose, and Eusebius of 
Casarea were other exceptions to the rule. Nectarius was 
more of a courtier than a bishop, and his social relations with 
the great ones of the city established a precedent which 
caused Chrysostom’s strictness to be severely criticized (p. 99). 


10] BISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE AI 


Chrysostom, Bishop of Constantinople 


The most influential man of affairs was Eutropius 1 
the eunuch, chief of the royal chamberlains. It was 
his wish to have John in charge of the city, as he 
had gained some experience of his high character when 
‘some business of the king took him to the further 
East; so he advised the king to send instructions to 
the governor? of Antioch, to send John quietly out 
of the city, without disturbing the Church. The 
governor, immediately on receipt of the letter, sum- 
moned him to present himself at the shrines of the 


1 When Theodosius died (395) he committed Honorius to 
the charge of the famous general Stilicho, who had married 
his sister, and Arcadius to Rufinus, a man of low birth who 
had raised himself by his wits, and urged the Emperor 
Arcadius in like manner to marry his daughter. Arcadius 
agreed; but Eutropius, the equally self-made rival of Rufinus, 
plotted with Stilicho to ruin him, and on the very day ap- 
pointed for the marriage, the Imperial wedding gifts were 
taken to the house, not of Rufinus, but of Eudoxia, a lady 
who hated Eutropius, as he had brought about her guardian’s 
death. Stilicho’s soldiers killed Rufinus, and Eutropius 
seized his property. But he made himself equally unpopular 
by his pride and ambition, and his sale of State offices ; Gainas 
(p. 122) demanded his death, and Eudoxia supported the 
request, which was granted. Eutropius had shortly before 
secured the passing of a law, abolishing the right of asylum 
in churches; now he fled to the altar of the church, imploring 
protection. Chrysostom refused to surrender him, even when 
summoned before the Emperor, and preached two sermons 
on the vanity of human things, the first while the ex-minister 
lay prostrate at the altar in abject terror. By these he 
aroused much ill-will from Eutropius’ friends, and from the 
upper classes generally, through his harsh treatment, as was 
alleged, of a man in misfortune, his condemnation of riches, 
and his insistence upon the power of the Church. Eutropius 
was banished to Cyprus, where he was presently killed; the 
law forbidding asylum was annulled. 

2 “Comes,” ‘“‘ companion,” our “ count”; a companion of 
or attendant upon a magistrate; later, a person in the suite 
of an emperor, so an officialin charge of a department. ‘“‘ The 
Emperor had as many comites as he had duties.”’ So there 
wasa ‘“‘comes ”’ of the Imperial purse, stables, etc. ; ‘“‘ comes ”’ 
of Britain, Egypt, the East, etc.; until the title took the place 
of ‘“‘ dux” for the military governor of a province or district, 


422 EARLY CAREER OF CHRYSOSTOM [τὸ 


martyrs,! outside the city, near the gate known as 
Romanesia; where he put him in a public. convey- 
ance, and entrusted him to the care of the eunuch 
sent by Eutropius, and the magistrate’s guard. 
Thus he reached Constantinople, and was ordained 
bishop of the Church of that city.? 


Theophilus’ Hostility 


Now Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria, as he 
observed his bearing,? and the irreproachable out- 
spokenness of his language, was from the beginning 


1 “As if to inquire about something ἡ (Sozomen). The 
governor was Asterius. Churches were very frequently built 
over a martyr’s grave, as the souls of them that were slain 
were seen “‘ beneath the altar” (Rev. vi. 9). The thought 
is not limited to any one religion, that the spirits of the dead 
hover about the resting-place of their bodies. There was such 
a shrine at Palladius’ own city of Helenopolis (Euseb. Vit. 
Const. iv. 61). Cf. pp. 62, 80, 95. 

2 This was upon a resolution of both clergy and laity, who 
either knew him personally, or had heard of his fame. The 
people were anxious to have one whom they knew to be 
ready to denounce wrong doings; not so the rich, and those 
in power (Soz. viii. 2). Possibly Eutropius proposed him, 
hoping to secure for the Emperor the support of such a capable 
man. ‘The day of the ordination was February 26, 398. 

3 προσχὼν αὐτοῦ τῇ καταστάσει. The meaning is doubt- 
ful. Our author uses the word for “observing” in this 
sense on p. 77; in the liturgies it is the “Let us attend ” 
before the reading of scripture. Palladius twice uses it so in 
L.H. But it also means “ was foremost” or simply “ was 
present.’ Again, the word for “‘ bearing,” so used just below, 
is frequent in Church writings for ‘‘ consecration ”’ (originally 
“appointment ”’ of civil officers) ; p. 133. Hence some inter- 
pret “‘was chief consecrator”; though this makes the 
grammar of the next sentence awkward. It is likely that 
Theophilus, as bishop of such an important see, should be 
chief consecrator, but it is doubtful if that is here stated. 
Socrates says simply, ‘he ordained him.’ Theophilus was 
anxious to secure the consecration of Isidore, whom he had 
employed on a certain discreditable mission some years before, 
upon which he wished to buy his silence. But the matter 
was known to many of the bishops assembled in Constanti- 
nople, and Eutropius showed him some documents, giving 
him his choice between ordaining Chrysostom, and taking his 


10] THEOPHILUS’ HOSTILITY 43 


bitterly opposed! to his ordination. For Theophilus 
is very clever at judging faces; the will and mind of 
a man are not easy to read. 

Deac. One moment, father. I must raise a slight 
objection. 

Bish. What is your difficulty ° 

Deac. If Theophilus is so sharp-sighted, how is it 
that he was unaware that if he expelled John from 
his see, he would disturb the whole world? 

Bish. There is nothing wonderful in this, my dear 
sir; even the demons recognized the advent of the 
Saviour, and yet were unaware that they would be 
made powerless by a single breath from those who 
believed in Him. 

Deac. Where do we find that they recognized the 
Saviour’s presence ? 

Bish. When they cried, ‘““We know Thee who 
Thou art, the holy one of God; why hast Thou come 
to torment us before the time?’ 8 You see that they 
knew, even then, that He is not only holy, but also 
judge. But apart from demons, unfortunate pros- 
titutes recognize men of self-control from the bearing 
of their eyes, and avoid them, just as a diseased eye 
avoids the light of the sun, or the vulture sweet 
scent. How is it that ‘“‘ Godliness is an abomination 
to sinners,” if they cannot recognize godliness? 50 
it was that Theophilus, not finding anything in John’s 
face corresponding to his own eye, or that which he 
desired to find, inferred his hostility, as a matter of 
unsupported conjecture. 





trial on the charges they contained (it must be said that 
_ Theophilus’ subsequent treatment of Isidore does not support 
this account, given by Socrates). 

1 A variant reading for an unusual word meaning “lost his 
spirit,” ‘fainted’; this will mean either ‘‘ he was deeply 
mortified at his ordination,” or ‘‘ he consented with a bad 
grace to ordain him,” or perhaps, as Socrates says, ‘‘ he was 
frightened [by Eutropius] into ordaining him.” 

2 The text is corrupt. I would suggest “he is very clever 
at reading the invisible will and mind of a man from. his 
visible countenance.”’ 

3 Mark i. 24; Matt. viii. 29. 


44. EARLY CAREER OF CHRYSOSTOM [τὸ 


Deac. You surprise me, father. But why did he 
oppose his ordination ? 

Bish. It was always his policy not to ordain good 
and sensible men, except by inadvertence, as he 
wished them all to be weak-minded persons, over whom 
he could dominate; he thought it better to dominate 
over weak-minded men than to hear the wisdom of 
the prudent. None the less, willing or unwilling, 
he had to yield to saving Providence. 


Reforms of the Life of the Clergy 


Thus John was ordained, and entered upon the 
care of affairs. At first, he tested his flock by play- 
ing to them upon the pipe of reason. But occasion- 
ally he exercised the staff of correction! as well; he 
inveighed against the mode of life, white-washed 
under the name of “ brotherly life,’ which he called 
by its right name of “ evil life,’ in connection with 
the women known as “ introduced.’ Σ He showed it 
to be worse, if a choice of evils had to be made, than 
that of brothel-keepers; for they live far from the 
surgery, and keep the disease to themselves, for those 
who desire it, while the “ brothers”’ live within the 
workshop of salvation, and invite healthy people to 
come and catch the disease. This caused great indig- 
nation to those among the clergy who were without 
the love of God, and blazing with passion. 

1 « Being naturally disposed to correction ”’ (Soz.). 

2 74.e. aS housekeepers. As the clergy were not allowed 
to marry after ordination, they had to have women to keep 
house for them; some of these were young, some even women 
of the Church under vows of virginity, claiming to live with 
them as sisters in devotion. The Nicene Council (Can. III.) 
forbade the introduction of any woman but a mother, a 
sister, an aunt, or other person above suspicion; a rule 
frequently enforced by later councils. Chrysostom issued 
two treatises against the practice; their date is uncertain, 
but this narrative suggests that they appeared now. He 
admits that there has been no great amount of actual wrong- 
doing, but points out that scandal must inevitably arise, and 
makes it clear that these women were in many cases leading 
the lives of smart society ladies. 


20] REFORMS IN THE CHURCH 45 


Reform of the Life of the Laity 


He next took action against injustice, pulling down 
avarice, that metropolis of evils, to build an habita- 
tion of righteousness. This is characteristic of wise 
master-builders, first to pull down the habitation of 
falsehood, and then to lay the foundation of truth, 
as it is said in the prophet, “1 have set thee over 
peoples and kingdoms, to root up and to plant, to 
dig down and to rebuild.” 1 The first expressions 
refer to his work as husbandman, the second as a 
builder. Next, he disturbed the numerous purse- 
worshippers, and then attended to their manner of 
life, urging them to be content with their own earn- 
ings, and not to be always dangling after the savoury 
odours of the rich. To follow smoke as their torch- 
bearer meant handing themselves over to the fire 
of licence; this was the result of following the life 
of the flatterer and the parasite. Then, most of the 
gluttons were dug out of their holes, and the sharp 
people who bring false accusations shared the same 
fate. 


Reform of Church Finance 


Then he examined the account books of the Church 
treasurer, and found expenditure which was of no 
benefit to the Church; these grants he ordered to be 
stopped. This brought him to another financial 
question—the bishop’s expenditure. Here he found 
extraordinary extravagance, and ordered the large 
sums so spent to be transferred to the hospital.2 As 


1 Jer. i. to. Chrysostom’s writings are full of denuncia- 
tions of wealth, and exhortations to charity. “Οἱ all the 
fathers of the fourth century, he is the panegyrist par 
excellence of almsgiving ”’ (Puech). 

2 According to Suetonius, it was the custom at Rome to 
carry sick folks to the temple of AZsculapius, on an island in 
the Tiber, to die there, so as to save the trouble of attending 
to them. Jerome tells us that the first hospital was founded 
by a Christian matron, Fabiola. Chrysostom followed the 
lead of Basil, who had erected a very large hospital at Cesarea, 
in charge of a “‘ local bishop.” 


46 EARLY CAREER OF CHRYSOSTOM Ὁ 


the need of treatment was very great, he erected other 
hospitals, over which he appointed two devout priests, 
as well as doctors and cooks, and kindly workers 
from among his celibates to assist them; so that 
strangers coming to the city, and there falling ill, 
could obtain medical care, as a thing which was not 
only good in itself, but also for the glory of the 
Saviour. 


Reform of the Order of Widows 


Then he summoned the members of the order ! of 
widows, and made a searching investigation into 
cases of misconduct; some, whom he found too fond 
of carnal pursuits, he admonished either to adopt the 
practice of fasting, and to abstain from the bath 3 
and from over-dressing, or else to proceed without 
delay to a’second marriage, that the law of the Lord 
might not be brought into disrepute. 


Reform of Devotion 


Next, he urged the people to join in the interces- 
sions 3 offered during the night,4 as the men had no 


1 i Tim. v. 3 shows that from the first there was a 
“catalogue ’” of Church widows; probably those needing 
relief (Acts vi. τὴ." Presently it became clear that their care 
needed the work of women, as well as that of the deacons, 
and some of the elder widows were put in charge of the rest. 
In some parts of the Church only widows who had_ borne 
children, who were of considerable age, and who had been but 
once married, were admitted as deaconesses. Olympias is a 
noted exception (p.150). Thus it appears that the order of 
deaconesses (p. 86) sprang from the order of widows. 

2 The public baths in a great city were enormous buildings, 
where much time was wasted in bodily pleasure, gossip 
flourished, and immorality lurked. It was better for those 
who had to set a high standard of life, to accept physical 
rather than moral uncleanness. Cf. p. I15. 

3 “ Litanies.”” The Apostolical Constitutions (viil. 6) give 
us an early form, the deacon “ bidding ” the prayer, or naming 
the subjects of intercession, while the people answer, “ Lord, 
have mercy.'y Cf. pu ΤῊΝ 

4 Pliny mentions the night services of the Christians, when 
they “‘sang praises to Christ as God.” Chrysostom recom- 
mends them in his Hom. in Ps. cxix. (“ At midnight I will 


21] RESULTS OF CHRYSOSTOM’S REFORMS 47 


leisure during the day, while their wives were to stay 
at home, and say their prayers by day. All this 
annoyed the less strenuous clergy, who made a practice 
of sleeping all night. 

Then he put his hand to the sword of correction 
against the rich, lancing the abscesses of their souls, 
and teaching them humility and courtesy towards 
others. In this he followed the apostolic precept to 
Timothy, “‘ Charge them who are rich in this world 
not to be high-minded, nor to trust in uncertain 
riches,”’ } 


Results of these Reforms 


As the result of these reforms, the Church put forth 
daily more abundant blossoms; the tone? of the whole 
city was changed to piety, men delighting their souls 
with soberness and psalmody. But the devil, who 
hates all that is good, could not tolerate the escape 
of those whom he held in dominion, now taken from 
his grasp by the word of the Lord through the teach- 
ing of John; so much so, that the horse-racing and 
theatre-going fraternity left the courts of the devil, 
and hastened to the [0143 of the Saviour, in their love 
for the pipe of the shepherd who loves his sheep. 


rise,’ etc.) and cxxxii. ‘‘ At night our prayers are more pure, 
our minds lighter, our leisure more abundant ’’; hence “ the 
poor abide in Church from midnight until dawn in prayer, 
and holy vigils are linked together, by day and by night ”’ 
(Hom. in Is.iv.). The services consisted chiefly of psalms, 
of which twelve were in time fixed upon as the normal use. 
At this time the Arians in Constantinople had been organiz- 
ing street processions, with singing of litanies, by night; 
Chrysostom arranged for rival processions, for which the 
Empress supplied silver candlesticks. The two _ parties 
naturally came to blows. 

Pe Lim ὙΠ 17. + Lite colour,’ 

3 “Some of those present yesterday have since then sat 
in the theatres, and gazed at the procession of the devil ” 
(Or: xc.). The circus was a fruitful source of iniquity, 
frequently condemned by Chrysostom (c. Anom. vii. 1; de 
Laz. vii. 1). During his first year at Constantinople, he 
preached a sermon ‘“‘ Against the games and the theatres,”’ 
after a tumultuous race-meeting held on Good Friday, in 
which many Christians had joined. 





48 THE BEGINNING OF TROUBLE [21 


CHAPTER: Vi 
THE BEGINNING OF TROUBLE 


The Plot against Chrysostom 


In consequence of this, envy took possession of the 
minds of the hireling shepherds, who were by implica- 
tion convicted. As they could not get the better of 
him, because they did not call upon the Saviour, the 
destroyer of envy, they devised various slanders 
against John; representing certain homilies of his 
as jests at the expense of the queen and of the royal 
court. 

‘Now it happened, that just at this time Acacius, 
Bishop of Berea, paid him a visit, and according to 
his own statement, was not given a decent lodging ; 
he was much vexed at this, and swelled with indigna- 
tion at what he regarded as a slight put upon him 
by John. Unable to control his feelings, he indulged 
in a witless witticism, “‘ out of the abundance of his 
heart,’’ 2 worthy of his great mind.® He said in the 
presence of some of John’s clergy, “1 am scasoning 
a pot for him.’ At once he threw in his lot with 
Severianus and Antiochus, and Isaac Syriscus, the 
leading spirit of the impostor monks,? a plausible 

1 His condemnations of luxury were said to be specially 
aimed at the Empress, into whose hands the chief power in 
the State had fallen since the death of Eutropius; cf. p. 72. 
From this time forward, as our other authorities show, the 
good-will she had hitherto borne to him turned to enmity, 
growing more and more bitter until, with the help of Theophilus 
and his party, she had accomplished his ruin. 

ΝΘ xi 27: 

3 Or, “ Of his drunken madness.”’ 

4 “Chrysostom continually showed his high esteem for 
monks, and saw to their necessities; but those who left the 
monasteries, and appeared in the city, he abused ”’ (Socrates). 
It is evident that a large number of indigent persons came to 
the capital to trade upon the Christian generosity of rich 
ladies (p. 152). For Isaac, see p. 70. 


21] BREACH OF CANON LAW 49 


rascal, who spent all his time in abuse of bishops. 
These worthies looked themselves out arms, nominally 
against John, but really against the glory of the 
Saviour. 7 

First, they sent to Antioch, and tried to discover 
any youthful offences of his. But as “they that 
seek failed,’ 1 and found nothing, they sent messengers 
to Alexandria, to the unprincipled Theophilus, known 
85. weather-cock,” 2 who was very clever at engineer- 
ing such things. He at once opened the books of 
his mind, with all the stealth of a thief, and set himself 
to find any pretext whatever for taking action. 


The Charge of a Breach of Canon Law 


Deac. Stay the torrent of your words, father, 
before I forget what is in my mind, and let me tell 
you the charge which reached us from Alexandria, 
and generally gained acceptance. The story is, that 
John received into communion some clergy who had 
been deposed by Theophilus. This improper action 
annoyed Theophilus, who in consequence had a 
disagreement with John, and proceeded to act 
against him. 

Bish. Granted that the popular account is true; 
still, is it for a bishop to remedy evil by evil? What 
then of the gospel saying, ‘‘ Let not the sun go down 
upon your wrath” ?3 Or of the apostle’s words, 
“Qvercome evil with good’ ?4 Or the prophet’s, 
“Tf I have rewarded evil to them that dealt evil to 
me”’?® Surely, then, it would have been more 
gallant for him, in dealing with devout bishops, to 
say, Brother John, in inadvertence you have done 
this or that? And for John to be able to plead in self- 
defence, that he knew nothing about the matter? 

Deac. That is true, provided that his will was 

ΕΒ. [σῖν; ὁ: 

2 “ Amphallax, alternating,” used for a tragic actor’s 
high-heeled buskins, which fitted either foot. Bunyan’s 
“Mr. Facing-both-ways.”’ 

* Eph. 1v. 20; * Rom. xii, 21. © PS vil. 5) bey 


4. δα 


50 THE BEGINNING OF TROUBLE [22 


good, and that he was not trumping up the charge 
of befriending these clergy to satisfy his private 
animosity. 

Bish. Then, by the fear of God, Who ruleth over 
the illimitable fears, I swear that I will speak no word 
that is not consonant with fact, in regard to these 
clergy of whom you speak. 


Isidore and the Widow’s Gift 


There was one Isidore,! one of the priests ordained 
by the blessed Athanasius the Great, still surviving, 
in his eightieth year. Most of the people of Rome 
know him, as he visited the city on ecclesiastical 
business, as the guest-master? of the Church of 
Alexandria; and you know him yourselves, from his 
coming with Acacius to convey the announcement of 
the establishment of communion ? between Flavianus 
and Theophilus,* after it had been interrupted for 
twenty years, on account of the blessed Evagrius,® 
who fought many a fight in the course of his labours 
for the good of the Church. The widow of one of 
the great men of the city gave this Isidore a thousand 


1 Theophilus’ candidate for the see of Constantinople. 
He had spent his youth as a monk at Nitria, and was famous 
for his piety. Sozomen says that he had embittered Theo- 
philus against himself, by giving evidence in favour of Peter, 
the “arch-priest’’ of Alexandria, in regard to a charge 
brought by Theophilus against him. See p. 42, n. 

* Most large cities and monasteries had a ‘‘ Xenodochium,”’ 
or hospice, for the reception of stranger Christians bearing 
letters of commendation. Can. X. of Chalcedon forbids a 
stranger to be concerned with the affairs of the shrines, the 
poor-houses, or the hospices of a Church. 

2 iit. the communion,,: cl. p22 

4 See p. 40, n. The Churches of Rome and Alexandria 
at first refused to recognize Flavian as Bishop of Antioch; 
shortly after Paulinus’ death Chrysostom negotiated success- 
fully with Theophilus, and Flavian “left no stone unturned 
to restore harmony.” Acacius and Isidore were sent to 
Damasus of Rome, and secured his recognition of Flavian. 

5 Paulinus’ successor, for a brief space, at Antioch. Theo- 
philus evidently wished the arrangement made by the six 
clergy to be carried out (p. 40). 


22} ACCUSATION OF ISIDORE 51 


gold pieces, putting him under oath by the table 
of the Saviour, for the purchase of clothes for the 
poor women of Alexandria; he was not to mention 
the matter to Theophilus, for fear that he would take 
the money, and spend it on his stones. For Theo- 
philus is obsessed, like Pharaoh, with a craving for 
stone 2 for buildings, of which the Church stands in 
no need. Never mind that now; I want to come to 
the point about Isidore. 

Isidore took the money, and spent it for the benefit 
of the poor women and widows. Theophilus some- 
how got to know; nothing could escape him, wherever 
done or spoken, with his gang of spies and eaves- 
droppers, not to call them anything else. He sum- 
moned Isidore, and with apparent civility asked if 
his information was true. Isidore did not deny it, 
and gave an account of his dealings in the matter. 
On hearing this, Theophilus changed his behaviour, 
and he who a moment before, when he made the 
inquiry, was gentle and kindly, next moment swelled 
all over his body with wrath; his very appearance 
changed, when Isidore’s answer reached his ears. 


Theophilus’ Accusation of Isidore 


He kept quiet for a while, like a dog that bites 
you when you are off your guard, but two months 
later convened the clergy, before whom he produced 
a document, and said in the presence of Isidore: 
“Ὁ received this charge against you, Isidore, eighteen 
years ago; but as I was very busy, I forgot the 
matter. Just now, as I was looking up some other 
papers, 1 found this document, which concerns you. 
What have you to say in defence?’’ The paper 
contained a charge of sodomy. 

ee “aureus,” of the value of twenty-five denarii, about 
18s. 6d. 

2 “ Lithomania.”’ ,‘“‘ Isidore said it was better to restore 
the bodies of the sick, which are more properly the temples 
of God, than to build walls’ (Soz. viii. 12; he does not 
mention this case of the widow). Isidore of Pelusium calls 
Theophilus ‘‘ the gold-maniac and litholater.” Cf. p. 115. 


52. THE BEGINNING OF TROUBLE [23 


Isidore began his defence by saying to Theophilus : 
“ Granted that it is true, that you received the paper, 
and also that it slipped your memory, was not the 
man who presented the memorial available for a 
second inquiry?’’ Theophilus answered, “No; the 
lad did not appear, as he was a sailor.”” Then Isidore : 
“He did not appear at the moment, as you ‘say, 
Pope; did he not appear after his voyage? Did he 
not appear the year after, or the year after that? 
It is not too late even now; if he is here, tell the fellow 
to stand forth.” 


Theophilus Excommunicates Isidore 


Hereupon Theophilus, finding himself likely to be 
humiliated in face of the actual truth, adjourned the 
inquiry to another day; and by large promises 
induced a boy to lay an accusation against Isidore, 
giving him a bribe, it is said, of twenty-five gold 
pieces, which he at once handed over to his mother. 
The mother refused to accept the money, deterred 
partly by the thought of the unbiassed Eye, partly 
by fear of the laws of the land; she reflected that 
Isidore, if falsely accused, might appeal to the 
magistrate.t So she came and told Isidore the whole 
story, and showed him the coins, which she said she 
had received from Theophilus’ sister as ‘a reward 
against the innocent.” 2 The woman paid the due 
penalty for her many sims, and for this one in par- 
ticular; she died under an operation on the breasts. 
All this time Isidore stayed at home, making sup- 
plication to God. The boy, partly in fear of the laws, 
partly at the thought of Theophilus’ rage at his 
failure, fled to the efficacious protection of the Church, 
and took refuge at the altar.® 

Thus, on a revolting allegation, the rights of which 
were never heard, Theophilus declared Isidore to be 
outcast from the Church; a solemn farce to disguise 
his own wickedness. Isidore now took alarm, lest 


1 The “‘ tribune of the people.” 
* Ps. Xvi 5. * See Di 41 ἢ; 


23] CHARGE OF ORIGENISM 53 


Theophilus in his increasing fury should take measures 
against his personal safety (for by all accounts, he 
actually went as far as this), and made his way with 
all speed to the community of monks of the mountain 
of Nitria,! where he had spent his youth; here he 
sat in his cell, and addressed himself in prayer to 
the long-suffering God.? 


The Charge of Origenism 


Meanwhile Theophilus, conscious of the indecency 
and doubtfulness of his victory, sent letters to the 
neighbouring bishops, ordering some of the principal 
monks, the heads of the monasteries, to be expelled 
from the mountain and from the further desert, 
without giving his reasons. These monks went down 
to Alexandria, with their priests, and begged Theo- 
philus to state the grounds on which they were 
condemned to expulsion. Theophilus stared at them, 
like a dragon, with bloodshot eyes, glaring like a 
bull; in his uncontrollable temper, he was livid one 
moment, pale the next, the next again smiling sar- 
castically. He took the tippet ? upon the shoulders 
of the aged Ammonius, and twisted it round his 
neck with his own hands, punching him in the face, 
making his nose bleed with his clenched fists, and 


1 About sixty miles south of Alexandria, “50 called from 
the neighbouring village, in which they collect nitre ” (Sozo- 
men). There were fifty monasteries there, containing 5000 
monks (so Pall., L. H.), some living a community, some an 
isolated life. 

2 Theodore Trim. says that seven Egyptian bishops, whom 
he names, and twenty-two clergy, wrote about this matter 
to Innocent; who remonstrated in vain with Theophilus. 

3 “ Omophorion,” a long band of white woollen stuff, draped 
over the shoulders with the ends depending before and 
behind; originally a piece of civil dress, retained by the Church 
as in the case of other vestments, and in time acquiring an 
ecclesiastical and then a symbolical significance. Apparently 
all bishops wore it in the east; afterwards, as the Roman 
“ pallium,’’ it was conferred first by the Emperors, then by 
the bishops of Rome, upon great prelates, as by Gregory 
upon St. Augustine of Canterbury. 


34 THE BEGINNING OF TROUBLE [23 


shouting, “ Anathematize Origen,’ you heretic!” 
when the only point at issue was the petition on 
behalf of Isidore. This is the way with bad tempers ; 
their actions and words are like puppies, born blind. 
So they returned, all bloodstained, to their monas- 
teries, without receiving an answer; and continued 
their usual life of austerity, sharpening their natural 
powers by the study of the scriptures, through which 
we win salvation. They thought the less of the man’s 
frenzy, because they were conscious of their own 
innocence. 


1 Ammonius and Dioscorus (p. 147) were two of four “ Tall 
Brothers,” famous for their piety in the monastery of Mt. 
Nitria; so much honoured by Theophilus, that he made 
Dioscorus Bishop of Hermopolis, and brought two others 
into Alexandria, making them stewards of the Church revenues. 
Observing Theophilus’ character and architectural extrava- 
gances, they pleaded the attraction of the desert, and returned 
to their seclusion; when Theophilus discovered the true 
reason for this, he determined to ruin them, by stirring up 
their fellow-monks against them. Many of the monks were 
illiterate men, who took literally scripture expressions, such 
as ““ The eyes of the Lord,” and said that God had a body. 
Theophilus issued a pastoral, explaining that these were 
symbolical expressions, which was the principle followed by 
Origen in his ‘‘ Mystical’? interpretation of Holy Scripture, 
200 years before. The monks protested, lamenting that 
Theophilus had “ taken away their God ”’; Theophilus assured 
their deputation that he, like them, condemned Origen’s 
views. But Dioscorus and Ammonius set their faces against 
such “‘anthropomorphism,’’ and so gave Theophilus the 
opportunity he wanted of inflaming the illiterate monks 
against them. He informed them that Dioscorus’ party, 
following Origen, were introducing a ‘‘ blasphemous dogma,” 
and issued a pastoral condemning the views which he had 
just before upheld. Chrysostom knew nothing of all this 
at the time. 


24] | CONDEMNATION OF MONKS 55. 


CHAPTER VII 
THEOPHILUS, THE MONKS AND CHRYSOSTOM 


Synodical Action against the Monks 


Not content with this, Theophilus sent to the 
neighbouring bishops, and convened a synod to con- 
demn the monks; without calling them to defend 
themselves, or letting them speak a word, he declared 
outcast three of the most eminent of them (he was 
afraid to issue sentence of punishment upon the whole 
body at once), trumping up a charge of perversion 
of doctrine. The very men whom he had often 
honoured above bishops as teachers, for their lives, 
their gifts of speech, and their length of service, he 
was not ashamed to call impostors, for their attitude 
towards Isidore. Following up this declaration, he 
secured! five mannikins from Mount Nitria itself, 
who never had a place in the chapter-meeting of the 
elders of the desert, creatures not fit, much as it pains 
me to say so, to keep the doors; one of them he 
ordained bishop, and as he had not a city at his 
disposal, placed him in charge of a little village. He 
had no scruples about revolutionary acts, as he called 
himself a second Moses. Another he ordained priest, 
and the other three deacons. These were not 
Egyptians, but from different countries—one from 
Libya, one from Alexandria, one from Pharana, one 
from Paralus; as they had no hope of making any- 
thing out of their native countries, they fell in with 
his ridiculous measures. 


Appeal to the Civil Authority 


Next, he persuaded them to present memorials 
against the three excommunicate bishops, concoct- 
ing the terms of the accusation himself; their only 
contribution was the signature. This done, he 


- echt. canointed 1p. 14). 
F 


56 THEOPHILUS, MONKS, CHRYSOSTOM [24 


accepted the memorials from them in the presence of 
the Church, and proceeded to the governor under the 
crown,! with whom he lodged a representation against 
them in his own name, as archbishop of the diocese 
of Egypt,? together with the falsely incriminating 
memorials, demanding the expulsion of the men, 
with the help of the military, from every part of 


Egypt. 
Savage Attack upon the Monasteries 


Armed with the governor’s order, and taking the 
military with him to cover his doings, he gathered a 
mob of ruffians, who cared nothing about dignities, 
and fell upon the monasteries in the dead of night, 
after priming his young fellows with liquor. First, 
he ordered their saintly brother Dioscorus, bishop of 
the mountain, to be expelled from his throne, literally 
dragged away by Ethiopian slaves, probably unbap- 
tized 8 into the bargain, and took possession of his 


> Lae ἈΠ ΘΙ τ Ὁ; asan. Pall, ΡΝ ΣΙΝ Ὁ the pre. 
fect’; app. used only of the governor of Egypt. 

Ξ Lit. “© Arch- vee of the diocese of Epypt. .” Drucese = 
and “ eparchy ἢ ““ province,’? as we saw, have the same 
meaning (p. ΟἿΣ the .expression = “‘ Metropolitan of the 
province.” The sixth Canon of Nicwa says, “ Let the ancient 
customs prevail, in Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis, that the 
Bishop of Alexandria shall have authority over all of these, 
since a similar custom holds in regard to the Bishop of Rome; 
and also in Antioch and the other provinces (eparchiz). No 
one may be made bishop without the approval of the 
Metropolitan.” The thirtieth of Chalcedon speaks of “ the 
archbishop in the diocese of Egypt, of the capital of the 
Alexandrians.’’ This province or diocese was the largest in 
the world, containing six civil provinces, with nearly one 
hundred bishops, thirty more than those under the Bishop 
of Rome. The Metropolitan had the unique privilege of 
ordaining not only these suffragan bishops, but every priest 
and deacon in the province. 

3 “ Unenlightened.”” In Heb. vi. 4 the reference is to bap- 
tism. ‘‘ This washing is called enlightenment, because those 
who learn these things have their minds enlightened ” (Justin 
Mart. Apol. II. So often from his time forward). 1 know 
many who have sinned in expectation of enlightenment; 
but God gave us baptism to set free from sins, not to increase 
them ” (Hom. in Heb. xiii.). 





24) FLIGHT OF MONKS TO PALESTINE 57 


see,! which since the coming of Christ had been in 
the possession of the city of Dioscorus. Next, he 
raided the mountain, and gave the trifling property 
of the monks to his youths ; when he had stripped the 
cells, he searched for the three bishops, whom they 
had let down into a well, putting’ rushes upon its 
mouth. As he could not find them, he set their 
cells on fire with faggots, burning up with them all 
their copies of the canonical? scriptures, and other 
valuable writings, as well as a boy (so eye-witnesses 


‘said), and the sacred elements.? 


Flight of the Monks to Palestine 


When he had thus relieved his senseless fury, he 
went down again to Alexandria, giving the saintly 
men an opportunity of escape; they at once took 
their sheepskin habits, and fled to Palestine, making 
their way to Aelia,t accompanied by 300 of the 


1 “ Pareecia,” our “ parish ’’; St. Peter’s word for *‘ sojourn- 
ine ( Pet. 717,11. τι) taken’ from the LX X (ch. Πρ. τι 19; 
contrasted with Heb. xi. 1 3y, xiii. 14). So the word came 
to be used for the Christians ἡ ᾿ Sojourning amid the heathen ” 
in any one place—the “‘ paroecia ’’—organized under a bishop. 
In Nic. Can. XVI. wandering clergy are ordered to return to 
their parceciz, and no other bishop is to ordain them, without 
the consent of the bishop whom they have deserted. 

2 évdtabérous. Cf. Euseb. H. E., vi. 25. 

*. Lhe symbois: or the mysteries.” Not all monks were 
in Holy Orders; so Socrates speaks of it as an unusual thing 
that Theophilus had honoured two of the “Tall Brothers ” 
with the clerical dignity. Palladius similarly speaks of one 
Macarius (L. H., xvii. 25); but as abstinence from the mys- 
teries for five weeks was a grave offence (ibid. xvii. 9), the 
elements were reserved. ‘ All they who dwell alone in the 
deserts, where there is no priest, keep the Communion at 
home, and receive it at their own hands ” (Basil, Ep. xciii.). 
For the use of the word, cf. Theodoret Ep. cxxx., “‘ The 
symbols do not lose their natural characteristics. . . . Christ 
taking the symbols at the giving of the mysteries said . ; 
Dionysius the Areopagite, ‘‘ The sacred symbols are placed 
upon the altar.”’ 

εἰ {ὙΠ Jerusalem. Sozomen (viii. 13) says they went to 
Scythopolis, as ‘‘ there were there many palm trees, the leaves 
of which they used for the usual work of monks »*__basket- 
making. 


58 THEOPHILUS, MONKS, CHRYSOSTOM [24 


worthy monks of the mountain, and a body of priests 
and deacons. The rest were scattered abroad in 
different places. 


Theophilus pursues Them . 


The serpent who creeps by crooked ways could not 
tolerate their freedom, and again stirred up Theo- 
philus against them; boiling with rage, he wrote 
letters to the bishops of Palestine, as follows: “‘ You 
ought not to have received these men into your cities, 
contrary to my judgment; but as you did it in ignor- 
ance, I grant you pardon. Look to it then in the 
future, that you admit them neither into ecclesias- 
tical, nor into private premises.” In the extrava- 
gance of his pride, he not only said, but actually 
imagined that he was a god. 


The Monks arrive at Constantinople 


The fugitives, sorely distressed by this continual 
movement from place to place, arrived at the capital,t 
where Bishop John had been enthroned under the 
good hand of God for the spiritual care of our rulers; 
they fell at his feet, begging him to help souls slandered 
and plundered by men better accustomed to this sort 
of thing than to doing good. 


Appeal to Chrysostom 


John stood up, and saw fifty first-rate men, their 
habits worn grey with their holy toils. With his keen 
sense of brotherly love, he was deeply moved, and 
bursting, like Joseph, into tears, inquired what wild 
boar from the forests, or rogue beast, had been doing 
mischief to this fruitful vine. ‘‘ Be seated, father,”’ 
they answered; “give us dressings for our ghastly 
wounds, inflicted through the frenzy of Pope Theo- 
philus, and see if you can bind up our swelling gashes. 
If even you give us no attention, through respect to, 

1 “ Stratopedon,”’ lit. ‘‘ the camp ’’; “‘ the place where the 


Emperor resides ’”’ (Balsamon) ; the theory of the “‘ Imperator” 
was, that he was commander-in-chief of the forces. 


24| - DEALINGS WITH THE MONKS 59 


or fear of, Theophilus, as the other bishops have done, 
there is nothing left for us to do, but to go to the 
king, and inform him of this man’s ill-doings, to the 
disrepute of the Church. If then you have any con- 
cern for the good name of the Church, receive our 
petition, and persuade him to allow us our home in 
Egypt. We have committed no offence, either 
against the law of the Saviour or against the Pope 
himself.” 


Chrysostom’s Dealings with the Monks 


John thought that he would have no difficulty in 
changing the revengeful feelings of Theophilus to- 
wards them, and gladly took the matter in hand. He 
instructed the men, for the love of God, to keep silence, 
and to tell no one why they were there, until he should 
send word to his brother Theophilus. He gave them 
sleeping-quarters in the Church of the Resurrection,+ 
but did not supply them with any of the necessities 
of life. Some godly women provided them with food, 
and they made their own contribution by the labours 
of their hands. 

It happened that at that time there were some of 
Theophilus’ clergy in Constantinople, who had come 
to purchase promotion from the newly-appointed ? 
governors in the province? of Egypt, and to secure 
their favour towards him, in carrying out his plans 
for the destruction of those who were an annoyance 
to him. So John called these men, and inquired if 
they knew the ascetics who were in the city. They 
frankly gave the men a good character. ‘‘ We know 
them,” they told John; “it is true that they have 
been treated with great violence. If it please you, 
my lord, refuse them communion in the spiritual 

1 The church in which Gregory Nazianzen began his minis- 
try in Constantinople; here Chrysostom preached several 
courses of homilies. Another church in Constantinople was 
that of ‘‘ Holy Peace.”’ 

2 The word (‘‘ stretching out hands’’) commonly used for 


“ ordaining τ cf. p. 36, n. Socrates so uses it. 
3 ** Dioecesis,’”’ 


60 THEOPHILUS, MONKS, CHRYSOSTOM [25 


feast, so as not to annoy the Pope, but deal kindly 
with them in everything else. This will be expected 
of you, as bishop.” 


Chrysostom’ s Letter to Theophilus 


So John did not receive them into communion,! 
but wrote to Theophilus, courteously asking him to 
do him, as Theophilus’ son and brother, the favour 
of taking the men like little children in his arms. 
Theophilus refused to do John the favour, and sent 
to him certain persons well versed in verbal disputes 
—the men we have just mentioned—instructing 
them to present requirements, which as usual he 
dictated himself, containing statements admittedly 
false, but dressed out with all sorts of calumnies in 
regard to the men’s spiritual condition,? as he had 
nothing to bring against their outward lives. Thus 
they were to be pointed at as impostors at the 
palace. 


Theophilus Implacable 


Seeing that Theophilus, so far from coming to a 
right mind, was all the more bitter against them, the 
ascetics sent a numerous deputation to him, declar- 
ing that they anathematized all false doctrine; and 
presented a petition to John, detailing the various 
forms of oppression from which they suffered, and 
some specific points of complaint. I am ashamed to 
speak of them in the presence of these young people, 
for fear of shaking their confidence in my veracity ; 
perhaps, too, even more experienced Christians might 
not believe me. 

John again, both in person and through other 
bishops, urged them to drop the charges against 
Theophilus, in view of the mischief which the suit 
would cause, and wrote to Theophilus: “‘ They are 

1 It was reported to Theophilus that he had done so 
(Socrates) ; this was one of the charges at The Oak. Chrysos- 


tom made no claim whatever to act as judge, 
2 Charging them with Origenism, 


26] MONKS’ APPEAL TO ΒΌΟΡΟΧΊΑ 61 


reduced to such extremities, that they are filing a 
formal indictment against you. I leave it to you to 
deal with it as you think best; for I cannot persuade 
them to leave the capital.’ 0. 

At this, Theophilus blazed with anger, and suspended 
the brother of the monks, Bishop Dioscorus, a man 
who had grown old in the service of the Church, 
from ministering in his own church; while he wrote 
to John: “ I think that you are unaware of the order 
of the Nicene Canons, in which it is laid down that a 
bishop shall not exercise jurisdiction beyond his 
boundaries ; 4 if so, now that you know it, leave these 
charges against me alone. If there was any need for 
me to be put on my trial, it should be before Egyptian 
judges, not before you, at the distance of a seventy- 
five days’ journey.” 


CHAPTER. Vill 
FIRST EXPULSION OF CHRYSOSTOM 


The Monks’ Appeal to Eudoma and 115. Result 


Joun received the letter, but kept it to himself, 
and discussed measures for peace with the ascetics of 
both parties. Both were exasperated at what he 
said to them; the exiles, because they had been 
tyrannically treated, the others, because they had 
no power to make peace without Theophilus, as it 
was at his orders that they had presented the falsely 
incriminating petitions. This done, John dismissed 
the matter from his mind, as he considered them to 
be answered. 

Hereupon the monks of the aggrieved party with- 
drew, and compiled a lengthy petition, formally 
charging the other monks with libel, and Theophilus 


ΤΡ ΤΈΣ he 


62 FIRST EXPULSION OF CHRYSOSTOM [26 


—well, to tell the truth, with everything that any one 
of them knew him to have done. They appealed to 
their majesties, approaching the queen in the shrine 
of the holy John, with the petition that the case of 
the disputant monks might be investigated before 
the prefects, and that Theophilus, however much 
against his will, might appear to stand his trial before 
John. The petition was made, and the answer was, 
that Theophilus should be summoned by the magis- 
trate to appear, whether willing or unwilling, and 
take his trial before John; and that Theophilus’ 
monks should substantiate the charges preferred 
against the aged saints or pay the penalty of false 
accusation. 


Theophilus Summoned to Constantinople 


So Captain? (retired) Elaphius was sent to Alex- 
andria to bring Theophilus, while the justices carried 
out the rest of the Empress’ answer. The investiga- 
tion was held, and an indecisive result obtained; 
but as they were still threatened with the glittering 
sword of the law, the poor wretches took fright at 
the possible issue, and got the matter adjourned until 
Theophilus’ arrival, on the ground that he had 
suborned them, and had dictated the petitions. So 
the officials put them in prison, until Theophilus should 
arrive, bail being refused under the circumstances of 
the case. Some of them lingered in prison until 
they died, owing to the slow movements of Theo- 
philus; 2 others, subsequently to his arrival, when he 

1“ Princeps”’ is properly captain of the second line of 
soldiers in a legion. 

2 In the interval Theophilus held a synod, which con- 
demned Origenism ; and wrote to Epiphanius, the aged and 
highly respected Bishop of Salamis in Cyprus, who with 
Jerome had taken the lead in the antagonism to Origen’s 
views. Theophilus had called him an ““ anthropomorphist,”’ 
because he insisted on the literal interpretation of scripture, 
including the passages which speak of God in terms borrowed 
from human nature. Now he declared that he saw the error 
of his ways, and invited Epiphanius to join him in a crusade 
against Origenism. Epiphanius called a synod which anathe- 


26] THEOPHILUS’ ARRIVAL 63 


hurried forward the matter by means of bribes, were 
at the final inquiry sentenced to transportation to 
Proconnesus for malicious accusation. 


Theophilus’ Arrival 


So Theophilus arrived at Constantinople, like a 
beetle loaded with the dung of the best that Egypt, 
or India itself, produces,! emitting sweet scent to 
cover his stinking jealousy; he entered the city at 
mid-day on the fifth day of the week, cheered by a 
mob of sailors.2,. Such was the palm of dishonour- 
able glory which he had to bear—the glory of which 
the apostle said long ago, “‘ Whose glory is in their 
shame,” and added, “who mind earthly things.” ὃ 
He took up his quarters in the tents of the unright- 
eous, and avoided the Church, forgetful of David’s 
verse, “1 had rather be cast away in the house of 
my God, than to dwell in tents of sinners.” 4 It 


was his own conscience that shut him out from the 
Church. 


matized it as heretical, and sent the resolution to Chrysostom, 
who in all innocence ignored it. The question did not interest 
him, and he saw no reason why it should be raised ; as his own 
commentaries show, he had no leanings towards Origen’s 
“mystical? interpretations. Epiphanius proceeded to Con- 
stantinople, where Chrysostom treated him with great 
courtesy, though he broke Church order by ordaining a deacon, 
but refused his demand to expel the monks, and condemn 
Origenism, as these matters were awaiting synodical decision. 
However, he laid the matter before a gathering of bishops 
in Constantinople, which declined to confirm the resolution. 
The Empress severely snubbed Epiphanius, and Ammonius 
compelled him to admit that he had not read any of his 
(Ammonius’) writings; at last he saw that he was simply 
being used as a catspaw, and departed for Cyprus, saying, 
“I leave to you the city, the court, and the hypocrisy.” 
Theophilus meanwhile journeyed slowly through Asia Minor, 
collecting his partisans among the bishops. 

1 Gifts brought to win favours. 

2 From the Egyptian corn-ships, for whose arrival Theo- 
philus delayed his entry. 

8 Phil. iii. 19. 

et FO 9.0.0.6 5 aur τὸ; 





64 FIRST EXPULSION ‘OF CHRYSOSTOM [27 


Theophilus’ Machinations 


In the course of three whole weeks he never held 
any conversation with John,! such as is customary 
among bishops, and never went near the church, 
but linked his new hostility with the old, and spent . 
night and day in his efforts to expel Bishop John not 
only from the Church, but even from life itself. He 
lavished money in purchasing the support of the 
superstitious 2 spirits among the authorities against 
the truth, made the greedy ones his slaves by the 
abundance of his table, and further, by flattery and 
promises of promotion, won over his fellow-impostors 
among the clergy. When he had put all these in 
bonds—of pleasure, not of rope—like some seducing 
demon, and bewitched the discerning faculties of their 
souls, he looked about for some demoniacal person to 
be his understudy in the play, and succeeded in 
finding what he wanted. 


The Memorials of the Renegade Deacons 


There were two deacons, who had been expelled 
from the Church by Bishop John for criminal offences. 
He availed himself of their frailty, and. persuaded 
them to present memorials against John, promising 
to restore them to their office. Their offences were 
murder and fornication respectively.? He fulfilled his 
promise ; for after the banishment of John he restored 
them to their places, obviously because they had 
presented the memorials which Theophilus himself 
dictated. They contained not a word of truth, except 
the one point, that he advised every one, after com- 
munion, to take a little water, or a pastille, for fear 
that they might involuntarily spit out a portion of 
the elements * with the saliva or phlegm. He first 
adopted the practice himself, to teach reverent care 
to those who would learn. 

oe: Beta ae ame 

2 Warning them of divine punishment due to Origenism. 

dan eons ae ἢν 


4 “ The symbol ”’ (p.57). See p. 120, ἢ; 


27] THE “SYNOD” OF THE. OAK 65 


The Conclave at Eugraphia’s House 


On receiving the memorials, Theophilus held a 
meeting at the house of Eugraphia; at which were 
present Severianus, Antiochus, Acacius, and every 
one else who had a grudge against John for his seemly 
exhortations. For the blessed bishop, like St. Paul, 
made a practice in his teaching, “‘ both publicly and 
from house to house,” ! of urging dignified behaviour ; 
he was especially severe with women like Eugraphia. 
“At your age,” he would say, “‘ when you are really 
old women, and widows into the bargain, why do you 
force your bodies to become young again, wearing — 
curls on your foreheads like the women of the street, 
bringing every other lady into disrepute, and giving 
people generally a false impression ?”’ 


The Hostile Synod Meets 


So they held a gathering,” and took steps to bring 
a suit against John. One of them suggested that they 
should present petitions to the king, and insist upon 
his appearing before the synod, however unwilling. 
This was the course adopted; as with the Jews, so 
with them, money made everything easy.® 


+ Acts. tx. 20. 

2 Palladius passes without explanation from the private and 
informal discussion at Eugraphia’s house, to the so-called 
‘“‘ Synod of The Oak,” in which, of course, only bishops took 
part. He declines to call it a synod. Theophilus summoned 
the Nitrian monks to it, and required them to express their 
penitence, and “‘ as is customary with monks, even if they are 
wronged, they said, ‘Pardon.’”’ Socrates thinks this would 
not have happened, had not Ammonius and Dioscorus now been 
dead (p. 147; Theophilus shed tears over the news). Hence- 
forth the question of Origenism, having served its purpose, 
was dropped. 

3 Photius gives an account of this assemblage. Paul, 
Bishop of Heracleia (p. 14, n.) presided as Metropolitan ; John 
the deacon, evidently the man mentioned above, brought 
forward twenty-nine charges, the first of which was, that 
Chrysostom had deposed him from the diaconate for flogging 
his own slave (or son). Others were, that he had sold Church 
property, including marble from the Church of the Resur- 
rection, that he had plotted against Severianus, entered and 


66 FIRST EXPULSION OF CHRYSOSTOM [27 


Chrysostom’ 5 Forebodings 


We were seated,t a company of forty bishops, in 
the refectory at the bishop’s house, with Bishop John, 
marvelling that a man who had been put on his trial, 
and ordered to appear at the capital on disgraceful 
charges, had arrived with such a numerous following 
of bishops, and that he had suddenly brought about 
such a change in the minds of the authorities, and 
perverted the majority of the clergy. While we could 
see no answer to the question, John was inspired by 
the Spirit, and said to us all: ‘“‘ Pray for me, brethren, 
and, if ye love Christ, let none desert the Church of 
which he is in charge on my account; for like the 
writer of the words, ‘ I am already being offered, and 
the time of my departure is at hand.’2 And I shall 
endure much persecution, and depart from this life, 
I see. For I know the cunning of Satan; he can no 
longer bear the annoyance of my invectives against 
him, The Lord have mercy upon you.? Remember 
me in your prayers.” 


Words of Consolation 


So profound was our distress, that some of us began 
to cry, others left the gathering with tears, and 
broken hearts. We kissed his eyes, and his sanctified 
head, and his facile and blessed lips. But he bade 





left the church without a prayer, ordained four bishops at 
once, ordained Serapion presbyter, hit a man in the face, 
eaten immoderately alone, living the life of a Cyclops, 
occupied the bath by himself, while Serapion kept the door, 
robed and unrobed in the episcopal throne, and eaten a 
pastille. Subsequently Isaac the monk (p. 48) brought 
forward eighteen other charges, such as that he had favoured 
Origenists, used strange expressions in his sermons, insulted 
the clergy, ordained slaves as bishops, and imposed fines upon 
Isaac himself, 

1 It is impossible to doubt that we have here the account 
of an eye-witness. Palladius was in Constantinople at the 
time, and was in some way involved in one of the charges. 

2 2 Tim. iv. 6. 

® 4. e. ““ Good-bye.” 


28] ~ WORDS OF CONSOLATION 67 


us, as we were flying hither and thither, like bees 
buzzing round a hive, to come back to the gathering, 
and said: ‘‘ Be seated, brethren, and do not weep, 
to give me greater pain. For to me ‘ to live is Christ, 
and to die is gain.’! It was often said, that I should 
lose my head for being too outspoken.. I think you 
will remember, if you look into your memories, that 
I always used to say to you, This present life js a 
journey, and its joys and sorrows are ever passing 
away. What is before our eyes is but a fair; we 
finish our buying and selling, and we move elsewhere. 
Are we better than the patriarchs, the prophets, the 
apostles, that this state of life should abide with us 
ΓΟ ὄνοι" 

Then one of the company sobbed aloud, saying, 
“Nay, we lament our orphaned condition, the widow- 
hood 3 of the Church, the confounding of ordinances, 
the ambition of those who do not fear the Lord, and 
leap upon high offices in the Church, the defenceless 
state of the poor, the famine of teaching.’ The 
Christ-loving bishop tapped the palm of his left hand 
with the forefinger of his right, a familiar gesture when 
he was in deep thought, and said to the speaker: 
‘““Say no more, brother, only remember what I said ; 
do not desert your Churches. The teaching office 
did not begin with me, nor did it come to an end in 
me. Did not Moses die, and was not Joshua found ? 
Did not Samuel end his days, and was not David 
anointed? Jeremiah departed this life, but was there 
not Baruch? Elijah was taken up, but did not 
Elisha take his place as prophet ? Paul was beheaded, 
but did he not leave behind him Timothy, Titus, 
Apollos, and countless others ?”’ 

Eulysius, Bishop of Apameia in Bithynia, was the 
next to speak. “It is inevitable,” he said, “1 we 
keep our Churches, that we shall be forced to com- 
municate with them and to sign (your sentence of 
condemnation).”” Said the holy John, “ Com- 
municate with them, lest you rend the Church; but 


coe nd a ἐγ: ple ©: Al sree 


68 FIRST EXPULSION OF CHRYSOSTOM [28 


do not sign. For my conscience is clear of any 
thought deserving my deposition.” 


The Summons from the Council of The Oak 


At this moment, messengers from Theophilus were 
announced. John ordered that they should be 
admitted; and on their entry, asked to what order 
they belonged. “‘ We are bishops,’’ they replied. 
He requested them to be seated, and to state their 
business. “‘ We only have a letter,” they said, “ to 
be read aloud ; cause it to be so read.”’ John directed 
that it should be read, and they ordered Theophilus’ 
young servant? to read the communication, which 
he did. The substance was as follows: “‘ The holy 
synod assembled at The Oak” (that was the name of 
the place where they had met—in the suburb of 
Rufinus,? on the other side of the sea), ‘to John” 
(they omitted his proper title of bishop; the dark- 
ened soul never does see things as they are, but 
imagines what its evil desires dictate). ‘‘We have 
received certain memorials, containing countless 
grave charges against you; appear, therefore, bring- 
ing with you the priests Serapion and Tigrius; for 
they are needed.” The two bishops who came to 
John were Dioscorus and Paulus, young men who 
had recently been consecrated in Libya. 


The Answer of Chrysostom’s Friends 


When the document had been read, John’s fellow- 
bishops replied with a statement drawn up by three 
bishops, Luppicianus, Demetrius, and Eulysius, and 
two priests, Germanus and Severus, all of them saintly 
and honourable men. ‘‘ Overthrow not the estate 
of the Church, and rend not the Church, for whose 
sake God from above entered into flesh. As it appears 

1 Cf. p. 38, n. Possibly this attendant was Theophilus’ 
nephew, Cyril, afterwards Bishop of Alexandria. 

2 “A suburb of Chalcedon, called after the name of Rufinus 


the consul, where was a palace, and a church built by Rufinus 
in honour of Peter and Paul the Apostles ’’ (Socrates). 


20] CHRYSOSTOM’S ANSWER TO “SYNOD” 69 


that by your disorderly action you are overthrowing 
the canons of the 318 bishops at Nicza, and are trying 
a case beyond your boundaries, do you cross over to 
us, that we may first hear what you have to say, in 
this city where good laws prevail, and do not be like 
Cain, when he invited Abel to come into the field.! 
For we have memorials against you, under seventy 
counts, alleging palpably criminous actions. More- 
over, we, assembled by the grace of God, not for the 
overthrow of the Church, but in peace, are more in 
number than your synod. For you number thirty- 
six, from one province; while we are forty, from 
various provinces, and among us are seven metro- 
politans. It is only reason that the smaller body 
should be judged according to the canons by the 
larger and the more honourable. Besides this, we 
hold your letter, in which you press upon our brother- 
minister John, that he ought not to accept cases from 
beyond his boundaries. Wherefore do you, in 
obedience to the laws of the Church, urge your accusers 
either to desist from their accusations against you, 
or from their approaches to John.” ὃ 


Chrysostom’s own Answer 


John was distressed at this answer, and said to his 
bishops, “ Write what seems good to you; I feel 
bound to make a statement for myself in answer to 
the allegations.’’ So he sent the following reply to 
Theophilus and his party: “1 hereby declare that 
if any man has aught to say against me, up to this 
moment I do not know what it is; but if any one 
has spoken against me, and you wish me to appear 
before you, put out of your assemblage my open 
enemies, who are filled with malice towards me 

1 The LXX of Gen. iv. 8, reads, ‘‘ Cain said to Abel his 
brother, Let us go forth into the field.” 

A * This was not strictly the case, as some of them were from 

Sla. 

* the text 195 uncertain:. George omits: “ your; end 
“against you.” ‘“‘ Bid the accusers cease from their accusa- 
tion, and their attack upon John.”’ 


70 FIRST EXPULSION OF CHRYSOSTOM [29 


because they think themselves slighted. Further, I 
raise no question as to the venue of my trial, though 
the fittest place would be the city. Those to whom I 
object as judges are Theophilus, whom I call to account 
for having said both at Alexandria and in Lycia, ‘ I 
go to the court ! to depose John.’ I know this to be 
true, because when he arrived, he did not have any 
intercourse with me, or communicate with me. If 
then he behaved as an enemy before the hearing, 
what would he do after the trial? Similarly, I charge 
Acacius with saying, ‘ I am seasoning a pot for him.’ 
As for Severianus and Antiochus, whom the divine 
sentence will soon overtake, what need to speak of 
them, when even the secular theatres make songs 
upon their revolutionary doings? I beg you there- 
fore, if you really desire me to appear, in regard to 
these four; if they are entered as judges, remove them 
from the panel; if as accusers, put them into the 
witness-box, that 1 may know how to prepare to meet 
them—whether as opponents or as judges. Then I 
will appear at all costs, not only before your love, but 
before any synod in the world. Now, then, I give 
you notice, that however often you write to me, you 
will hear no more from me.” 


The Emperor's Summons to Trial 


So the envoys withdrew, and a notary immediately 
arrived, bearing a letter from the king, enclosing the 
petition (of Theophilus’ synod) that John should come 
up for judgment whether he would or no, and bade 
him hasten to the trial. When the notary had 
received his answer, two of John’s priests appeared ; 
one FEugenius, who was given the bishopric of 
Heracleia ? in payment for the part he had played in 
the plot against Bishop John, and Isaac, the monk 
under rule of silence—not to call him anything else. 
These said, “‘ The synod sends you this message; 

1 “ Comitatus”’; “the place where the Comes is, or the 


Emperor ᾿᾿ (Balsamon). 
2 In place of Serapion, who was ejected. 


30] GUILTY OF LESE MAJESTE nt 


come over to us, and defend yourself against the 
charges.’’ 


Chrysostom Refuses to Appear 


To this John answered, through other bishops, 
“ How can you judge me with any show of order, 
when you have not -put forth from among you my 
enemies, and when you send my own clergy to summon 
mea 

They seized the bishops, and beat one, and stripped 
another of his robes, and put round the neck of a 
third the chains which they had in readiness for the 
saint, intending so to put him on shipboard, and 
carry him off to some unknown place; the devil 
had made them as savage as lions. The holy bishop, 
aware of their shameful intention, took no steps to 
meet it; but these worthy gentlemen compiled some 
paltry dockets, more frail than spider’s web,? for the 
sake of form, making representations against the 
blessed bishop, whose face they had never seen and 
whose voice they had never heard, and in a single 
day consummated the villainy which they had long 
been forging. For the onslaught of the devil none 
can restrain; it waits not for reflection. 


Chrysostom Guilty of Lése Mayesté 


So they sent an address to the king setting forth 
that : ““ Whereas John is accused of various offences, 
and in consciousness of his guilt has refused to appear,? 
he is by the laws degraded from his bishopric, and 
this has been done. The memorials include a charge 
of treason.? Your piety, therefore, will command, 


1 In ‘a sermon before he went into exile” he calls those 
sent to arrest him “‘ spiders sent by a spider.” 

2 “When, after being four times summoned, he appealed 
to an cecumenical council, bringing no further charge against 
him, but that he had been summoned, and refused to obey, 
they degraded him ”’ (Soz. viii. 17). 

3 Lése Mayjesté. Just after Epiphanius’ departure, 
Chrysostom “‘ preached a sermon reproving women in general 
terms; which was generally interpreted as directed against 

G 


72 FIRST EXPULSION OF CHRYSOSTOM [30 


that whether he will or no, he be expelled from his 
office, and pay the penalty for his treason, as we 
have no powers to inquire into this charge.” 

You thrice miserable wretches, what thoughts 
are these? What deeds? They should fill you 
with shame, if you have any fear or reverence for men, 
much more any for God. The treason consisted in 
offensive language against the queen, whom, as they 
alleged, he had called Jezebel.1 So this was the 
allegation of these wonderful people, longing to see 
John killed with the sword; but God brought to light 
the malice lurking within them, and softened the 
hearts of the magistrates, as with Daniel at Babylon. 
For there, the lions turned gentle, and spared Daniel, 
while the men turned savage, and did not spare the 
prophet ; but God vanquished the unnatural savagery 
of man, by the unnatural gentleness of the savage 
beasts. 





the Empress” (Sozomen). Our other sources agree in 
stating that he had rebuked her for following Eutropius’ 
example in seizing property, especially the vineyard of 
the widow of one Theognostus. George asserts that he gave 
orders for her to be excluded from the Church for so doing. 
Hence her sudden change of attitude towards him. Palladius, 
no doubt, had his reasons for not saying more on the subject 
of Eudoxia’s actions; it would have been too dangerous; 
CoD, 75, ἢ, 

1 Another sermon “ before he went into exile ’’ contains 
an allusion to Jezebel; it is almost certainly spurious, prob- 
ably the work of his enemies. But Theodore implies 
that he had used Naboth’s vineyard “as a parable” in 
pleading for the widow. He tells us, with a certain amount 
of verisimilitude, that the Emperor, on Acacius’ application, 
appointed Aquilinus the Questor to investigate the charges 
against the monks, and was satisfied with their answers; 
Chrysostom was also summoned to appear in reference to 
his alleged insults to the Empress, but refused to make any 
defence. 


3 


30] EXPULSION AND -RETURN 73 


CHAPTER IX 
INTRIGUES AND VIOLENCE AT CONSTANTINOPLE 


Chrysostom’s Expulsion and Return 


Tuus was John ejected from the Church ;?.a court 
official. was despatched for the purpose, with a body 
of soldiers, as if it was an expedition against bar- 
barians. On his expulsion he went first to the 
country district of Prenetum, in Bithynia.? But 
only a single day had passed, when a catastrophe ὃ 
occurred in the royal palace, which caused such 
alarm, that a few days afterwards they recalled John, 
through a notary of the household, and restored him 
to his own throne.* So Theophilus, with the Egyptian 


1 “On the third day after his deprivation’’; the civil 
authorities, with the sanction of the Emperor, instigated by 
Eudoxia, carrying out the resolution of the so-called “-Synod.”’ 
“6 went out unknown to the people, for fear of causing a 
disturbance; but immediately the king, the synod, and, 
above all, Theophilus, were bitterly censured. It was pointed 
out that Theophilus had immediately communicated with 
the Tall Brethren, whom he had called heretics, and Severian 
caused strong indignation by a sermon concerning Chrysos- 
tom’s pride ”’ (Soz. viii. 18). The Emperor was compelled to 
order his return by the strong feelings aroused. 

2 On the other side of the Bosphorus. 

3 Apparently an earthquake. Eudoxia herself wrote, 
begging him to return: “1 am innocent, I knew nothing of 
what was being done. I cannot forget that you baptized 
my children.” 

4 He refused to enter the church, on the ground that the 
synod which deposed him must also reinstate him; but the 
vast crowds who had welcomed him insisted on his pronouncing 
the ‘‘ Peace be with you,” and giving an address, which is 
still preserved ; in it he speaks very favourably of the Empress. 
He maintained that all this was done under compulsion, 
and that he cannot therefore be accused of the breach of 
canon law alleged below (p. 76). But no man can be com- 
pelled to speak; his natural impetuosity overcame him at 
the sight of the sympathetic flock. A synod of sixty bishops 
met in Constantinople, and annulled the proceedings at The 
Oak, declaring that Chrysostom still held his bishopric 
(Soz. vill. ΤΟ): 


74 INTRIGUES AND VIOLENCE [30 


bishops, secured his own safety by flight; for the 
populace wished to drown him.? 

But two months later, recovering from their wound, 
they again uplifted themselves against John; and 
as they could not find a promising opening, they sent 
to the clever man who managed such things at Alex- 
andria, to this effect : Do you either come here again 
to take the lead in the campaign against John, or, 
if you will not do this for fear of the people, suggest 
to us some scheme, so that we may make a beginning. 


Theophilus’ New Ground of Accusation 


In answer to this, Theophilus did not go himself, 
remembering how he had escaped, but sent three 
miserable bishops, Paul, and Poimen, and another, 
newly consecrated, and at the same time despatched 
certain canons,” which the Arians had framed against 
the blessed Athanasius, suggesting that by use of 
these they might manipulate a suit against John 
for having on his own initiative re-entered his bishop- 
ric after deposition. For Theophilus is naturally 
an impetuous person, headstrong, bold, and extra- 
ordinarily fond of quarrelling; whatever it be that 
presents itself to his vision, he rushes at it in need- 
less haste, without any restraint, giving himself no 
time for judgment or consideration. So he proceeded 
with a mad fury which carried him beyond the bounds 
of order, to secure John’s submission, and in sure 
confidence in the verdict passed upon him, vigorously 
opposed all who wished to bring a counter-charge ; 


1 Feeling ran so high in regard to the condemnation by the 
‘Synod ” of Heracleides (p. 126, n), accused of Origenism in 
his absence, that sanguinary tumults took place in the streets. 

2 By Can. XII. of the Synod of Antioch (a.D. 341), any bishop 
who after deposition appealed to the civil power was to be 
ipso facto irrevocably deposed. The number of bishops 
present at Antioch was ninety-seven, of whom forty belonged 
to the party of Eusebius, a ‘“‘semi-Arian”’ (7.e. one who 
denied the eternal Godhead of the Son). It seems probable 
that these had remained after the others had returned home, 
and passed this and other canons on their own account. 


gr) tHE PLOPFIERS AND. THE PEOF 75 


his one aim, as ever, being to show that his own 
judgment and decision conquered and prevailed. 


The Plotters and the Plot 


Knowing his character, his agents fell in with his 
scheme. They summoned metropolitans and bishops 
from Syria, Cappadocia, and the whole province of 
Phrygia, and Pontus, to a conference at Constanti- 
nople. These on their arrival communicated with 
John in accordance with the canons, so as not to 
repeat their first mistake. The authorities were 
annoyed to hear of their act of communion; Theo- 
dorus, the respected Bishop of Tyana, aware of the 
conspiracy from the information which had reached 
his ears, refused to join in the hasty action of Theo- 
philus, and deserted the main body without further 
concern, bidding a long farewell to the capital as he 
retired to his own Church. He fortified his own 
province with the rampart of his piety, and continued ᾿ 
to the end in the communion of the faithful of Rome, 
to whom Paul bears witness in the words, “ Your 
faith is spoken of in all the world.’ ? On the other 
hand, Pharetrius, Bishop of Czsarea, near Mount 
Argus, alarmed beyond measure, like a little child 
frightened by a bogey, without even leaving his own 
city, conferred by letters with John’s enemies, 
although he had not even been invited to take any 
part in the matter; in his ignorance of episcopacy, 
he knew no better. Leontius, Bishop of Ancyra in 
Galatia, joined with Ammonius, Bishop of Burnt 
Laodicea,?, in burning the church. These two, 
yielding to the threats of the authorities, and at 
the same beguiled by the hope of gifts from the 
king, at the second session made a vile suggestion 

1 Rom. i. 8. So Cyprian, Ep. iv., objecting to an appeal 
made to Cornelius, Bishop of Rome, against the decisions 
of an African synod, says that they “‘ forgot that it was the 
Romans, whose faith ig applauded in the preaching of the 
Apostle.” 

2 Laodicea in Lycaonia, so called from the furnaces in 
connection with the mines (W. M. Ramsay). 


76 INTRIGUES AND VIOLENCE [31 


to the party of Acacius and Antiochus: namely, 
that Theophilus’ judgment, which was no judgment, 
should prevail, and that no opportunity should be 
given to John even to defend himself, appealing to 
the canons sent by Theophilus, which the forty 
bishops in communion with Arius! had_ passed, 
containing the clause, “If any bishop or priest who 
has been justly or unjustly deposed of his own 
initiative re-enters his Church, without sanction of 
a synod; such an one shall thereafter have no oppor- 
tunity of defence, but shall be absolutely excluded.”’ 
This canon was rejected, as being illegal and passed 
by illegal persons, at Sardica,? by the bishops of 
Rome, Italy, Illyria, Macedonia, and Greece, as you 
know better than I, my famous friend Theodorus, 
when Liberius, or rather Julius,? in the reign of 
Constans received into communion Athanasius and 
Marcellus of Galatia, on whose account the canon 
was laid down. 


The Question of Canon Law 


This wonderful pair, Ammonius and Leontius, 
formed a league with Acacius and Antiochus, and 


1 The famous heretic, who maintained that ‘‘ there was a 
time when the Son was not’; against whom Athanasius 
maintained the Catholic Faith. 

ἈἘΠᾺ 343; about a hundred and seventy bishops were 
present. The eastern bishops objected to the presence of 
Athanasius as having been) deposed, but they were out- 
voted. Pall., L. H., lxiii. t has the same note of time in 
reference to Athanasius—‘“‘in the time of Constantius the 
king ΟΡ the eastern, Constans being emperor of the 
western empire. 

3 Julius was Bishop of Rome at the time; Liberius suc- 
ceeded him in 352. At this council it was determined that 
any bishop who considered himself aggrieved might appeal 
to Julius, Bishop of Rome, for a re-trial before such neigh- 
bouring bishops as he should appoint. The canon applied 
only to Julius personally, to cover the exigencies of the 
moment; Athanasius would ordinarily have appealed to 
the Emperor, but as Constantius, Emperor of the East, was 
an Arian, Julius was for this turn substituted for him. 


32] FAILURE OF THE -PLOT 79 


Cyrinus of Chalcedon,! and Severianus, and came 
before the king, recommending that ten bishops of 
John’s party, which numbered more than forty, 
should be summoned, to maintain the authority of 
the canons; as some asserted that they were the 
work of orthodox persons, while others maintained 
that they were of Arian origin. However, Elpidius,? 
old in spirit and in the years which had whitened his 
head, Bishop of Laodicea in Syria, and Tranquilius, 
with their supporters, came and urged upon the 
king that John ought not to be unreasonably ejected. 
“For,” they said, “ John had not been previously 
deposed, but was expelled by the civil official; nor 
did he re-enter it upon his own initiative, but obeyed 
the order of your piety, conveyed by a notary; more- 
over, we can prove that the canons to which they 
appeal are of heretical origin.” 

John’s opponents continued very improperly to 
press their views, some shouting at the top of their 
voices, Others, wild with excitement, impudently 
gesticulating, and twitching their chests in the pres- 
ence of the king. Then Elpidius, a most profound 
student of Church law, in a moment of silence said 
meekly to the king: ‘“ Your majesty, let us not 
trouble your gentleness further, but let this be done; 
let our brothers Acacius and Antiochus subscribe 
the canons which they put forward as the work of 
orthodox persons, and declare themselves to be of 
the same faith as those who issued them.? Then the 
whole dispute is at an end.” 


Failure of the Plot 


The king noted the simplicity of the solution 
proposed, and said to Antiochus, with ἃ smile, 
‘““ Nothing could be better.’ The king was through- 
out entirely free from blame; it was others who 

eee Pp. 175 πὶ. 

* Six of Chrysostom’s letters are addressed to him. He 
was deposed, but in 414 restored to his see. 

* In that case, they admit themselves to be Arian heretics. 


"ὃ INTRIGUES AND VIOLENCE [32 
altered his excellent decrees. Severianus and_ his 
party reeled, and began to swirl against one another 
like water that has burst its bounds; they were 
struck dumb at the bishop’s thoughtful observation, 
and at the opinion expressed by the king. Their 
faces turned livid, but in the king’s audience chamber 
they had to restrain themselves. So they promised, 
sorely against their will, to subscribe the canons, 
and departed. But as they were afraid of being 
worsted, they did not carry out their promise, on 
the ground that it was given against their will; and 
began instead to devise means to secure John’s 
expulsion. 

In these various manceuvres and counter-manceuvres 
nine or ten months passed, John foregathering with 
his forty-two bishops, while the people enjoyed the 
benefit of his teaching with much gladness. For. 
the unselfish mind always expresses itself with 
greater grace and power in times of difficulty. 


The Emperor takes the Side of the Enemy 


Such was the state of things when the Lord’s fast 
recurred, like the spring which puts forth its blossoms 
year by year. Again Antiochus and his party 
approached the king, in private, and informed him 
that John had been deposed, begging him to order 
his expulsion at the approaching Paschal season,? 
and the king, wearied by their importunity, could 
not but listen to them, seeing that they were bishops. 


1 Eudoxia once more turned against him at this time. 
Her statue had been set up in the square before the church, 
and its inauguration was attended by disorderly and pagan 
rejoicings, against which Chrysostom protested (January 403). 
On the feast of the Beheading of John the Baptist, he was 
alleged to have begun his sermon with the words, “ Again 
doth Herodias rave, again does she ask for the head of John.” 
The Emperor sent him word that he would not communicate 
at the Christmas festival; but Chrysostom declared himself 
ready to meet the charge of attacking the Empress, and the 
question of re-entry was made the issue. 

2 They wished to anticipate the signs of popular good-will 
likely to be shown by the crowds attending the festival. 


32] THE STORM GATHERS 70 


For the true priest or bishop knows not falsehood; 
these titles belong to the higher sphere, since there 
is nothing more priestly or more episcopal than God, 
for it is God Who is the bishop! and beholder of all 
things. The true bishop, then, or the true priest, 
inasmuch as he bears these titles in fellowship with 
God, ought also to be in fellowship with Him in 
His actions. The king accordingly sent word to 
John, ‘‘ Leave the Church.” “I have received this 
Church,” John sent word back, “ from God our 
Saviour, for the care of the salvation of the people, 
and I cannot desert it; if, then, this is your will— 
for the city is yours—thrust me out by force, that I 
may plead your authority in defence of my desertion 
of my post.” 


Chrysostom Ejected by the Civil Power 


So they sent men from the palace, with a certain 
show of respect, and ejected him; but in appre- 
hension of a possible visitation of the wrath of God, 
bade him stay in the bishop’s house for the time 
being, so that if any misfortune should occur which 
affected them, they could at once appease the Divinity 
by restoring him to the Church, while if nothing 
happened, they could proceed further against him, 
as Pharaoh did against Moses. 


The Storm Gathers 


Meanwhile, the Great Sabbath drew near, in which 
the Saviour spoiled Hades by His crucifixion. Again 
they sent word to John, ‘‘ Leave the Church”’; to 
which he sent a suitable reply. So the king, in 
consideration of the sanctity of the day, and the 
disturbed state of the city, summoned Acacius and 
Antiochus, and said to them, “ What is to be done? 

1 ‘‘ Episcopus,”’ ‘“‘ overseer” (Acts xx. 28, addressed to 
the ‘‘elders’’). Cicero calls Pompey ‘‘ Episcopus of Cam- 
pania ” (ad Att. vii. 11). So 1 Macc.i. 51, LXX. The verb 
is used by Pall., L. H., xxxv. 10, where he himself playfully 


says, e I bishop the kitchens, the tables, and the pots.” 
‘‘God is the true bishop of the heart ’? (Wisd. i. 6). 


80 INTRIGUES AND VIOLENCE [32 


Take care that you are not acting unadvisedly.”’ 
Then the worthies, high-spirited to a fault, said to 
the king, “ Your majesty, the deposition of John be 
on our heads.” As a last resource, the bishops on 
John’s side, to the number of the days of the holy 
fast,! approached the king and queen in the shrines 
of the martyrs, and besought them with tears to 
spare the Church of Christ, remembering especially 
the Paschal festival, and those already prepared 2 
for the sacrament of the new birth to be received on 
that day, and to restore to her her prelate.? The 
request was unheeded; Paul of Crateia* went so 
far as to say, with fearless out-spokenness, “‘ Eudoxia, 
fear God, and pity your own children; do not dis- 
honour the festival of Christ by the shedding of 
blood.” 


The Easter Vigil 


So the forty bishops returned to their lodgings, 
and spent the night without sleep, some weeping, 
others grieving, others again held inactive by a 
stupor of pacificism which dulled their minds— 
according as their individual feelings disposed them. 
However, those of John’s priests who had the fear 
of God in their hearts, gathered the faithful laity in 
the public baths, called the baths of Constans, and 
occupied the night vigil ® in reading aloud the divine 
oracles, or in baptizing the catechumens, as usual 


> 


1 The name of Lent is ‘ Tessarakoste,” ‘‘ the fortieth 
(day) ”’; it is still called so in the Greek Church. 

2 οὐ ΤῊ ΠΑ ΤΟ into the mysteries’? of the Creed and the 
Lord’s Prayer. ‘‘ Those who are initiated will know what 
is likely to have happened amid such disorder; I must keep 
silence, lest any uninitiated should read my narrative” 
(Soz. vili. 21, in relating these proceedings). 

fs Ee rest «Clb. 95. 

4 In Bithynia. 

5 Jerome (in Matt. xxv.) speaks of the apostolic tradition 
not to dismiss the congregation before midnight; Tertullian 
warns against marriage with a heathen, who will not allow 
his wife to be absent all night for the Paschal solemnities. 
ΚΕΡῚ τ ἢ: 


33] THE OUTRAGES IN: THE CHURCH ὃ. 


at the Paschal festival. These proceedings were 
reported by those corrupters of mind and perverters 
of sense, Antiochus, Severianus, and Acacius, to 
their champions, with the demand that the people 
should be prevented from assembling there. The 
magistrate on duty objected that it was night, and 
that the crowds of people were large ; some regrettable 
incident might well occur. Acacius and his party 
urged against this: ‘“‘ Not a soul has stayed in the 
churches; we are afraid that if the king goes to 
church and finds no one there, he may recognize the 
affection of the people for John, and condemn us as 
slanderers, especially after our telling him that there 
is absolutely no one who is kindly disposed towards 
him, but that he is regarded as an outlaw.” So the 
magistrate, under protest, on the ground of what 
was likely to result, granted them the services of one 
Lucius, reported to be a Greek, and his commando 
of armed men, giving him instructions to go and call 
the people, gently, to the church. - This he did, but 
as they would not obey, he returned to Acacius and 
his party, and explained the zeal and dense numbers 
of the people. Hearing this, they seduced him with 
golden words,’ and promises of further promotion, 
urging him to hinder the glory of the Lord; instruct- 
ing him either to bring the people to church by 
verbal persuasion, or to excite them, and by drastic 
action prevent the festival from being celebrated. 


The Outrages in the Church 


So Lucius at once set out upon his mission, accom- 
panied by the clergy of Acacius’ party. This was in 
the second watch of the night; for in our parts of 
the world they keep the people at church till the 
first cock-crow. He took 400 Thracian swordsmen 
(the same number that Esau had), newly enlisted, 
and absolutely reckless, and at a moment’s notice 
threw himself, like a savage wolf, with the clergy 


1 Possibly the first two letters of the word for “ gifts ”’ 
have been dropped out of the text, leaving that for “ words.” 


82 INTRIGUES AND VIOLENCE [34 


to guide his movements, upon the crowd of people, 
hacking a way through with flashing swords. He 
pressed forwards to the blessed water within, to stop 
those who were being initiated into (the sacrament 
of) the Saviour’s resurrection, pinioned the deacon, 
and poured away the sacramental elements;! he 
beat the priests, men advanced in years, about the 
head with bludgeons, until the laver was dyed with 
blood. Sad it was to see that angelic night, in which 
even demons fall prostrate in terror, turned into a 
labyrinth.2 Here were women, stripped for baptism, 
running by the side of their husbands, glad so to 
escape in dishonour, in their terror of murder or 
dishonour; here was a man, with a wounded hand, 
making off, crying; another fellow dragging after 
him a maiden whose clothes he had torn off. All 
of them were carrying away loot which they had 
pillaged. 
The Devotion of the Faithful 


So those priests and deacons who were seized were 
thrown into the gaol; the better-class lay folk were 
expelled from the capital. Orders were issued one 
after the other, containing various threats against 
those who would not renounce communion with John. 
Yet in spite of all this, the bishops of whom I have 
told devoted themselves to their duties in the open 
air all the more earnestly; and the gathering of 
those who love Christian teaching, or rather, love 
God, was not brought to an end. As we read in 
the book of Exodus, the more they killed them, the 
more numerous they were. 


Further Imprisonments 


So when the king went out next day, to take 
exercise in the plain beside the city, he saw the 


FSV EIDOLS ΠΡ. 64), 

2 In the labyrinth of Crete, according to Greek folk-lore, 
lurked the minotaur, a monster to which were given seven 
Athenian youths and seven maidens every ninth year, until 
he was slain by Theseus. 


Ξὰ BLESSED ARE THE POOR IN SPIRIT 83 


waste ground round Pempton?! clothed in white; 
and in astonishment at the sight of the newly bap- | 
tized, thick as blossoms in spring (there were about 
3000 of them), he asked the guard what was the great 
crowd gathered there. Instead of telling him the 
truth, they said that they were the mis-believers ; ? 
so as to bring upon them the wrath of the king. 
Hearing of this incident, those who were responsible 
for the affair, the champions of envy, sent to the 
suburb 3 the most pitiless of their followers, to scatter 
the audience and arrest the teachers. So once more 
some few of the clergy, and a larger number of the 
laity, were arrested. 


Blessed are the Poor in Spintt 

Deac. Most blessed father, how was it that, when 
they were so many that the newly baptized alone 
numbered 3000, these few soldiers mastered them, 
and broke up the assemblage ? 

Bish. There is no indication here of small numbers, 
nor proof of want of zeal. It only shows their 
exceeding piety, and proves their attention to their 
teachers, who continually urged them to cultivate a 
peacetul habit of mind. 

And Theodorus said— 

Deac. xcellently spoken; certainly it was not to 
be expected that men who had learnt prudence and 
gentleness from the holy John should maintain his 
cause by folly and turbulence. 

1“ The Fifth,’ because five miles from the Forum. 


2 ‘* Heterodoxi.” 
obit, «tae back...) 50: 9. ΖΟ; 


84 CHRYSOSTOM’S DEPARTURE [34 


CHAPIN Χ 
CHRYSOSTOM’S DEPARTURE, AND ITS SEQUEL 


Prisons become Churches 


Bish. So you are satisfied with this explanation. 
Do not, then, I beg, interrupt my words; they are 
begotten of.sad events. As a general rule, it is 
events that beget more words than anything else.* 
Well, the wives of some eminent men were arrested, 
as well as the clergy and laity who were taken 
prisoners. From some of these they snatched their 
veils,? and tore their earrings, with the lobe of the 
ear, from others; seeing this, a very wealthy lady, 
the wife of one Eleutherus, threw off her veil of her 
own accord, and ran into the city, disguised in the 
dress of a female slave, to shield her modesty. For 
she was endowed with a beautiful face and comely 
figure. So the prisons of the magistrates were filled, 
but they were turned into churches; hymns were 
sung, and oblations of the mysteries celebrated in 
the prisons, while in the churches floggings and 
tortures and terrible oaths were brought to bear, 
to compel people to anathematize John, who had 
fought against the malice of the devil even to the 
death. , 


Final Appeal to the Emperor 


The feast of Pentecost ® passed, and five days 
afterwards Acacius, Antiochus, Severianus, and Cyrinus 
came to the king, and said: “‘ Your majesty, as by 
God’s appointment you are not under our authority, 


1 More than the expression of abstract thoughts. 

2 ‘‘ Maphoria’”’; at first the ordinary veils worn by women, 
then, with some distinguishing features, by professed virgins 
and deaconesses; later still, confined to these. Cassian says 
they were worn by monks. See p. 53, ἢ. 

3 The period between Easter and Whitsun. “ For two 
months John did not go forth in public” (Socr. vi. 18). 


δ υδ Ρ'Πν, 6 ΠΤ 





35] FAREWELL TO THE DEVOUT WOMEN 85 


but have authority over all, you can do whatever 
you will. Be not more mild than a priest, and more 
holy than a bishop; we said to you publicly, Upon 
our heads be the deposition of John. Do not then 
be unmerciful to all of us, in being merciful to one 
man.’ They employed the same language, I might - 
say the same actions, as the Jews, to persuade the 
king. 


“ Leave the Church’’ 


So the king despatched Patricius the notary, with 
the following message to John: “‘ Acacius, Antiochus, 
Severianus, and Cyrinus have taken your condemna- 
tion upon their own heads. Commend, therefore, 
your affairs to God, and leave the Church.” So Bishop 
John came down from the bishop’s house, with the 
bishops, and after giving them clear and definite 
instructions, said to all, “‘Come, and let us with 
prayer take leave of the angel! of the Church.” He 
rejoiced at what had happened, but grieved over the 
misfortune of the people. 


Farewell to the Devout Women 


At this moment one of the officials who loved God 
sent word to John: “ A savage and brazen-taced man, 


1“ Tf the whole air is full of angels, how much more the 
church? Hear the deacons ever saying in the churches, 
Call upon the angel of peace”’ (Serm. in Ascens.i.). ‘‘ The 
angels stand round the priest ” (de Sac. vi. 4). Chrysostom’s 
sense of angelic presence abides in the “ Liturgy of Con- 
stantinople’’: ‘‘ Cause that holy angels may enter with our 
etttance’ ( Prayer of the entrance ἢ) -In the Book*ot 
Daniel (cf. Deut. xxxii. 8, 9, LX.X) nations have their guardian 
angels; Basil calls angels “‘ the rulers of the Church.” Euse- 
bius regards Ps. xlviil. 5 as addressed to “ the guardian angels 
of the Church.” Matt. xvii. 10, Acts xii. 15 seem to imply 
guardian angels to individuals; “‘ each of us has a guardian 
angel by his side”? (Hom. in Heb. xiv.). The thought of a 
guardian angel for each Church is, no doubt, founded on 
Rev. τὸν πὶ which Origen (Hom. in Num. xx. 4) explains 
as “his angel, or the angel of his Church’’; Chrysostom 
(Or. clxix, in. Syn. Arch.) says, “‘To each man an angel is 
assigned, in each church Christ has set angel guardians.” 


86 CHRYSOSTOM’S DEPARTURE [35 


named Lucius, is waiting with his commando in the 
public bath, ready to drag you out, and expel you ~ 
from the city by force, if you refuse to go, or delay; 
and the people of the city are in a ferment. Do your 
best to get away unnoticed, to prevent the people 
from coming into conflict with the military, in trying 
to help vou.” Then John with tears kissed some of 
the bishops (his emotion would not allow him to do 
so to all), and took his Jeave of them, saying to the 
rest, within the vestry,! “Stay here for the present, 
and let me go and have a little rest.’ But he 
went into the baptistery, and called Olympias, a lady 
who spent all her time in the church, and Pentadia, 
and Procle, the deaconesses,? and Silvina, the widow 
of the blessed Nevridius,? who adorned her widowhood 
by-a beautiful life, and said to them, ‘‘ Come here, 
my daughters, and listen to me. I see that the 
things concerning me have an end; I have finished 
my course® and perhaps you will see my face no 
more. What I want to ask you is this: let no one 
dissever you from the good-will you have always 
borne to the Church; and whoever succeeds me, if 


1 “ Hierateion’’; where the priests robed, prepared the 
sacred vessels, etc. Palladius, both in this treatise and in 
L. H., uses the word also for “‘ the body of clergy.” 

2 Sozomen says that Olympias was ordained deaconess by 
Nectarius, though but a young widow, for her extraordinary 
devotion. The order, as we saw, sprang from that of widows 
(p. 46); the Council of Chalcedon made forty the minimum 
age for their ordination. Their duties were to assist in the 
instruction of female catechumens, and at their baptism; 
to visit sick women, guard the doors, and to look after the 
women members of the congregation in Church. Nicarete, 
“ the best of all the good women Sozomen ever knew,” refused 
to accept the dignity of a deaconess, and “ to preside over 
the Church virgins.” The order seems to have come to an 
end about the eleventh century. But see The Ministry of 
Women (S.P.C.K., 1919). nk 

3 Nephew of Theodosius the Emperor. Silvina and 
Olympias were naturally friends, as young widows of husbands 
bearing the same name (p. 86). 

ST Ake X28 97: 

ee WET ode ἵν 

ΑΕΒ > 0, Cayo, Ra 








35] THE ΟΠΌΝΟΗ ΟΝ FIRE 87 


he be brought forward for ordination not by his 
own wish, and without place-hunting, with the 
approval of all, bow your heads to him, as you have 
done to John. The Church cannot exist without a 
bishop. And so may you find mercy. Remember 
me in your prayers.” 


Chrysostom’s Departure from the Church 


The ladies burst into tears, and threw themselves 
at his feet. Then he made a sign to one of the 
reverend priests, and said, “ Take them away, for 
fear of their raising a aisturbance.”’ So they were kept 
under control for a while, and apparently acquiesced. 
And so he moved away to the eastern part of the 
church (there was nothing western?! about him ἢ) ; 
but he had given orders for the mule which he gener- 
ally rode to be waiting at the west end, where was 
the porch of the church, in front of the main door, 
so as to mislead the people, who were waiting for him 
there. With him went forth the angel, unable to 
bear the desolation of the Church, brought about by 
wicked principalities and powers, who had produced 
a sort of theatrical exhibition. Yes, there was a 
roar, like that one hears in a theatre; the ungodly 
hissed and booed, Jews and Greeks yelled at the top 
of their voices. And there were blows and body 
wounds, inflicted by the soldiers, as if they were deal- 
ing with criminals in a prison; while every faculty 
of the soul was tortured by the withdrawal of the 
teacher, and by the blasphemy against God. For in 
the place appointed for the remission of sins, there 
took place the shedding of blood. 


The Church on Fire 
Now after this scene of awful and inexplicable 


1 The east is the symbol of light, the west of darkness 
and sin. Baptizands faced the west until they had renounced 
evil, after that the east. 

Hi 


88 CHRYSOSTOM’S DEPARTURE [30 


darkness, a flame! appeared from the middle of the 
throne in which John usually sat, like a heart set in 
the midst of a body, to expound to the other organs 
the oracles of the Lord; and sought for the inter- 
preter of the Word. Not finding him, it devoured 
the chamber used for the Church vessels. Then it 
spread like a tree, and crept through the rafters to the 
roof; and consuming the belly like a viper, it leapt 
upon the back of the church building. It seemed 
as though God was paying the reward of iniquity 3 
appointed as its penalty, to admonish and warn those 
who will not be warned, except by the sight of 
such heaven-sent calamities; and more, leaving to 
posterity a memorial of the savage synod.* 


The Strange Behaviour of the Flames 


But what happened to the church was nothing 
wonderful, in comparison with the destruction of 
the building, commonly called the Senate, which 
lies opposite the church, many paces away to the 
south. The fire seemed to be possessed of reason ; 
it passed over the heads of the people in the street 
between, like a man crossing a bridge, and first caught, 
not the part nearest to the church, so that we cannot 
ascribe the misfortune to the proximity of the two 
buildings, but the part on the side of the king’s 
palace. This clearly showed that the marvel was 
heaven-sent; for one could see crowds of people 
passing without harm upon their ordinary business 

1“ On the same day, some of the Johnnites set the church 
on fire’ (Socrates). The “‘ Johnnites ”’ attributed it to their 
enemies (Sozomen, who describes it as heaven-sent). Palladius 
' regards it as the result of the angel of the Church going forth 
with Chrysostom. 

2 Acts 1. 18; 2 Pet. 11. 13, 15. The expression is strange; 
possibly the preposition has been changed, and “ laying 
upon them” should be read for “ paying.” The grammar 
of the sentence is very bad. 

8 The church was that of St. Sophia, built by Constantine, 
A.D. 360. After this conflagration it was restored, but again 
burnt down, and finally rebuilt at vast expense by Justinian 


in 532. 


30] (ΗΝΥΘΟΣΤΟΝΜ SENT [Ὁ CUOCUSUS 86 


between the mountains of fire. In the same way 
the flames, whirling and surging like the sea tossed 
by a fierce wind, seemed to advance in obedience to 
signal; they seized the buildings all round without 
mercy, but showed consideration for one little out- 
house, that in which the bulk of the sacred vessels 
was stored. Not that they reverenced the gold, or 
the rest of the precious materials; it was to give 
no ground to his accusers for the false charge ! against 
the good bishop, that he had appropriated part of 
the valuables. 

So the fire, after doing all this mischief, gradually 
withdrew to the back parts of the city, following 
the track of the malice of the criminals; to expose 
the madness of Theophilus, who apparently had 
been scheming to use the treasures of the Church as 
a plea for John’s ejection. There was no loss of life 
from the fire, of man or beast, among the great 
crowd; but the filthiness of the men who were 
behaving so foully was purged by the violence of the 
flames, which in three hours of a single day, between 
twelve and three o’clock,? destroyed the work of years. 


CHAPIER XI 
EXILE AND DEATH OF CHRYSOSTOM 


Chrysostom sent to Cucusus 


Deac. And where were John and the rest of the 
bishops, father, while this was going on ? 

Bish. The rest of the bishops were put in prison, 
or haled out of the city, or found means of conceal- 
ment; John, Cyriacus, and Eulysius were carried 
off in bonds to Bithynia by the soldiers of the prefect,* 

? One of the charges mentioned by Photius. 

* Sozomen says the fire advanced from late evening until 
morning. 

3 Optatus, the prefect, tried various accused persons by 


torture, under which Eutropius, a reader, died. Olympias 
also was put on her trial. 


go EXILE AND DEATH OF CHRYSOSTOM [36 


under threats of punishment for setting fire to the 
church. Later on, Cyriacus and Eulysius, with 
other clergy, were brought up for trial, but were 
acquitted, and set at liberty, while the holy John, 
outspoken as ever, sent them this last message: 
“You refused to give me the opportunity of defend- 
ing myself on the other matters; at least let me have 
a hearing in regard to what happened to the church, 
as to whether I am guilty, as you allege, of the 
incendiarism.” His request for a hearing on this 
point was equally unsuccessful, and he was sent in 
charge of soldiers to a very lonely village in Armenia, 
called Cucusus,! in the hope of getting him killed 
by the Isaurians, who were continually raiding the 
place, by night and by day. 


Arsacius succeeds Chrysostom 


The successor appointed in the place of John the 
inspired teacher was Arsacius, brother of the blessed 
Nectarius; a man with less power of speech than a 
fish, and of action than a frog.*. For there are times 
when action speaks, especially when it is for good. 
However, Arsacius only held on to life for fourteen 
months, when he died; for he had broken an oath 
upon the gospels. He had sworn to his_ brother 
Nectarius, that he would never accept consecration 
as bishop, when Nectarius reproached him for refus- 
ing to be Bishop of Tarsus, saying that he was waiting 
tor his own death. What led to his perjury was 
first of all ambition, for the sake of which he wooed, 
so to speak, his brother’s wife; and after that, shame. 
His brother’s reproof was indeed prophetic. 


1 A village in the Taurus Mountains, on the edge of Cilicia. 
Chrysostom’s friends did their utmost to get him sent to a 
less remote and dangerous place, but the Empress had chosen 
Cucusus herself, and this time was implacable. It took him 
seventy days to reach it: his letters tell of the hardships of 
the journey. 

2 He was eighty years old. Socrates says that through 
his extraordinary gentleness he quietly administered the 
see; Sozomen also speaks highly of him. 





37] ARSACIUS AND ATTICUS gl 


Alticus succeeds Arsacius. Coercive Edicts against the 
Johnnites 


A priest named Atticus,! who had taken an active 
part in the schemes against John, was appointed as 
successor to Arsacius. Observing that none of the 
eastern bishops, or even of the laity of Constantinople, 
would communicate with him, because of the lawless 
and irregular proceedings which had taken place, 
in his ignorance of the divine scriptures he set to 
work to coerce those who would not communicate 
with him by means of rescripts.”. The edict against 
the bishops contained the following threat: “ If 
any of the bishops does not communicate with 
Theophilus and Porphyrius® and Atticus, let him be 
expelled from the Church, and deprived of his personal 
property.’ Some of them, crushed by the pressure 
of circumstances, thereupon communicated, against 
their will; those who were poorer, and less firm in a 
sound faith, were induced by promises of gifts to 
communicate, while those who set no store by birth 
and possessions and fatherland, and perishable glory, 
and bodily suffering, preserved the nobility of their 
souls by flight, mindful of the gospel oracle, “ If they 
persecute you in one city, flee unto another,” * and 
repeating to themselves the words of the Proverb, 
“ Possessions shall not benefit in the day of wrath.”’ ® 
Some of them reached Rome, some the mountains, 
and others escaped from wickedness like that of the 
Jews in the retreats of anchorites. 

The edict against the lay-people contained the 
clause, “ Those in high position are to be deprived 
of their official dignities, soldiers are to lose their 


1 An Armenian, a monk in his youth; “‘ learned, industrious, 
an excellent teacher, sympathetic and courteous, in a word, 
like the apostle, all things to all men ”’ (Socrates). 

2 A play upon words: graphe, “ scripture,’ antigraphe, 
PPeSerIDL: 

3 Bishop of Antioch (p. 133). 

* Mate x29; 

* Prov, κι 4 (one MS). P 


g2 EXILE AND DEATH OF CHRYSOSTOM [37° 


girdles, the common people are to be heavily fined, 
and submit to banishment.’ In spite of all this, 
the AR a of the devout were offered in the open 
air,! amid much suffering ; because they were friends 2 
of the Saviour, Who said, “1 am the way and the 
truth,’ and again, “Be of good cheer, I have over- 
come the world.” 


Chrysostom Transferred to Arabissus 


Meanwhile, the blessed John resided at Cucusus 
for a year, ‘feeding great numbers of the poor of 
Armenia,’ where a great famine occurred at the time; 
not with corn, so much as with words. This again 
roused the malignity of the fratricides, who transferred 
him to Arabissus,* exposing him to hardships of all 
sorts, in the hope of bringing about his death. Here 
once more the light of his virtues shone brightly (for 
a city set upon a hill.cannot be hid, nor can a clearly 
burning lamp be hidden under a wooden _bushel- 
measure) ; ὅ he awoke people from all the surrounding 
districts who were slumbering in the depths of 
unbelief, from the sleep of ignorance to the rays of 
the word.® 


1 “Tn the outskirts of the city τ (Sozomen). The meetings 
were suppressed with cruelty and robbery; Nicarete, among 
others, left the city. 

2 Trom John xv. 15, which is spoken in connection with 
the two following texts (xiv. 6, xvi. 33). 

3 Many friends, including Olympias, supplied him with 
money, with which he ransomed many prisoners from the 
Isaurians, and relieved the needy; many went out to him 
from Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia (Sozomen). He kept up 
close correspondence with his friends in the city; now telling 
of an Isaurian attack, now of quiet. 

4 A strong fortress not far from Cucusus. The “ priva- 
tions ’’ were inevitable, as the place was crowded with fugi- 
tives; three hundred Isaurians once nearly took it in a night 
attack. 

PAA. Τ 05s 

° By his correspondence he encouraged the missionary pro- 
jects he had begun as bishop, in Persia, Phoenicia, and among 
the Goths. They were in charge of Constantius (p. 135), W ho 
joined him for a time at Cucusus. 


38] RENEWED MALEVOLENCE 93 


Renewed Malevolence 


Then the flames of malignity blazed yet more 
fiercely in Severianus and Porphyrius and other 
bishops of Syria, and they set to work to get him 
again transferred elsewhere; for he was obnoxious 
to them not only in his days of what men call pros- 
perity, but also, and much more, in his adversities. 
They were dunces in knowledge of the nature of 
temptations,! and forgot the divine message to thf 
apostle when tribulations befell him, ‘“ My grace is 
sufficient for thee; for my strength is perfected in 
weakness.”? 2 So when they saw the Church of 
Antioch migrating to the Church of Armenia, and 
the gracious philosophy? of John chanted from 
there back again to the Church of Antioch, they 
longed to cut short his life. The accounts they 
heard tortured them like blows of a whip—such is 
the power of malice, which hates the good—until 
their clerical followers saw what was going on, “and 
said in astonishment, Here is a formidable dead man, 
who frightens living men, and men in authority too, 
as bogies frighten children. The wonder of it! Men 
supported by the powers of the world and by the 
wealth of the Church, men with authority and control 
of affairs in their hands, turning pale and writhing 


1“ Trials’? perhaps better expresses this word, found in 
plural in the New Testament only in Acts xx. τὸ 1 Pet. i. 6; 
in singular of Our Lord’s Temptation, in the Lord’s Prayer, 
the Garden of Gethsemane, etc. 

a COT, κα Ὁ. 

3 A term frequent in the Fathers for “‘ Christian belief and 
practice.” It is ‘“‘ the knowledge (gnosis) of things divine 
and human ” (Hom. in. Col. ix.); ‘‘ tribulation is the mother 
of philosophy - (tz Ps. ix.). “To be gentle of speech is the 
road to philosophy ” (in. John xxvi.). One of Chrysostom’s 
shorter treatises compares the life of a king with that of a 
monk living ‘“‘ according to Christian philosophy.” On the 
other hand, “‘ Are there no heathen who live in philosophy Ὁ ἢ 
(in John xxviii.). ‘‘ Gracious,” as in Prov. xi. 16, LXX, of 
a wife; or ‘‘ thankful,’’ as Col. iii. 15. Pall., L. H., xlvil. 15, 
has this identical expression. 


94 EXILE AND DEATH ΟΕ CHRYSOSTOM [538 


in fear of a priest, alone, disfranchised, infirm, 
exiled ! 1 


The Terrible Journey to Pityus 


At last they could hide the serpent in their tent 
no longer; so they sent to the capital, and again 
produced a _ rescript, more severe than the last, 
prescribing a narrow limit of time, within which, 
under penalty of a fine, John was to be transferred 
to Pityus, a desolate spot in Tzane, situated on the 
shore of the Black Sea.? The soldiers of the pre- 
torian prefect who formed his escort accordingly 
hurried him over the ground at forced speed. They 
said that such were their instructions; if he died 
by the roadside, the higher the promotion they would 
earn. One of them, who thought less of service in 
the present world, showed him by stealth a certain 
amount of kindness; the other was so savage and 
ill-tempered, that he took as insults the courteous 
requests made to him by persons who fell in with 
them, that he would spare the saint. The only 
thing he cared about was, that John should die a 
miserable death. For instance, he started out 
regardless of a heavy shower of rain which was fall- 
ing, so that the water ran in streams down his neck 
and chest. Another time, an unusually hot sun 
gave him great delight, as he knew that the head 
of the blessed bishop, which was like Elisha’s, ached 
under it. When they reached a city or village where 
the refreshment of a bath was available, the wretch 
would not allow a moment’s delay. This most dis- 
tressing journey took three months; yet the saint 
among all these annoyances was always the same 
shining star, his poor body like an apple reddening 
in the sun at the tip of a branch. 


1 “ Like David, a wanderer, an exile, disfranchised, home- 
less, I am exiled to a barbarian land ”’ (Ad eos qui, ii.). 
2 At its far eastern end. 


38] LAST HOURS AND DEATH 95 


Chrysostom’s Last Hours and Death 


They approached Comana,! but passed through 
the town as men cross a river by a bridge, and lodged 
outside the wall in the shrine of a martyr, five or 
six miles from the town. The name of the martyr 
of the place was Basiliscus, who was Bishop of 
Comana, martyred under Maximian at Nicomedia,? 
at the same time as Lucianus, priest of the Church 
of Antioch in Bithynia. That night the martyr? 
stood by him and said, “‘ Be of good cheer, brother ; 
to-morrow we shall be together.’ It is said that 
he had first called to the priest who shared his abode, 
“Get ready the place for our brother John; he is 
coming.’ John took this as a sure warning, and 
next day begged them to stay where they were till 
eleven o'clock. They refused, and pushed on; but 
when they had covered about thirty furlongs, he 
had such a sharp attack of illness, that they had to 
return to the shrine from which they had started. 
On his arrival, he asked for white clothes 4—clothes 
befitting his life—and taking off those he was wearing, 
he put these on, deliberately ὅ changing everything 
down to his shoes. All but these he distributed 


1 Tokat. 

2 a.D. 303. Diocletian, Maximian’s fellow-emperor in the 
East, originated the persecution. 

3 “* And the martyr of the place—Collythus was his name— 
stood over her, and said, To-day you are going to travel 
to the Master, and see all the saints. Come, then, and break- 
fast with us in the chapel. . . . And she died that very 
night . . . having decked herself for the funeral’ (Pall., 
L. H.,\x.). Theodore gives a different version of this vision, 
which he says was granted to him before reaching Cucusus. 

4 «We clothe the dead in new garments, to signify their 
putting on the new clothing of incorruption ”? (Hom. cxvi.). 
So Constantine arrayed himself in'royal and shining garments 
for death (Eusebius). Pall., L. H., v., tells how Alexandra 
““in the tenth year fell asleep, having arrayed herself (for 
death).’”> Theodore says they were “the garments of the 
holy liturgy.” 

5 Bigot translates “‘ jejunus,” “‘ without breaking his fast.’’ 
I understand the word to be used as in 1 Thess. v. 8, 2 Tim. 
Ἵν. So etc, 


ΓΙ 


g6 " ΕΧΙΤΕ AND DEATH OF CHRYSOSTOM [20 


among those present. Then he partook of the 
symbols of the Lord’s appointment,! and _ offered 
his last prayer, in the presence of those who stood 
by, using his customary formula, “Glory to God 
for all things;’’ 2 and signing himself? at the last 
Amen, he raised his feet, which were so beautiful as 
they sped for the salvation of those who chose repent- 
ance, and the reproof of those who persistently 
cultivate the fields of sin. If reproof did not benefit 
the wicked, it was not from the carelessness of him. 
who had spoken out so fearlessly,4 but from the 
recklessness of those who would not accept them.® 


His Burial 
Thus was he gathered to his fathers, shaking off 


1 “ Symbola Despotica.”’ In the Coptic Liturgy the frac- 
tion is called “‘ Isbodicon.”? The Eucharistic elements were 
often carried on a journey (Ambrose, de Ob. Sat. iii. 19). 

* “ He closes the book with thanksgiving, to show us that 
this must be the beginning and end of all our-words and 
deeds; even as in our prayer, Our Father is the language of 
men who give thanks for the gifts they have received ” (in 
Ps. 01). ‘‘ Let us_render thanks when in poverty, sickness, 
disgrace; not in word or in tongue, but in thought and act. 
Say nothing prior to this word, 1 give thee thanks, O Lord ” 
(in Eph. xix. 2). ‘‘ What shall I say? Blessed be God. 
This 1 said when I departed, and I have not ceased to say it. 
You remember that 1 quoted Job’s words, Let the nafne of 
the Lord be blessed for ever” (from ‘‘ the sermon after 
returning from exile”). The last rubric of the “ Liturgy 
of St. Chrysostom,” still used in the Greek Church, is ‘‘ The 
priest having adored, and given thanks to God for all things, 
so departs.” 

3 “At every journey . . . at the putting on of our clothes 
and shoes ...at going to bed, at sitting down .. . we 
wear our foreheads with the sign (of the Cross)” (Tert., 
de Cor., iii.). 

* “A man who in his zeal for temperance yielded to anger 
more than to respect, and for the sake of temperance all 
through his life allowed his tongue too much out-spokenness. 
I marvel how a man who practised such zeal for temperance, 
taught men in his addresses to despise temperance ”’ (Socrates). 

δ᾽ Socrates says this was on November 24; George says 
September 24, which the description of the weather makes 
more likely. 


30] THE “CYCLOPEAN MEALS” 97 


the dust from his feet, and passing over to Christ, 
as it is written, ‘“‘ Thou shalt come to thy grave, 
as ripe corn gathered in its season; but the souls of 
the transgressors shall die before their time.’?? Such 
a concourse of virgins and ascetics and men renowned 
for their devout lives came together from Syria, and 
Cilicia, and Pontus, and Armenia, that many sup- 
posed that they had been summoned by signal. 
The rites of internment and the funeral gathering 2 
took place; and so his poor body, like a victorious 
athlete’s, was buried in the same shrine as Basiliscus. 


CHAPIER. ΧΗ 
A DEFENCE OF CHRYSOSTOM’S ABSTEMIOUS HABITS 


THEODORUS, amazed at what he had heard, here 
asked a question, quoting scripture words— 


The “ Cyclopean Meals” 


Deac. As it is written, ‘‘ Neglect not the recital 
of elders, for they also have learnt from their fathers,’’3 


7 jad Ὁ, 

* “The clergy honoured Constantine with the mystical 
liturgy’ at his funeral (Eusebius). The third Council of 
Carthage shows this to be the usual custom, as a token of the 
communion between the living and the dead. Ambrose 
speaks of a body removed from the church where the Eucharist 
was offered to that in which it was to be buried. This con- 
course cannot have taken place till long after the actual 
interment, owing to the distance, though the Vit. Anon. says 
it took place immediately through Divine inspiration. The 
word [ have translated “‘ gathering” is used for a Church 
Festival, such as Easter. The relatives of a Christian were 
to meet for psalms, hymns, and prayers on the third, ninth, 
and fortieth days after death (A postolical Constitutions, viii. 
42). “1 happened that the services for the fortieth day 
of the one and the third day of the other were being 
celebrated by the brethren ” (Pall., L. H., xxi, 15). 

* Ecchlns, viii: ὁ. 


98 ABSTEMIOUS HABITS [39 


I will trouble you to tell us what was the reason for 
his custom of eating alone, and whether it is true 
that he used to eat alone, as they say he did.1 

Bish. 1 admit that he used to eat alone; but 1 
am sorry to find such a very careful person as you, 
Theodorus, asking the questions that greedy children 
put. A grown man like you ought to inquire about 
the virtues which belong to men; what was his 
disposition in regard to courage, wealth, self-control, 
gentleness and righteousness, almsgiving, practical 
wisdom, manliness, memory or forgetfulness. For 
meat does not commend us to God, neither if we 
eat nor if we do not eat;? but knowledge working 
with activity. 


Personal Reasons 


Yes, he did eat alone, and I know that in part at 
least it was for the following reasons: first of all, 
he drank no wine, because it sent the blood to his 
head, except that in the heat of summer he took 
rose-water. Secondly, owing to some ailment, his 
stomach was disordered, so that often he found the 
food prepared for him distasteful, and asked for 
something not on the table. Next, at times he forgot 
his meals, and put them off until evening; either 
because he was occupied in ecclesiastical concerns, or 
because he was absorbed in spiritual meditation. 
For he was ever striving to grapple with every 
difficulty in holy scripture, and such researches require 
a light diet, or no diet at all. Again, bons vivants, 
if they have a friend? to sit at table with them, or 
to swill with them, or to cackle with them in unseemly 
mirth, with the cup of warm wine held in the tips 

ΞΕ 60 


° 


PE ότι Vili δ᾽ 

3 ““ Why he chose to eat alone, no one has been able to 
state clearly; those who wish to defend him say that it was 
‘on account of infirmity ” (Socrates). 

« The text reads “ no friend ’’; and ‘‘ sweat” (as at the 
baths) for “‘ swill.” 


40] THE SNARE OF THE TABLE 99 


of his fingers, generally turn the good fellowship of 
the table into malicious gossip. 


Delicate Living an Abuse of Stewardship 


But in my opinion, the whole secret, and the truer 
explanation, was this: he was careful to excess in 
dealing with men of pleasure, counting the expendi- 
ture of money on such people as sacrilege.1 At the 
same time, it was a way of minimizing opportunities 
for theft on the part of his stewards, preventing them 
from multiplying by ten the costs of the food, and 
securing for themselves what the poor needed. Be- 
sides this, with the whole population 2 of the city in 
his mind, he considered that as the steward of Christ 
he ought to regard every one, of whatever rank, as 
worthy of the honour of dining with him, or else 
to grant the privilege to none. And he dwelt upon 
the bad behaviour which occurred at table, and the 
many expenses which fell upon the poor, until he 
detested the whole business, and would put out of 
his mind the malicious comments you mention, 
repeating to himself the words of the Acts, “‘ Men 
and brethren, it is not meet that we should serve 
tables; but let us appoint devout men over the 
matter, and let us give ourselves to the word and to 
prayer.” 3 


The Snare of the Table 


When a racehorse is too old to run a race, he is 
relegated to the mill, and tramps round and round 
in an endless circle. In the same way, a teacher, if 
he lacks the spirit to speak the words of virtue, sets 
himself to catch men with the net of the table. And 
well for him, if it be among the hungry and the needy, 
from whom he may win the blessing promised by the 
Lord, “1 was hungred, and ye gave me meat.” 4 


BUS xix 37 OI ἢ. 22. 
Or, perhaps, “‘ moral tone,”’ “‘ character.”’ 


Acts vi. 2, very freely quoted, with no MS. support. 
Matt. xxv. 35. 


em © τ = 


100 ABSTEMIOUS HABITS. . [40 


Alas, it is often only among the rich that he lays 
his snare, to earn a good name, or reputation which 
fades away, or to secure return-invitations of the 
same kind, or at least to avoid having a bad name. 
Such a man forgets the curse pronounced by the 
Lord, ““ Woe unto you, when all men speak well of 
you.’ ! He did not say, “ All the poor,” but, “ All 
men.” ‘For even so did their fathers unto the 
false prophets.” Let us not, then, Theodorus, seek 
for the reputation of a false prophet, as the vain- 
glorious do. “For John came neither eating nor 
drinking, in the way of righteousness, and they say, 
He hath a devil. The Son of Man came eating and 
drinking, and they say, Behold a gluttonous man, 
and a wine-bibber, the friend of publicans and 
Sinficrs. 5 


The Need of Discretion in Hospitality 


Deac. It was not, O excellent father, to blame, 
or to run down such austerity, that I put my inquiry 
to your accuracy; for I knew the mind of the man 
from common report, and from those writings of his, 
homilies and letters,? which have come into our 
hands. I wished to learn his aim, and so to emulate 
his actions. Who could be so absolutely stupid, as 
to be unaware that one loses more than one gains 
from the table, unless there be need to entertain 
saints in their necessity ? 

Bish. Nor did I say what I did, Theodorus, most 
careful seeker after truth, to belittle the virtue of 


1 Luke vi. 26. 

* Matt. χὶ- 18, joined with xxi. 32. Pall, £3. (eso, 
p. 13), similarly oe the two verses, with no MS. 
authority. Cf. p. x 

3 Nearly all the BAG letters we possess date from his 
second exile, and are short answers to inquiries, requests for 
prayer, or devotional considerations of Providence and the 
use of sufferings; seventeen are addressed to Olympias. 
The sentence suggests the passage of a certain space of time 
for their collection. They could not have reached Rome 
at the supposed date of the Dialogue. 


41] THE DANGER OF EXCESS ΤΟΙ 


our fathers, least of all their virtue of hospitality. 
It is one of the many virtues which make for piety, 
practised by the lord?! patriarchs. One caught in 
the snare of his table the Saviour God,? another 
entertained the angels; one was rewarded by a son 
in his old age, another by deliverance, with his 
daughters, from Sodom. The apostle himself speaks 
of them, urging us to follow their example. “ Be 
not forgetful,’ he says, “of hospitality; for by it 
some have entertained angels unawares.’ ? But an 
host must have the practical wisdom of the serpent, 
as well as the harmlessness of the dove; he must 
give heed to both the oracles, “Give to every man 
that asketh of thee,’* and also “‘ Admit not every 
man into thine house,” ὅ or else he will entertain a 
wolf instead of a sheep, or a bear instead of an ox, 
and barter away his gain for loss.6 And first he ought 
to investigate the place in which a man has been 
set—whether it be desolate or populous; and then 
his own fitness for the position of host—whether he 
can bear with the manners of other people. Then he 
must use discrimination in regard to the man who 
claims his services—whether he be rich or poor, well 
or ill, in need of food, or of clothes; for it is with 
these things that operative charity deals. 


The Danger to a Priest of excess in Hospitality 


The blessed Abraham did not entertain governors, 
or generals, or the great men of the world around 
him, vaunting horses with glittering bits and bridles, 
or trousers’ set with metal bells, eructating their 
conceited tinkling far abroad. He lived in a desolate 


1 As “lord bishops ” on p. Io. 

2 Gen. xvili. 8, 22. ‘“ Theangel of great counsel ”’ (Isa. ix. 6), 
God, and yet an angel, hence identified by Christian writers 
with the Second Person of the Holy Trinity (cf. Novatian 
de Trin, xviii.; xix.), 

® Hep. sil. 2: 

* Luke vi. 30. 

δ Ecelus: x1. 20. 

Pid. Ρ τῶι: 

ΘΙ, . PP etsiam trousers, > Dans ii. 27: 





102 ABSTEMIOUS HABITS [41 


district, and entertained those who visited it; they 
came to the patriarch across the desert, either 
attracted by his virtue or under the stress of penury 
and poverty. Poverty is a mean between excess and 
deficiency; the excess of wealth, and the deficiency 
of penury.1. In the same way, Lot lived in a city 
which was worse than a desert, and entertained the 
strangers who visited it, because of the bad manners 
of its inhabitants. But a priest living in a very 
well-ordered city, like Constantinople, where every- 
body entertains,?, may easily come to neglect the 
ministry of the word, even to excess, and be always 
busy with food-bills. Such a man_ unconsciously 
comes to regard himself as an innkeeper, rather than 
as a teacher, till pure knowledge vanishes in wishy- 
washy talk; and he earns the reproach of the pro- 
phet, “‘ Thine inn-keepers mingle the wine with water.’ ὃ 
For teaching is as much superior to hospitality, as 
wine is to water if one is run down. The one benefits 
a man’s contemporaries, the other posterity; the 
one does good to those present at the time, the 
other to those who are not present as well; those 
present, by word of mouth, those not present, by 
writing. So it was with the Saviour, in the days 
of His flesh. He fed five thousand men with the 
loaves, not in a city, but in a wilderness; but He 
taught those who were present by word of mouth, 
while He saved the world through the written gospels. 
This is true especially of the words of inspired men. 


Bodily and Spiritual Food 


And do not be impressed, Theodorus, when a man 
satisfies the hungry with food, but when he delivers 
a soul from some form of ignorance. For plenty of 


1 This sentence seems to be a gloss. But our author, like 
many of the fathers, is fond of ‘“‘ the doctrine of the mean ”’ 
(Aristotle, Eth. Nic., ii. 6, etc.); cf. p. 111. 

2 The word used for the “ guest-master’”’ of the Church 
(p. 50). 

8. ISA) 922, 


41] OLD TESTAMENT WARNINGS το 


people can be found to feed the belly, either gratis, 
or for money, with bread or vegetables, in case of 
need; while it is rare to find one who provides the 
nourishment of the word, and when he is found, ~ 
he wins acceptance for his message with difficulty, 
if at all. For the evil spirits always do their best 
to prevent the salvation of souls. It was this famine 
of the word of teaching, that the Lord God threatened 
to bring upon the people by way of punishment, 
when He said to the prophet, “I will bring upon 
them a famine, not a famine of bread and water, 
but a famine of hearing the word of the Lord.’ 1 
Moreover, in the case of a famine of material food, 
it is always possible to leave the city or the country 
where the shortage exists, and find safety in another, 
as the holy patriarchs did, when they went down to 
Egypt from Palestine; while in regard to famine of 
mental food, which befalls the Churches only for 
want of teachers, the prophet said again, ‘‘ They 
will run from the east to the west, seeking the word 
of God, and shall not find it.’’ 2 


Old Testament Warnings against High Livine 


Why, what good thing is there, that does not spring 
from teaching? And what trouble, that is not to be 
traced to errors of eating and drnking? I mean 
ailments, quarrels, disorders in the _ sub-gastric 
regions, and the sequele of these. When was it that 
Eve was expelled from Paradise? Was it not when 
she ate of the tree at the serpent’s suggestion, instead 
of being satisfied with her appointed food? When did 
Cain commit the foul crime of fratricide? Was it 
not when he kept the best for his own greedy self, 
and ate the first-fruits before offering them to God? 
When did the children of Job meet with the disaster 
which at a moment’s notice made their table a grave ? 
Was it not when they were eating and drinking? 


1 Amos viii. II. 2 Amos vill. 12. 
I 


104 ABSTEMIOUS HABITS [42 


When did Esau lose the blessing? Was it not when 
he yielded to the lure of the kitchen, a slave to his 
belly? When did Saul lose his kingdom? Was it 
not when he ate the best of the sheep, contrary to the 
law? And when did the people of Israel provoke 
God? Was it not when they lusted after the table 
of Egypt, and required of the teacher flesh and 
cauldrons? Why were Hophni and Phinehas, the 
sons of Eli, slain in one hour, in the war? Was it 
not because they used to draw the meat which 
belonged to the sacrifice out of the cauldrons with 
their flesh-hooks ? And why did Jacob, the blamed,* 
kick? Was it not when he was “‘ filled with bread, 
and anointed, and waxen fat, and enlarged’’ ?? 
When did the people of Sodom run unnatural riot ? 
Was it not when they had ruined their powers of 
sound judgment by continual drinking? So they 
are scornfully referred to by the prophet Ezechiel,* 
in the words, “‘ In abundance of wine and fulness of 
bread they lusted, themselves’ * (that is, the city) 
“and her daughters” (that is, the villages, which 
always follow the example of the city). When was 
‘it that the principle of moderation passed away from 
the people of old? Was it not when they, too, had 
grown old upon their beds, as the prophet complains, 
“They that eat the lambs out of the flock, and 
- sucking calves out of the stalls, that drink strained 
wine, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments, 
and they were not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.’’® 
Upon whom did Isaiah pronounce the woe? Was 
it not upon those who rise up early to drink? Here 
are his words: ‘“‘ Woe unto them that rise up early, 
and follow strong drink; who tarry late into the 
night; for wine shall inflame them; for with the 
harp and the lute they drink wine, but they regard 
not the work of the Lord.” ὁ When were the priests 
of Bel put to shame by Daniel? Was it not when the 


‘Lage Jacob the wrestler,” p. 106: * Dent. xxx. 15: 
each. νι 40: inhi. she. 
5 Amos vl. 4-6. 154 ν' ἘΠ; es 


42] HIGH LIVING AND TEACHING τὸ 


dust ensnared them, and proved their guilt by means 
of food and drink? 4 

No need for me to talk of those who have chosen 
to go by the broad way, and abuse the narrow; the 
words of the Saviour are to my mind sufficient con- 
demnation of the roast-hunters, in the passage in 
which he shows the unnamed rich man, who fared 
sumptuously every day in this life present, longing 
. for the poor man Lazarus to bring him crumbs and 
drops of water, and not getting them. Let us look, 
too, at the company of the saints of old, and see 
what kind of teaching they employed; whether 
that of a devout life and words of uprightness, or 
that of drinking parties and high living. Enoch was 
the first to be translated; was it by faith, or by 
joining in drinking parties? Then Noah preserved 
the human race on the face of the earth, by faith, 
in the ark of wood, when the world around was 
purified; was this through a course of drinking 
parties and unclean works, or by fasting and prayers ? 
And when after this tremendous flood he found a 
little relief in drinking,” do not the scriptures proclaim 
his disgrace, and not his honour? When the blessed 
Abraham overcame the five kings at Sodom, and 
rescued Lot, was it by faith and rnghteousness, or 
by eating and drinking? 


A Single Instance no Basis for a Universal Rule 


Then Theodorus said— 

Deac. If you bring Abraham into the discussion, 
let me call your attention to this point; some one 
will tell you, that he won the war by faith, but he 
ensnared God, as you yourself explained just now, by 
means of the table. 

Bish. What an idea! As Abraham _ ensnared 
God by means of the table, had we not all better 
_abandon faith and the rest of the virtues, and cultivate 


1 Bel and the Dragon, v. 14, etc. Their footsteps were 
seen in the ashes sprinkled by Daniel. 
2 A slight alteration of the text gives this meaning. 


τοῦ ABSTEMIOUS HABITS [43 


drinking parties? Then we shall be no better than 
inn-keepers and caterers, who line the streets with 
buildings for the purpose, for filthy lucre’s sake. 
And then the virgins, who strive to be holy in body 
and spirit, for the glory of God, had better bear 
children, because Mary bore Christ; if they do so, 
they will be no better than prostitutes. If our 
teachers must furnish the pleasures of the table 
because Abraham did so, then our virgins should bear 
children because Mary did so. 

No, no, my honoured friend; we must not bring 
ridicule upon things which have been done, or are 
being done, with the justification of special circum- 
stances; for each man’s conscience tells him his duty, 
if he will have it so. 


Further Old Testament Illustrations 


Again, did Jacob the wrestler carry off the goods of 
Laban by austerity, or by taking the chair at drinking 
parties? “1 was consumed by the heat,” he said, 
“and by the frost at night, and sleep departed from 
me.’ 1 And he asked in his prayer for no more than 
bread and clothes: “If thou wilt give me bread to 
eat, and raiment to put on, of all that thou shalt 
give me 1 will give the tenth part unto thee.” 2 He 
did not say, “ I will spend it on tables.’? What sort 
of table did Moses, the spokesman and _ faithful 
minister of God, prepare, when he gathered the people 
to the assembly upon the mountain? What sort of 
drinking cups did he have? He melted the rock 
with his rod, because of the unbelief of the people; 
he led six hundred thousand men out of Egypt; he 
carried the tables of the law to guide the people in 
the right way; was it transparent bowls, and pork 
haggis, and birds from Phasis,® and fish from the sea, 
and Tyrian wine well refined, and snow-white loaves, 
that he set before those under instruction, or was it 
words ? 


1 Gen. xxxi.4o. ? Gen.xxviii.20. % In Pontus; pheasants. 


43] TEACHING OF JOHN,THE: BAPTIST. τοῦ 


Deac. But some one will meet your argument by 
saying, Give me too manna, and the water that Moses 
produced, and [1 ask for no more. 

Bish. Who is so dull of wit as to prefer material 
manna, and water from the stream, to spiritual 
teaching? Let us pass on. Whom did Samuel, 
the teacher of the people, after his twenty-five years 
of retirement at Armathem,! ever turn away from 
idols by means of the table, and not by words? And 
the king who was at the same time prophet and 
psalmist ; he who said, “ I have eaten ashes as bread, 
and mingled my drink with weeping”’ ;? when did 
he set a luxurious table? Elijah the Tishbite, who 
brought about a fast all the world over, and made the 
greedy to go short of food against their will for three 
years and six months—by what sort of table did he 
deliver them from their sin? What cooks had he? 
Did he not receive his daily bread through ravens ? 

Daniel the wise, the seer of the future—by what 
sort of table did he instruct the Assyrians? Was it 
not by prayer and fasting that he destroyed the 
dragon, and overthrew Bel, and stopped the mouths 
of the lions, and moved the king to deny his ancestral 
gods by the confession of the God who essentially 
is? * What tables, and what sort of good cheer, 
did the rest of the company of prophets, or of apostles, 
employ? Were they not teachers? Was not the 
whole world entrusted to them? Are we not their 
successors? Does not the word wish us to be imitators 
of them and observant of their ways, as Paul teaches, 
when he says, “‘ And considering the issue of their 
manner of life, imitate their faith’’ ? 4 


The Teaching of John the Baptist 


What sort of honey-cakes had John the Baptist, 
the herald of repentance, in the wilderness; he who 
was so far from providing meals for those who came 
to him, that the bitterness of his reproofs actually 


1 Ramah,.1 Sam. vii. 17. ce cg Fee ΟἿ Bao 
8 The phrase recalls Ex, iii. 14. « Heb, xin.7. 


τοῦ ‘ABSTEMIOUS HABITS [44 


offended his visitors’ taste? His fierce looks, and 
even his appearance, shook. their defiled consciences 
like an earthquake; much more did his words cut 
away the abscesses of their souls like knives. ‘“ Ye 
offspring of vipers, who warned you to flee from the 
wrath to come? Bring forth therefore fruits worthy 
of repentance,’ + and do not rely upon baptism by 
itself, or upon your descent from Abraham. 


The Teaching of the Apostle Paul 


What of the teacher of the Gentiles, who abolished 2 
circumcision, to establish the circumcision of faith, 
the chosen vessel, Paul? Do we find him busying 
himself with a table? He was a debtor;? but this 
was the last item of his debt. Does he owe it to the 
unbelieving Gentiles, first of all, to have table relations 
with them ? 

Again, what does he write to Timothy, Bishop of 
Ephesus? ‘“‘ Take heed unto’’—the splendour of 
thy table? Or “‘ Unto the reading, the exhortation, 
the doctrine”? ?4 ‘These were just the duties in which 
the blessed John was diligent and strenuous. “‘ Be 
instant out of season, in season,” he continues. 
“Reprove, rebuke, exhort.’’® No one raises the 
objection that two of these methods of address are 
bitter, and one pleasant ; or suggests that he brings in 
the third with a touch of leniency. The exceedingly 
bitter ‘ Reprove, rebuke,’ are coupled with “ Ex- 
hort’’ (not “ flatter’’).6 Exhortation, given scienti- 
fically, is more bitter to lovers of pleasure and 
degenerates, than reproofs, though they may find 
these the more vexatious. For under the influence 


SAE ΠῈ6 τ}. 7. * Matt. v.57. Galo waa. 

Ὁ ΝΌΣΩΣ τ΄ τῇ. 4 ΤΠ πὴ tv 19. 2 fm. τ 2. 

6 The grammar of the sentence is so strange that it is 
almost untranslatable. ‘‘ Flatter’? could not be joined 


with ‘‘reprove, rebuke,’ because flattery never is bitter, 
while exhortation can be more bitter, as he goes on to show, 
than either; hence the apostle does not hesitate to couple the 
apparently pleasant “‘ exhortation ”’ with the bitter ‘‘ reprove, 
rebuke.” 


44] MISCHIEF WROUGHT BY EXCESS τοῦ 


of some passion, the soul may perhaps set itself in 
opposition to reproof, and remain indifferent to what 
is said; but by exhortation, gently and gradually 
administered in kindly and truthful language, it is 
consciously devoured, so to speak, in a slow fire, and 
sawn in pieces. Now of what does he remind 
Timothy? Of drinking parties and festivities, or 
of the revered stories! of his tribulations? ‘ Thou 
hast fully known,” he says, “my manner of life,’ ? 
how in my persecutions I set myself with purpose of 
heart to do all to the glory of God. Does he any- 
where mention a table, when reproving error? 

Again, let us see what he writes to Titus, Bishop of 
Crete. Does he discuss meat and drink, or reproofs 
and teaching? This is what he says: “For this 
cause left I thee in Crete, that thou mightest set in 
order the things that are wanting, and persuade them 
not to teach a different doctrine, nor to give heed to 
tales and endless genealogies’’;*® and he adds the 
kind of reproof needed: “ The Cretans are always 
liars, evil beasts, idle gluttons.’?* We may ask the 
belly-olaters, and table-giants, and women-preying 
hawks,®> who find fault with John’s asceticism, to 
look through the Old and the New Testaments, and 
tell us when they find drinking commended, except 
perhaps in dealing with aliens, and that only as a 
pledge of peace, since barbarians, like wild beasts, 
are softened by table law? 


The Mischief wrought by Excess 


And when did drinking parties lead to anything but 
sin? When I say “sin,” I ought perhaps rather to 
say, ‘more grievous idolatry, and fratricide’”’ ; as it 
is written, ‘ The people sat down to eat and drink, 
and rose up to play.” ® The play was the issue of 

1 “Things which appear shameful (the Cross) are the 
revered stories of our good things”? (Hom. in John Ixxv. 3). 
Cr Pall 2 vin. 

Pot tat το ἀπ 1}. with t bine i. 3) 4) 1 ΠΕ Ὶ 17, 

5 This word is only found here, and in Pall., L. H., lxv. 2, 

Sx. xxx 6, . 


IIO ABSTEMIOUS HABITS [45 


drunkenness. ‘“‘ Come, let us make gods, who shall 
go before us.’?? They were so much shaken by wine, 
that they looked for gods who could be moved, and 
departed from the God Who is unshaken, and fills 
all things without walking a step. And what says 
the prophet? ‘‘ The priest’s lips should meditate 
upon drinking parties, for they shall seek from him 
dinners and lunches’? Or that, “‘ The priest’s lips 
shall guard law, and they shall seek the word from 
his mouth”? “ For he is a messenger of the Lord,” ? 
and not a cook. Once more, when was it that the 
tower was built in Chalane?? Before wine, or after 
wine? Was it not with wine, when Noah had planted 
the vine-stock, and was the first to gather the fruit 
of reproach? This shows that it was not the result 
of drinking, or of planting, but of excess. 

When was Joseph sold by his brethren? Was it 
when they were busy tending the sheep, or when they 
were killing and eating the best of the flock in idle- 
ness, and devising malicious schemes against him 
over their cups? When did they deliver the head of 
John the Baptist on a charger to the young harlot ? 
In an assemblage of the wise, or at a drinking party 
of the lawless? Was it in drinking and eating that 
the blessed Paul continued his discourse until mid- 
night, or in fasting and teaching, and leading to faith 
those who knew not God ? 

As for the Chief of shepherds, the Chief of teachers, 
the Chief of wise men, Jesus the Christ, the Corrector 
of human error, where do we find Him eating in a 
city, except at the Passover?—and this was the 
fulfilling of mysteries.4 And what do we find Him 
discussing with His disciples, when they were anxious ? 
Food, or reading? ‘‘ Labour,’”’ He says, “ not for the 
meat which perisheth, but for that which endureth.” ® 

ΟΣ 0.2 41 yan Ὁ Mal. i697 ; 

3 In Gen. x. 10, Calneh is one of the cities of pam in 
the plain of Shinar jen: wise: 

4 Contained in the words, ‘‘ How shall this man give us his 
flesh to eat ὁ" 

> OME Vin 27. 


45] NO EXCEPTION FOR BISHOPS τί 


Chrysostom’s Action Justified 


So the good John may well say, with the Lord, 
My drinking-party is the teaching and distribution 
of the word, for which I was chosen, for the salvation 
of the people. For meat does not commend us to 
God, neither if we eat it, nor if we do not eat it. 
It is with the Gentiles that the custom prevails, of 
winning with tables those whom they seek to ensnare ; 
as they cannot persuade them with words, they say, 
“Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we _ die.” 
The apostle launches upon them an unusually severe 
correction : 2 “‘ Be not deceived; evil communications 
corrupt good manners.” By “ evil communications ”’ 
he means the whirl of talking which goes on over such 
things. . 


CHAPTER, ἈΠ 


A DEFENCE AGAINST THE CHARGE OF TYRANNICAL 
DEPOSITIONS 


No Exception made for Bishops 


Deac. You have delivered yourself with sincerity 
and learning; your contention is sound. ‘‘ Woe 
unto him that calleth sweet bitter, and bitter sweet. 
Woe unto him that setteth darkness as light, and light 
as darkness.’’ 3 Still, some one will say, We do not 
assert, any more than you do, that John was given 
to such tables as these. It is true that extravagant 
ambition is at the bottom of the love of pleasure; 4 
excessive parsimony is equally a proof of slovenliness 

ty Cor, viii. 8. AVE Ot RV. 52: Se 795 τ 20. 

4 If the text is correct, it means that a man gives dinner- 
parties not for the pleasure of eating, but because he wishes 
to belong to the ‘“‘ smart set,’’ and push himself forward by» 
ostentation of his wealth. Aristotle (Eth. Nic., iv. 3) remarks 
upon the difficulty of explaining ‘‘ ambition ’’—‘‘a desire 
for honour carried to excess,” 


112 TYRANNICAL DEPOSITIONS [45 


and pettiness of mind. He might have invited 
bishops only, especially the more devout bishops; if 
not bishops, at least his own clergy, after the example 
of the Lord when He ate with the twelve apostles. 
Bish. The objection you raise, most truth-loving 
of men, would be most valid, if only the clergy would 
have been content to have their meals with John, 
and get their food an hour, or a day, late; but they 
expected lavish hospitality, and great style, punctually 
to the minute. It would have been absurd to waste 
the food of the sick or the poor on feasting the healthy. 
Besides, what an idea it is, for the pupils to lay down 
the law for the teacher, or the patients for the doctor, 
or the passengers for the pilot.2 It is always the 
doctor who cures the sick, the teacher who instructs 
the pupils, the pilot who woos the welfare of the 
passengers. Moreover, the love of life makes those 
who take the advice of a doctor or a pilot willing to 
bear any pain or hardship, though they cannot 
guarantee success; the teacher of the higher life is 
entrusted with the duty of eradicating diseases and 
infirmities, and trained to overcome the fiercest 
waves of lust. Yet people do their utmost to oppose 
him with their unbridled tongues, and stir up all the 
mud with unwashed feet. And if John had _ sur- 
rendered himself, and given himself over to tables, 
how many of the important people could he have 
satisfied, living as he did in a great city, where every 
one wanted to dine with him, either to get a blessing,® 


1 The contrast with “‘as quickly as possible ”’ requires this 
rendering of the preposition, which implies an irregular or 
unusual action (as in par-akoe, ‘“‘ mis-hearing’’). It is 
so used, again in connection with time of meals, in Pall., L. H., 
XXX1. I, Ixi. 6—“‘ once a day ”’ or “‘ once every other day ’’; 
this meaning occurs on p. 129. 

2 Both favourite metaphors of Chrysostom. ‘‘ God’s 
providence is unrecognized, as when the pilot is saving the 
ship in a storm, but the passengers do not recognize his skill 
in the general confusion ”’ (adv. Opp., vol. ΗΠ 1136). 

3 The word is frequent in N.T. for “spiritual blessing ”’ 
(i Cor. αὶ τὸ; Gal. in 147 Jas; ni 10)... In L XX itis used for 
any benefit bestowed; as in Judges ἘΞ 15, a piece of land; 


40 THE GOOD. NAME OF A PRIEST 113 


or because he was poor, or because he was greedy ? 
And how could he have found time for religious 
meditation, the ministrations to his flock, the study 
of holy scripture, the care of the widows, the en 
couragement of the virgins, the nursing of the sick, 
the assistance of those in distress, the conversion of 
those in error, the anxious thought for the broken in 
heart, the visiting of the prisoners? How could he 
have escaped the reproachful curse of God, pronounced 
in Ezekiel? ‘‘ Woe unto the shepherds who feed 
themselves, and feed not the flock! Ye did not 
bring again that which had wandered, that which 
was lost ye sought not, the weak ye visited not, that 
which was broken ye bound not up; the fatlings ye 
killed and ate.’?! Of whom Paul writes, ‘“‘ Ye bear 
with a man, if he bringeth you into bondage, if he 
devoureth you, if he taketh you captive.” 2 ‘“ And 
ye clothe yourselves with the wool, but ye feed not 
the flock.”’ And He says in Jeremiah of the idle 
shepherds, “Many shepherds have destroyed my 
vineyard.” 3 


The Good Name of a Priest 


Deac. In time, he might have paid his respects 
to these people, without neglecting ecclesiastical 
duties, so as not to get himself a bad name, when in 
everything else he was so eminent. 

Bish. This is just what is wanted in a priest— 
not to get himself a bad name, so as to have full 
scope for his gifts of speech, his energy, his zeal, and 





1 Sam. xxv. 27, Abigail’s ΠΗ 2 Kings v. 15, Naaman’s. 
Hence especially of the bread not consecrated at the Eucharist. 
Socrates tells of one who “‘ took nothing: from the Church, 
save two loaves of eulogiz each Sunday.” Cf. Pall., L. H., 
xxv. 3, ‘‘ lam not worse than you, that you should send me a 
blessing ΟἹ sweetmeats given to a monk. Hence the 
sense here will be the “ cetting good ”’ of a worldly, not a 
spiritual kind; a gift to take home, or the honour of an 
invitation. 

1 ΕΠ ΖΕΙ͂ xe 2. 

5.2 COP. ΣΙ 20: 
Ὁ yer. σιν τὸ 


14 TYRANNICAL DEPOSITIONS [46 


all the other right dispositions of a priest.t_ Do you 
not know, my most honoured Theodorus, that one 
of the beatitudes laid down by the Lord deals with 
unreasonable accusations? ‘“‘ Blessed are ye, when 
men shall reproach you, and say all manner of evil 
things against you.2, But woe unto you, when all 
men shall speak well of you; for so did their fathers 
to the prophets.” ® And how could lips trained in 
divine oracles, and an ear accustomed to listen to 
divine precepts, endure the gossip of the table, when 
the Lord says, ‘‘ No man can serve two masters,’’ 4 
continuing, ‘‘ Ye cannot serve God and mammon” ? 
We had better find out what is mammon, or we may 
find ourselves not even serving the two masters, but 
mammon only. For in this passage He does not mean 
by “mammon”’ “ the devil,” but the vain industry 
of this world, from which the word of God bids His 
disciples to stand aloof. 


True Priestly Work not in Earthly, but in Spiritual 
Things 

Deac. Iam quite satisfied with the light you have 
thrown upon this question of the table. Now, most 
holy father, come back to your narrative of events. 
And do not be vexed with me for raising objections ; 
it is only because I wanted to learn more that I kept 
questioning your abundant learning at greater length 
than you liked. 

Bish. Let me make this point still more clear to 
you, Theodorus, most earnest lover of learning. I 
was myself once one of those who are bent on pleasing 
the masses with the table; and I say that a bishop, 
especially the bishop of a large city, who leaves the 
ministry of the word, and has not in his hands by 
night and day the tables of the law, and performs his 
ministrations to the poor not in person, but by 
proxy, is quite a different person from those who 
said, “‘ Lo, we have left all, and followed thee; what 


1 He will have a bad name, if he play the host too much. 
a Matt. v.11. δ᾽ Luke vi, 26; « Matt. vi. 24. 


47] PRIESTLY WORK r15 


shall we have therefore?’’! He must .be ranked 
with those who said, “‘ Lord, did we not in thy name 
do this or that?’’ and like them, he will hear the 
answer, ‘“‘ Depart from me, ye cursed; I know you 
not whence ye are.”’ ? 

For the Word 3 knows not wordless 4 workers; His 
eye is too pure to look upon evil things. For many so- 
called bishops, anxious to get rid of the quite reason- 
able hatred in which they are held, owing to their 
own characters, and their indifference to spiritual 
things, do but exchange one evil affection for another— 
covetousness for vain-glory. While with one hand 
they do wrong without stint for the sake of un- 
righteous gain, with the other they set elaborate 
tables, and rear pillars for lofty buildings,® so as to 
gain a reputation for being good and laborious workers, 
and win honour instead of dishonour. They forget 
the Ecclesiast, who built great buildings, and hated 
them; and clearly forbad such things, when he wrote, 
“IT built me houses and gardens,” etc., “ and behold, 
all are vanity; and I hated all my labour, wherein 
I labour under the sun.” ® He did not say, ““ Above 
the sun,’ or he would have brought spiritual toil 
into disrepute. In saying this, I do not include in 
my condemnation those who build reasonably, and 
of necessity, or beautify Church property; I am 
thinking of those who waste the money of the poor 
on hanging corridors, and water-cisterns raised into 
the air three storeys high, and disreputable baths, 
hidden from sight, for effeminate men; or spend their 
gifts of energy upon buildings, either as an excuse 
for collecting more money, or again, to win the esteem 
of popular favourites. That is simply to sacrifice 
everything to give pleasure to sinners. As for me, 
God forbid, famous Theodorus, that I should ever 


S MACE. ΣΧ, 27: 3. Juke απ, 27. ni (ej ete ὃ τ. 

4 “ Logos”’ in Greek means “ reason,”’ as well as “‘ reason 
expressing itself in words.” Cf. p. 31, n. 

©’ Cf. Theophilus’ “lithomania”’ (p. 51). 

Sh cel, Ἢ ΒΡ Τα. ko. 


116 TYRANNICAL DEPOSITIONS [47 


please bad people, for I shall never please them, 
except by methods which do not please Christ. 


The Alleged Deposition of Sixteen Bishops 


The deacon, much impressed by these remarks, 
here made a request to the bishop :— 

Deac. Your observations are perfectly sound, and 
there is nothing to be said against them. Now, if 
you have any knowledge of the arrangements ! made 
by the holy John in Asia, as it is with him that our 
discussion 1s concerned, let me share it. 

Bish. Certainly I have such knowledge. 

Deac. From being personally present? Or did 
you gain your information from others ? 

Bish. No; I did not miss a word of the trial. 

Deac. Then tell me in detail what followed, and 
how it ended, and how it began. I especially wish 
to know, because Theophilus said in his indictment, 
in his anxiety to dignify or to hide his own rash con- 
duct, that the blessed John was so much influenced 
by the love of power, that he deposed sixteen 2 bishops 
in a single day and ordained creatures of his own in 
their stead. 

Bish. It was just what one would expect from the 
character of this wonderful person, to write, and to 
write falsehoods, against John. By the very steps 
which he took to hide his own shame, he made it the 
more conspicuous, and involuntarily established the 
innocence of John ; just as it was in the case of Balaam. 
If he had succeeded in deposing him, there would 
have been no need of indictment, or of banishment, 


1 Lit., “ things stamped ’’; the word in late Greek often for 
‘‘ordain,” “‘decree,” of persons in authority. Cf. pp. 78,125, n. 

2 Socrates says, “‘ Thirteen, in Lycia, Phrygia, and Asia; 
and also Gerontius, Bishop of Nicomedeia ’’—on his way home 
from Ephesus; who being a skilful doctor had much endeared 
himself to his flock. Chrysostom ordained Pansophius, the 
late instructor of the Empress,in his place; the action causing 
great indignation. Apparently the number was six in Asia, 
seven in Lycia and Phrygia. Isaac’s eleventh charge at The 
Oak was, that he invaded other provinces, and there ordained 
bishops. 


48] ACCUSATION BROUGHT ΒΥ EUSEBIUS 117 


as the deposition is enough to disgrace a deposed 
person; but as our bishop stood firm in his virtue, 
against the attempts to depose him, and won victory 
in defeat, his opponent’s malice is as fierce as ever, 
bearing the palm of defeat for its senseless victory. 
He swells like a bubble, chafing against himself, 
writing tracts and detractions. This is what Isaiah 
meant, when he cried woe upon him who seizes every 
opportunity of doing, and telling, and writing, lies; 
“Woe unto them,” he says, “who write; for they 
write iniquity.” + 


The Accusation brought by Eusebius against Antoninus 


The number of the bishops whom John deposed 
in Asia was not sixteen, but six; J] make the assertion 
as at God’s judgment throne, not subtracting a single 
unit from the figures, nor adding a single qualification 
oi his action. My statements are in exact accordance 
with the facts. : 

In the thirteenth year of the sixth indiction 3 
some bishops from Asia came to Constantinople on 
business and stayed with us. Besides these, there 
were other bishops, including one from Scythia, 
Theotimus,? one from Thrace, Ammon the Egyptian, 
and one from Galatia, Arabianus—all metropolitans, 
advanced in years; making a total of twenty-two 
bishops. A certain Eusebius, from the district known 


Elsa δ τὶ 

2 The text reads, ‘“‘ the thirteenth indiction,”’ clearly in 
error. An ‘“‘indiction’’ (properly the notice of taxation, 
revised every fifteen years) was a period of fifteen years, 
instituted by Constantine in 312, when he became undisputed 
emperor through his victory over Maxentius; possibly 
wishing to show his zeal for the Faith by abolishing the pagan 
mode of reckoning (by the Greek ‘‘ Olympiads ”’ of four years) 
May 400 is the time of this event. 

3 A Goth, Bishop of Tomis, missionary to the Huns; he | 
refused to sign the resolution of agreement with Epiphanius’ 
condemnation of Origenism. 

4 It was natural that at all times many bishops should 
visit the capital of the Eastern Empire “on ecclesiastical 


118 TYRANNICAL DEPOSITIONS [48 


as Kilbia, Bishop of Valentinopolis,! took the oppor- 
tunity of these being assembled and holding com- 
munion together to come forward in the assembled 
synod,? on the first day of the week, and lay memorials 
before it, against Antoninus, Bishop of Ephesus; to 
these charges, so as to be in order, he of course pre- 
fixed the name of John. The charges fell under 
seven heads; first, that he had melted down Church 
plate, and placed the proceeds to the account of his 
son; second, that he had carried away marble from 
the entrance of the baptistery, and used it for the 
improvement of his own bathroom; next, that he 
had set up pillars belonging to the Church, which 
had been in position for many years, in his own dining- 
room; fourth, that his servant had committed 
murder, and that he was still keeping him in his 
service, without bringing him to trial; fifth, that he 
had sold some land bequeathed to the Church by 
Basilina, the mother of King Julian, and kept the 
money; sixth, that after separating from 3 his married 
wife, he had taken her again, and had had children 
born to him by her; seventh, that he regarded it as 
law, and dogma, to sell consecration to bishopricks 
at prices in proportion to the emoluments. He added 
that there were persons present who had paid such 
money, and been consecrated, as well as the man 
who had received it; and that he had proofs of his 
statements. ᾿ 


if 


business ”’?; these gradually formed a “ synodus endemusa ”’ 
—a ‘“‘home” or “ floating synod ’’—meeting under the 
presidency of the archbishop. At the Council of Chalcedon 
the question was raised as to the authority of such a synod, 
and it was declared to be good. Similar home synods 
existed at Rome and at Treves, during the residence of the 
emperors there. 

1 In the province of Asia. 

2 He apparently was not himself a member. 

3 The word is frequent for “‘ saying good-bye to ”’ (Luke ix. 
61, ete.) so.for ~ renouncing, the world,’~ reine, to the 
desert as a monk,’> etc, According to, the. Apostolic 
Canons,” only the lower orders of clergy were allowed to 





48] EUSEBIUS’ PERSISTENCE 110 


CHAPTER ΧΙΥ 


THE TRIAL OF ANTONINUS—CHRYSOSTOM’S VISIF- 10 
EPHESUS 


Johw s Moderation 


Deac. Pray, father, cut. your narrative short; 
for those who are here with us! are grieved to hear 
of bishops making such assertions, to say nothing 
of bishops doing such things. 

Bish. Woe is me, that I have lived to see these 
days, in which a sacred office—if under the circum- 
stances it is a sacred office—is being sold for money. 
‘“T have become a fool’’ 2 in giving my account of 
the doings of John’s accusers, who have brought us 
to this pass. But be patient with me, and you will 
be surprised at the reasonableness which John showed 
in this matter, as in others. He restrained his in- 
dignation for the time, and said to Eusebius : “‘ Brother 
Eusebius, as accusations made in a moment of 
vexation are often not easy to prove, I beg you not 
to bring a written charge against our brother An- 
toninus; we will set right the matters which have 
vexed you.”’ 


Eusebius’ Perststence 
At this Eusebius was very angry, and indulged in 
harsh language, raging with all his might against 
Antoninus, and persisting in his accusations. So 











marry after their appointment to office; the Council in Trullo 
ordered that a bishop’s wife should retire to a convent, or 
become a deaconess; that of Cesarea, that if a priest marries 
after ordination he must be degraded. For Antoninus to 
resume relations with his wife was equivalent to marriage 
after ordination. It was proposed at the Council of Nica 
that married clergy should be compelled to separate from 
their wives, but the proposal was rejected; though it was 
generally held that the relations of bishops with their wives 
should be those of brother and sister. Cf. pp. 129, 136. 

1 The Dialogue is supposed to be carried on amid a circle 
of listeners. ae Ole ΧΙ ΤΊ. 


K 


120 THE TRIAL OF ANTONINUS [48 


John requested Paul of Heracleia,! who seemed to 
be a warm supporter of Antoninus, to bring about a 
reconciliation between the two. Then he rose, and 
- went into the church, as it was time for the sacrifice ; 
gave the people the usual salutation,? and took his 
seat with the other bishops. But Eusebius, the 
accuser, came in unobserved, and in the presence of 
all the people, and the bishops, presented another 
memorial, containing the same charges; conjuring 
John by terrible oaths, nothing less than “ by the 
salvation of the king and queen.” He made such 
a disturbance that the people took alarm αἱ his 
audacity, and supposed that he was urging John to 
petition the king for reprieve from a death sentence. 
So John, struck by the man’s persistence, and anxious 
to keep the people quiet, accepted the document, and 
after the reading of the divine oracles requested 
Pansophius, Bishop of Pisidia, to offer the gifts, 
while he himself retired with the rest of the bishops. 
For he always objected to offering the sacrifice with 
a disturbed mind, as the gospel requires: ‘‘ When 
thou bringest thy gift,’ etc. 


The Charges made Public 


After the dismissal of the people, he carefully con- 
sidered the situation, and taking his seat in the 
baptistery * with the other bishops, called the accuser, 
and said to him in the presence of all, “ I repeat what 
I said before, that people under the influence of 


1 He presided as metropolitan (p. 65) at The Oak. 

2 “The bishop at his entry into the church says always, 
Peace be with you, as a proper salutation when he enters his 
Father’s house ’”’ (Hom. 1m 1 Cor. xxxvi.; so in Col. ili., etc.). 

3 Matt. v.23. ‘‘ Good food upsets the nauseated stomach ; 
so does the spiritual food upset the man not of a pure con- 
science ’’ (Hom. in Heb. xvii.). ‘‘ Approach the mystic rite 
without disturbance, without molesting your neighbour” 
(Hom. in Nat.-Chr. xi.). Conc. Nic. Can. V. orders, ὁ Let one 
synod be held before Lent, that all ill-feeling may be laid aside, 
and the gift offered to God in purity.” The “ gift” is the 
pure offering of Mal. i. 11. ~ 

4 “ Photisterion ’’; ‘‘ place of illumination,” cf. p. 56, πὶ 


49] THE CHARGE OF SIMONY 121 


vexation or anger, often say and write a great deal, 
while their proofs are feeble. If, then, you have 
certain knowledge of the charges which you wish to 
bring—for if you can maintain them we do not reject 
them, nor, if you cannot, do we invite them—before 
the memorial is read, decide what is best to be done; 
for after the charges are read, and reach the ears of 
the public, the proceedings will be on record, and you 
cannot then, as a_ bishop, ask for an annulment. 
However, Eusebius still persisted; so orders were 
given for the document to be read, and the seven 
counts which I detailed were read. 


The Charge of Simony to be first Investigated 


With the contents of the document thus brought 
to their ears, the senior * bishops said to John, With- 
out doubt, each single point of each single count-is 
impious, and forbidden from every point of view by 
the sacred laws; but we must not appear to spend 
all our time upon the less weighty charges. The 
investigation therefore should begin with the most 
awful of the points; for if that be found to be true, 
there is no answer to be made upon the other counts, 
as that one count contains the root which bears fruit 
in every kind of evil, as the writer said, “ The love 
of money is the root of all evils.’ 3 For if a man has 
accepted bribes against the innocent, and thought fit 
to barter for money his powers of distributing the 
Holy Spirit, how is he likely to spare the plate,’ 
or the stones, or the property, of the Church ? 

Then John began the investigation, asking An- 
toninus, “ What answer do you make to these charges, 
brother Antoninus?’”’ He, of course, denied them; 

1 A strange word, probably “ abolitio,’’ not ‘‘ absolutio ᾿""--- 
“pardon for offences hastily admitted ”’ (Savile). 

2 “The elders of the bishops,’”’ probably with reference to 
the name of the Roman Senate, “‘ the council of elders.”’ 

δυτε ss ieee eee Coe 

4 Soz. v. δ tells of one Theodoret, who held the office of 


“guardian of the sacred vessels,’ and was tortured for 
refusing to surrender them. 


12 THE TRIAL OF ANTONINUS [0 


for how could he admit his disgrace at the very 
beginning? Those who had paid the money were 
questioned, and they, too, denied the charge. These 
stages of the carefully conducted investigation lasted 
till two in the afternoon, when the verdict began to 
take shape on the strength of certain points of 
evidence. 


Absence of the Necessary Witnesses 


At last, the result of the inquiry turned upon the 
question of witnesses, in whose presence the money 
had been given and accepted. These witnesses were 
not at hand, and their presence was necessary. In 
view of the trouble which their attendance would 
involve, John expressed his readiness to secure the 
purification of the church, and to save the witnesses 
inconvenience, by going to Asia in person, and com- 
pleting the investigation there. Then Antoninus, 
conscious of his guilt, and observing the resolution 
and impartiality of John, went secretly to one of 
the officials, for whom he was looking after some 
estates in Asia,’ and begged him to arrange that John 
should be prevented from going to Asia, promising 
that he would himself see to the attendance of the 
witnesses. This man at once had a communication 
sent from the palace to Bishop John, to this effect : 
“It is out of the question for you, the bishop, the 
champion of our souls, to leave the city, when there 
is such grave expectation of disturbance, and commit 
yourself to a long absence in Asia, when the witnesses 
can easily be brought over.” It was Gainas, the 
barbarian, who was expected to cause the disturb- 
ance.” 

1 The 3rd Canon of Chalcedon (451) gave the confirmation 
of a General Council to numerous local canons forbidding 
bishops to be entangled in secular business. 

2 Gainas was a Goth, who had been made commander of 
the army in Constantinople (in which he had enrolled “‘ ‘his 
whole tribe ’’), and sent to check the advance of an insurgent 


brother Goth, Tribigild. Instead of doing so, he joined forces 
with him, and advanced upon the city, demanding the 


40] CHICANERY AND DELAY 123 


The Delegation of Bishops to meet the Witnesses 


Well, to make a long story short, he consented to 
stay in Constantinople, as he had to ‘consider not only 
the burden placed upon the witnesses, but also the 
claims of justice. This postponement for the appear- 
ance of the witnesses was a godsend for the accused, 
as it was now possible to get rid of them by bribery 
or by pressure. This John foresaw; and accordingly 
deliberated with the assembled synod the question of 
sending to Asia some of the bishops present, to 
examine the witnesses. 


Chicanery and Delay 


Three bishops were at once appointed to go— 
Syncletius, metropolitan of Trajanopolis,! Hesychius, 
Bishop of Parius,? and Palladius, Bishop of Heleno- 
polis; a resolution of the synod being entered upon 
the minutes, that if either of the litigants did not 
within two months appear, and stand by his pleas, 
in Hypoepi, a city of Asia (chosen as at a convenient 
distance both for the accused persons, and for the 
other bishops who had to take part with Syncletius 
and his companions in the trial), he should be 





surrender of three Court favourites. Chrysostom was known 
to be kindly disposed towards the Goths, as he had organized 
mission work among them (his befriending of heathen against 
Christians was one of the charges brought against him at 
The Oak); he therefore was asked to negotiate (hence “ the 
champion of our souls ” or “lives’’), and was granted the 
lives of the three, but could not stop Gainas’ entry. For 
some months nothing was done, the barbarians only waiting 
for orders to sack the city; meanwhile, Gainas asked for a 
church within the walls, for himself and his fellow-Arians. 
Chrysostom discussed the matter with him before the Emperor, 
and the request was refused. In the winter the Goths 
attacked the palace, but were repulsed through “a vision 
of angels”’ (or through the efforts of the citizens), and half 
the army, with Gainas, retired through the gates, which were 
at once shut. The rebel forces were thus divided; Gainas 
fled to Thrace, where he was killed, in January 401. Theodoret, 
WE. v. 32, places his application for a church before, not 
after, ‘his rebellion. 11η S.Thrace. 3. On the Propontis. 


24, THE TRIAL’ OF ANTONINUS [50 


excommunicated. Two of the bishops nominated, 
Syncletius and Palladius, went down to Smyrna; 
for Hesychius, who was a friend of Antoninus, pre- 
tended that he had fallen ill. They at once notified 
both parties, by letter, of their arrival, bidding them 
to go together without delay to the city designated 
in the resolution, and carry out their promises. 
Instead of this, they came to terms with one another, 
thanks to bribery? on one side, met by an oath on 
the other, and before the judges arrived, had become 
friends. Then they made a great show of hastening 
to the district of Hypoepi, and calculated to fool the 
judges by putting off the appearance of witnesses 
again, on the ground that they were away from home 
for various unavoidable reasons. Upon this, the 
judges asked the accuser: ‘‘ Within how many days 
will you produce the witnesses? We will wait for 
them for so long.’ As he expected that they would 
soon leave the place, owing to the oppressive weather 
—it was the hottest period of summer—he promised 
in writing that within forty days he would either 
produce the witnesses, or submit to the penalties 
prescribed by the canons. He was accordingly set 
free to look for his witnesses; but he did nothing of 
the sort, but came down to Constantinople, and 
there remained in hiding. 


Death of Antoninus 


The judges duly waited for the forty days, and as 
he did not appear, they sent word to all the bishops 
of Asia, declaring him to be excommunicate, either 
as a shirker? or as a false accuser. Then they held 
out for thirty days more, and as he still did not 
appear, they departed, and came to Constantinople, 
where they fell in with him, and reproved him for his 
contemptuous action. He again pleaded the excuse 
of ill health, and promised to produce the witnesses. 

Eusebius is guilty of the very offence he had so violently 


condemned. 
2 Lit. “‘ deserter’’; not daring to face the inquiry. 


50} CHRYSOSIOM’S VISIT TO EPHESUS 125 


Thus matters dragged on, until Antoninus, the 
defendant in Eusebius’ suit, died. 


The Invitation from Ephesus 


At this juncture John received a resolution for- 
warded from Asia, on the part of the clergy of the 
Ephesian Church, on the one hand, and of the bishops 
on the other, making requirement of him, with an 
awful adjuration, as follows: “‘ Whereas for years 
past the laws of the Church, and we ourselves, have 
been in a sad state of confusion for want of good 
shepherds, we beg your honour to come and lay down 
an order! issued of God for the Church of Ephesus, 
so long oppressed, on the one hand, by persons 
holding the views of Arius, on the other, by those 
who make a great show of professing the views we 
hold, to secure advantage and domination for them- 
selves; especially as there are many who are lurking 
like savage wolves, eager to seize the episcopal throne 
with the help of money.” 


Chrysostom’s Visit to Ephesus 


Now John was seriously ill, and it was the stormy 
season of winter; but he dismissed every difficulty 
from consideration, and thought only of the settle- 
ment of the troubles from which the whole province 
of Asia was suffering through the inexperience, or 
lack, of shepherds. Strengthened by his zeal, he 
embarked and left the city. A violent storm from the 
north came on, and the sailors were afraid of being 
cast upon the Proconnesus,? so they set the prow 
to windward, and ran under Mount Trito, where they 

1 The noun of the verb used above (p. 116), our “ type,”’ 
meaning (1) “‘a blow,” (2) ‘‘ the impress on a coin,”’ (3) in 
fare Grecie a decree, (2-0. Conc. ΝΟ, Can. xix). The 
second may be the meaning here (so Stephens); but the 
adjective (lit. “‘ sent from God ’’) does not seem to suit this 
sense so well.. The point to be settled was, the appointment 


of a successor to Antoninus. 
2 A promontory on the south shore of the Sea of Marmora, 


which is so called from the marble quarries on Proconnesus. 


126 THE TRIAL OF ANTONINUS [50 


cast the anchors, and rode, waiting for the south 
wind to enable them to reach Apameia. For two 
whole days they lay without food, the ship rolling 
heavily, but on the third they arrived at Apameia, 
where Bishops Paul,! Cyrinus,? and Palladius? were 
waiting for them; for John had appointed them to 
be his companions on his visit. 

They accomplished the journey to Ephesus on 
foot, and on their arrival gathered together the bishops 
of Lydia, Asia, and Caria, making in all seventy 
persons. Thus they held the ordination,’ the 
majority meeting them in the most friendly spirit, 
especially the Phrygian bishops; so much did they 
appreciate the wisdom which fell from his mouth, as 
it 1s written, ““ Wisdom is praised in the streets ’’— 
that is, in those that speak; “‘in the broad places 
she uttereth her voice with outspokenness,” ὅ that is, 
in the hearts that have been enlarged through manifold 
distresses, as the scripture saith, ‘In distress thou 
didst enlarge me.’ ® For wisdom is straitened in 
those that cultivate tares, and choke the word. 

1 Of Crateia (p. 80), not of Heracleia (pp. 23, 65). 

2 Of Chalcedon (pp. 23, 77); at this time a friend of 
Chrysostom, afterwards a bitter enemy. 

3 Hence the author’s knowledge of the details of the journey. 

4 As there was much rivalry for the vacant office, Chrysos- 
tom settled the dispute by appointing Heracleides, a Cypriote, 
one of his deacons, once a monk of Scetis. Hoping to 
strengthen his case against Chrysostom, Theophilus at The 
Oak had a charge brought against the new bishop of violence 
to certain persons, and of “ Origenism.’”? As he was not 
present to answer, a dispute, ending in blows, arose between 
the bishops of Constantinople and those of Egypt, and 
Theophilus, finding his plansa failure, “‘ immediately departed 
for Egypt.’ Heracleides, however, was subsequently deposed 
(Pp. 130). 

"τον 1; 70. 

5 Εν 2. 


51] CONFESSION OF ACCUSED BISHOPS 127 


CHAPTER XV 
SIX BISHOPS DEPOSED—-CHRYSOSTOM’S WORK UNDONE 


Eusebius Request for Immediate Procedure 


THIS was the state of things when the man who 
caused us all this long story, Eusebius, the accuser 
of the six other bishops, presented himself to the 
whole body of bishops, claiming to be admitted to 
communion with them. Some of the bishops objected, 
maintaining that as a false accuser he ought not to 
be admitted. Upon this he played. the suppliant, 
saying, “ As the main part of the case has been under 
investigation for two years, and the adjournment 
was madé to enable the witnesses to be examined, I 
beseech your love of God, to let me produce the 
witnesses this very day. For although Bishop 
Antoninus, who accepted the money, and performed 
the act of ordination, is dead, there yet remain those 
who gave the money, and received ordination.” 


Confession of the Accused Bishops 


The assembled synod resolved that the inquiry 
should be held, and the proceedings began with the 
reading of the minutes of the previous transactions. 
Then the witnesses were introduced, and also six of 
those who had given bribes and received ordination. 
At first they denied the charge; but the witnesses, 
some of whom were laymen, others priests, in whom 
they had evidently trusted, others again women, 
held to their assertions, and stated the nature of the 
pledges exchanged, the places, the dates, and the 
amount. At last, their consciences so much troubled 
them, that with very little pressure they confessed 
of their own free will. ‘‘ We have given bribes,’ 
they said; “ the thing is admitted, and we have been 
made bishops, in the expectation that we should be 


=28 Six BISHOPS: DEPOSED [51 


regarded as exempt from civil duties. And now we 
beg to be allowed, to continue in the ministry of this 
Church, if there is no impiety in our doing so; or, 
if that is impossible, that we may receive back the 
money we have paid. For some of us have given 
furniture belonging to our wives.’ 


The Sentence 


John in answer promised the synod, that with the 
help of God he would present a petition to the king, 
and get them freed from civil duties; and bade them 
order the accused to recover what they had paid 
from the heirs of Antoninus. So the synod ordered, 
that they should recover from the heirs of Antoninus, 
and should communicate within the sanctuary,? 
but not be reckoned as priests, for fear that if their 
doings were condoned, a custom might arise worthy 
of Jews or Egyptians, of selling and buying the 
priesthood. They say that the pestilential patriarch 3 


1 All citizens possessing twenty-five acres of land were 
liable to serve on the city council; Constantine exempted 
the clergy from this duty. ‘‘ Our pleasure is, that all the 
clergy be exempted from all public offices whatsoever ”’ 
(Eus., Vit. Const., x. 7). But as it was found that laymen 
took inferior offices in the Church to avoid their civil duties, 
the privilege was afterwards confined to bishops, and to 
such priests and deacons as were ordained with the consent 
of the civil court, and otherwise restricted; but still ‘‘ the 
Church knows nothing of extraordinary duty or sordid 
functions’ (Theod. Cod. xi. 7). Basil (Ep., 279) asks that 
the clergy may be exempted from taxes, “‘ according to the 
ancient law’’; Gregory Nazianzen (Ep., 159) complains ofa 
deacon compelled to pay taxes. 

2 ““ Thysiasterion,”’ properly “‘ the altar,” the usual word i in 
the Old Testament; here extended to mean “‘ the place of the 
altar.” So four times in the Epp. of Ignatius (about 110) 
and frequently in later writers. 

δ * Patriarch’ is in LXX (1 Chron. xxvii. 22, etc.) the 
title of a division of a tribe in Israel (Authorised Version, 
“Princes’’). After the fall of Jerusalem, Jewish “‘ patri- 
archs’’ were set up at Tiberias and Babylon. The office is 
referred to by Church writers as of great dignity, but ceased 
at the end of the fourth century. The reference here is 
uncertain. ‘‘ The Patriarch of Egypt 15 Theophilus, 


st] CONDEMNED BISHOPS RESTORED 129 


of the Jews, whose acts belied his title, used to change 
the rulers of the synagogues every year, or every 
other year, as a means of raising money; and that 
the Patriarch of Egypt emulated him by doing the 
same, that the word of prophecy might be fulfilled, 
‘“ Her priests made answer for gifts, and her prophets 
divined for money.” ὦ 


Re-introduction of the Condemned Bishops 


The minutes of all those proceedings, and the 
names of the judges, are on record. Further, the 
investigation was not a matter of a single day, as 
Theophilus falsely asserted, but of two years. More- 
over, those who were deposed acquiesced, thankful 
to be delivered from the judgment to come; indeed, 
one of them was appointed solicitor for dealing with 
public affairs. In their places six others were 
instituted, unmarried men, adorned by graces both 
of life and speech. And the noble and quarrelsome 
gentlemen, after John had been exiled, got what 
they did get (for their villainy has no name,® any 
more than it has a substantial existence),* and brought 
back into the Churches those who had four years 
before been expelled, while those who had_ been 
enthroned with due order they thrust out, scattering 
the sheep of Christ. 


A Vile Person enthroned at Ephesus 


Yet the most ridiculous thing of all, though it calls 
for lamentation ‘rather than laughter, Theodorus, 


Ae ΝΠ ΘΒ: 1 ET, 

2 “Defensor rerum publicarum.”? Every large corporation 
would have such an official, and the Church naturally ap- 
pointed hers. ‘They were either clergy or laymen, their duties 
being to maintain the legal rights of the Church, or of indi- 
vidual clergy, against encroachment and oppression, and to 
expel unlicensed clergy from the capital (Conc. Chalc. Can. 
SEXII12); 

3 We call it simony, after Simon Magus (p. 5). In the 
fifth century it was called “‘ Christemporismus,”’ “‘ trafficking 
in Christ.” 

Evil being merely a negation of good. 


130 ΙΧ BISHOPS DEPOSED - [52 


best friend of learning, is yet to follow: As the 
prophet says, “‘ Both thine ears shall tingle,’ ἢ if you 
hear it, but as a lover of God you will mourn for the 
bishops who are behaving as madmen, and with 
darkened ? hands outraging the gifts of Christ. The 
ordinations which Peter and John and their brethren 
administered with fasting and prayer, and with 
careful testing by lot, and fear, they administered 
with revelry and drunkenness, and lamentable bribes, 
to abortions ὃ of men, not worthy to be set with pigs 
or dogs, creatures without reason; as Job prophesied, 
impersonating the Saviour, ““ Whom 1 thought not 
worthy of the dogs of my flocks, who lived beneath 
the nettles.’’ 4 

“So these companions of actors and Jews are 
entrusted by our clever friends with the secrets® of 
the priesthood, as if they were friends ® of the Saviour, 
and in consequence the orthodox laity avoid the 
houses of prayer. For this new and most con- 
temptible form of audacity has actually spread from 
the Church of Ephesus as far as to us; and it is not 
to be wondered at, as Ephesus stands upon the sea, 
and exports its news as easily as its cargoes. For 
in the place of “—no, [ will say, in the place of John, 
the author of the gospel, the loyal disciple who leaned 
upon the bosom of wisdom, called in Scripture the 
disciple whom Jesus loved; who was succeeded by 
Timothy, the disciple of Paul, to whom are addressed 


1 Jer. xix. 3, “ both” is in one MS. of LXX, but ke 
probably crept in from 1 Sam. iii. 11. 

Ὁ, hom. 1 21 Ppb viv. 18: 

2 x Cor. xv. 8. 

SOD xe τ ἢ 

5 Chrysostom (Hom. in 2 Cor. xvili) speaks of “‘ ordination, 
which the initiated know; for all may not be revealed to the 
uninitiated.”? So (Hom. in 1 Cor. xl.) he will not speak of 
baptism, because of the presence of uninitiated persons. 

©. Jon Ky. Ta (p92): 

7 He was going to say “of Heracleides.” ‘“‘I am like- 
named (homonymus) but not same-named (synonymus) 
with the Apostle’? (Hom. in Acts lii.). The Apostle John 
was regarded as the first Bishop of Ephesus. 


52] A VILE PERSON ENTHRONED 131 


the two epistles of the apostle—there succeeds an 
abomination of desolation.t For they consecrated 
and enthroned the eunuch? Victor the tribune, 
and cast into prison, where he is still languishing, the 
bishop enthroned by seventy bishops; a man who 
had lived a solitary life in the desert, trained in every 
branch of learning,? possessed of a profound know- 
ledge of Holy Scripture, and with three years of 
service as deacon to his record. Would that the 
eunuch whoa was consecrated had been trained by a 
holy life, for then the evil would have been halved; 
but as it is, we have a worm of earth, a slave of the 
belly, lustful, fierce, drunken, profligate, venal, 
illiberal, covetous, a jail-bird* from his birth, a 
sexless creature, neither man nor woman, raging mad ; 
a man who (so I have often been told) carried theatre 
girls upon his shoulders at drinking parties fit for 
satyrs, his head garlanded with ivy, and a bowl 
clasped in his hand, playing the role of Dionysus ὃ 
in the fable, as master of libations. All this he did, 
not before his initiation into the mysteries of Christ, 
but after his baptism;® from which it is a plain 
inference, that he does not even believe in the resur- 
rection. For how can a man believe in the resurrec- 
tion, who has made rotten the foundation’? of the 
resurrection? As the apostle says, ‘“‘ How shall they 
preach, unless they believe?’’ 8 He is moral, thanks 
to the knife, as to deeds which bring no reward; but 


τ ἐκ RAV. 15: 

2 The first canon of Nicza forbids ordination to an eunuch; 
it was earlier urged that Origen’s ordination was void, owing 
to his self-mutilation in his youthful enthusiasm to be above 
reproach as a teacher of both sexes. Page 174 suggests that 
he bore the name Eunuchus, and that the language here used 
is an expensive play upon words. Victor perhaps nominated 
him, as Eutropius nominated Chrysostom. 

fhe ei i 0d χχὶ 1. 

* A word of Palladius’ own coinage, lit. ‘‘ condemned to 
be put in irons.” 

5 The Greek god of the vine. 

6 “ Tllumination.” 

7 2. δ᾽ his bedy. Pe Gis me 1. 


132 ΡΟΕΡΗΥΕΙ 9. [53 


he is mad upon unfruitful works,! from his natural 
depravity. 

Now I have answered your inquiry as to events in 
Asia, which arose from the statement in Theophilus’ 
letter that John had deposed sixteen bishops. You 
may be quite sure that the number is six. We 
have the records preserved, with the signatures of 
the twenty-two bishops who heard the case from the 
beginning, and the seventy who effected the deposition, 
and brought the trial to a conclusion, 


CHAP TER vi 
PORPHYRIUS 


The Deacon's Inquiry 


Deac. Pardon me, father; such deeds overpass ? 
drunkenness, and madness, and youthful folly. 
Madmen, drunkards, and young men, when they are 
sober again, or have digested their food, or when 
they have come to years of discretion, as the case 
may be, are ashamed of their disgraceful or disorderly 
doings or sayings, and renounce them; these people, 
after all they have done in mature age and apparently 
in a sober frame of mind, so far from repenting of 
their deeds, hope and pray that their wickedness may 
be permanent and undisturbed. When men have 
not shrunk from placing the gospel on a polluted 
head,? upon which coarse women have danced; 


Eph: v.18. 

ni te om, de 28. OP, DE 

3 The earliest account of the ordination of a bishop (Const. 
A post., viii. 4, 5) directs that the presiding bishop is to question 
the priests and laity as to the worthiness of the candidate 
thrice; then, “silence having been made, one of the first 
bishops, standing with two others near the altar, the rest 
silently praying, and the deacons holding the gospels open 


53] PORPHYRIUS’ CAREER 133 


with whom are they fit to be ranked, but with those 
who put the crown of thorns about the head of the 
Son of God? However, if you have personal know- 
ledge of the circumstances of the consecration! of 
Porphyrius to the bishopric of Antioch, or of those 
who performed the act of consecration, or of the 
previous life of the man, whether it was distinguished 
or not, and of his teaching, whether it be true or 
false, tell us what you know; especially as he has 
sent a letter to the Church of Rome, and was not 
considered worthy of an answer. 


A Protestation of Veracity 


Bish. My words shall again be the words of truth, 
for I will not forget the voice of the Master, which 
says, “‘ For every idle word shall men give account in 
the day of judgment.’ 2 Let me venture to add a 
clause; and say, “ For every idle hearing.’’? Do you 
then guard yourself; if you find me not speaking the 
truth, do not let my grey hair weigh with you, but 
only the veracity of my statements. For what profit 
shall I have from what I have said to-day, or yester- 
day, if I have told lies, when I am put to shame for 
ever before the unerting judgment throne? And 
how shall I bear the mill-stone * of slander cast about 
the neck of my mind, when I am cast down into the 
pit of hell for the souls who have been caused to offend 
by my les? 

Porphyrius’ Career 

Well, this Porphyrius * had long been in the Church, 
on the head of him who is being ordained, shall address God.”’ 
A ninth-century MS. directs that ‘‘ After the Kyrie Eleison, 
the archbishop lays the gospel upon his head and neck, while 
other bishops stand by and touch it, and laying his hand 
upon him, prays thus .. .” 

1 Here the word is not “stretching forth of hands,’ as 
usual in this treatise, but ‘‘ catastasis”’ (p. 42, N.). 

2 Matt. xii. 36, freely quoted. 

3 Matt. xviii. 6. 

4 Socrates and Sozomen say no more of this man than that 
Flavianus, his predecessor, had dissented from the deposition 





134 PORPHYRIUS [53 


and held office both as deacon and as priest in the 
presbytery ; but his character was quite out of keeping 
with his long tenure of office, and he was never of the 
slightest spiritual benefit to the Church. He was 
always in opposition to the devout bishops in his 
neighbourhood, and used his position as bishop of 
the most important city, with the magistrates under 
his jurisdiction, to make ordination a matter of barter ; 
he exerted his ingenuity to prevent seemly ordinations, 
and by his uncanny abilities wormed himself into 
friendship with the bishops in office for the moment, 
as one may call them, even dragging them down with 
him against their will, to hold ordinations blasted by 
the wind.t Flattery, coupled with an evil disposition, 
is a terrible thing; as the comic poet Menander says, 
“Tt is hard, Pamphile, for an honest woman to fight 
with an harlot.” 3 


Porphynus’ Character 

The more such a man knows the more harm he does. 
He is ashamed of no one, but the worse a man 1s, 
the more he flatters him. As the wise Solomon says, 
“The words of flatterers are soft ; they smite upon the 
‘innermost chambers of the belly.’’® He is as much a 
stranger, or rather an enemy, to self-control in the 
pleasures of the flesh, as the vulture is to scent; in- 
deed, common report credits him with the unnatural 
wickedness of Sodom. Nature imposes upon our 
pleasures laws, and limits, and barriers; if what they 
say is true, he has trodden down the barrier, burst 





of Chrysostom, while he approved of it. A schism arose in 
the Church of Syria between the supporters and the opponents 
of Chrysostom, and a law was passed through Arsacius’ 
instrumentality, that all who would not communicate with 
Porphyrius were to be expelled (p.g1). Hence his connection 
with our narrative, and the great space devoted to him in it. 

1 4. e. “ Of short endurance ”’ (the word in Gen. xli. 23, St. 
Jude 12); so used by Pall., L. H., xlvii. 11. Cf. p. 189. 

2 Fragment 36. Cf. p. 135. Palladius quotes three popular 
proverbs in his L. H. 

3 Prov. xxvi. 22, LAX. 


34] CONSTANTIUS DESIRED AS BISHOP 135. 


the limit, and made despite of the law, until he has 
produced the impression that he takes the chair and 
joins in the convivial gatherings of jugglers, and 
jockeys, and actors who represent incidents of ancient 
times with improper posturings and distortions of the 
leg.1 He had the hardihood to enter into contests 
of skill with jugglers, and have friendly intercourse 
with them; indeed, charges of so doing are entered 
in the records of several of the magistrates. He has 
not read the gnomic poet’s words, ““ What thou ought- 
est not to do, do not even think.’ [Thanks to him 
the Mediator was slain with blows,? and “‘ he who found 
was exiled, and the juggler was put to flight.’’ | * 

They say that besides all this wickedness, he was 
guilty, after his ordination, of melting down (Church) 
plate, and lavishing the proceeds upon the magistrates, 
to produce the appearance of having the authority, 
not of a spiritual guide, but of a tyrant, over those 
who unhappily fell into his power.* 


Constantius desired as Bishop 


_ Now the death of Flavianus, Bishop of Antioch, 
coincided with the exile of John to Armenia. Por- 
phyrius observed that the whole population, men and 
women alike, hung upon the neck of Constantius the 
priest, longing to have him (as bishop). He had been 
the servant of the Church from his earliest childhood ; 
an ambidextrous man, to use a term from the book of 
Judges.? What is generally considered the left hand, 
was in him stronger than the right of other men. He 
had first rendered service by writing letters,6 and been 
found blameless in regard to unrighteous gain and 
bribes; next he had been promoted to be reader and 


1 Men played the part of women upon the stage. The Hom. 
in Thess. v. mentions these same points; the moral tone of 
the stage was extremely low. 

Cr seb. νὴ 6: 

5.“ These words are found in the manuscript, but omitted 
by the editor as alien from the context ”’ (Bigot). 

* Theodoret says he left many memorials of his loving 
character. 5 Judges iii. 15. ® As secretary of the synod. 

L 


136 PORPHYRIUS [54 


deacon, and without an effort had mastered the sexual 
delights which reign among men. As the author of 
Proverbs says, “‘ The hand of the elect shall easily 
prevail.” ? For possibly even the vilest of men can 
master pleasure; either through fear of consequences, 
or from shame, they may by great exertion restrain 
their bodily impulses. But it is only those that love 
God, who through love of the higher can rise superior 
to the lower—those whom the scripture calls “ elect,”’ 
in the text, “ The hand of the elect shall easily pre- 
vail.” If ever a man was gentle, it was he; or if 
ever a man was self-disciplined, penetrating of vision, 
sharp of comprehension, slow to punish, thoughtful, 
able to draw inferences by reflection, merciful, 
generous, just in judgment, long-suffering under in- 
sults, of ability to win men, oft continuing fasting 
until evening, so as to relieve the oppressed, of digni- 
fied appearance, stern of look, swift of step, celibate, 
as a bishop should be, ever wearing upon his face, 
even in sickness, the blossom of a smile. 


Porphynius’ Private Ordination as Bishop 


Such a man it was whose banishment Porphyrius 
set himself to bring about by means of bribery; and 
his method was this. He sent to the capital a message 
addressed to the officials in authority over the bishops, 
and procured his exile to Oasis by royal edict, as a 
seditious agitator. Constantius, however, at once 
heard of this, and with the help of his friends escaped 
to Cyprus. But Porphyrius himself had Cyriacus 
and Diophantus, priests, and other clergy, put under 
arrest; and then, keeping by his side in hiding the 
party of Acacius, Severianus, and Antiochus, he 
waited for the occasion when the whole city went 
abroad to the suburbs on one of the great pagan festi- 
vals, observed every four years in honour of the labours 
of Hercules, called Olympia, upon which flocks of 

women stream out with the crowds to Daphne,? to 


+ Prov x, 24; ΧΟ 
2 A public park in the suburbs of Antioch. 


55] PORPHYRIUS’ ACTS OF VIOLENCE 137 


see the sports. Bursting into the church, with the 
bishops [ mentioned, and a few clergy, he was privately 
ordained, with closed doors, and in such haste, through 
fear of discov ery, that they did not give themselves 
time to finish the prayer. Such is adultery, its off- 
spring and its deeds ever bastard. 


Porphyrius’ Acts of Violence 


Severianus and his friends took their bribe-money, 
and fled through mountains and pathless wastes; 
they escaped the terror of man, but were pierced 
through by the terror of God, which they had ignored. 
Now when the public theatre emptied, and the crowds 
re-entered the city, they were told what had been 
done to Porphyrius, and of the drama that Acacius 
had played. That evening the people forbore, like 
men flogged for adultery; but next day they rose, and 
poured through the streets in a great throng, with 
fire and faggots, determined to destroy Porphyrius 
with his house. Porphyrius, however, quite aware of 
the hatred in which he was held, deserted God, and 
fled to the officer in command of the camp,! put money 
in his hands; and so diverting him from the war with 
the Isaurians, opened a campaign against the disciples 
of the Saviour. So the marauding Isaurian savages 
ravaged Rhosus ? and Seleucia, while Porphyrius and 
Valentinus the governor pillaged the Church of the 
orthodox with an armed force; trampling with their 
own feet upon the most awful sign of the Cross, which 
they (the orthodox) bore upon their shoulders 3 to be 
their teacher, while they offered litanies* upon the 
desolated land. 


1 The word in Acts xxvili. 16, where it means “ princeps 
peregrinorum,”’ in charge of the receiving depot for soldiers 
passing from and to the armies abroad. 

2 Cape Amanus, on the gulf of Issus. 

3 So Augustine and his forty companions came to Canter- 
bury ‘‘ bearing a silver cross for their banner, and the image 
of Our Lord painted ona board; and, singing the litany, they 
offered up prayers to the Lord ”’ (Bede, Eccl. Hist., 1. 25). 

"ΟΡ 26: 


138 ᾿ς PORPHYRIUS | et LG 


The Indignation of the People 


A few days, afterwards, Porphyrius sent to the 
capital in great haste, and urged upon the magistrates, 
who were such men as himself, that a certain creature 
of their own, old but active, and of an evil disposition 
and a twisted mind, should be appointed! night- 
prefect, that he might so make himself master of the 
city by bringing false charges against the good citizens 
without fear of consequences. It was a fine imitation 
of the ways of Nero the fighter against God. It is 
not in him to win men by reason, but to vex them with 
unreason and cruelty; since he does not make it 
his aim to please God by leading to Him wandering 
souls, but to fill his serpent-like belly * that crawls 
upon its chest. So a certain number of the laity, in 
fear of rough treatment, unwillingly assembled in the 
church, for the sake of appearances, but in reality, 
they vituperated the lives of the men, and awaited 
succour from God. 


Cruelty Preferred to Flattery 


At this point Theodorus said, in amazement— 

Deac. I note something contrary to natural order 
in these events, father. Asa general rule, vainglorious 
persons are men-pleasers, and prove to be flatterers, 
and provide sumptuous tables, to get themselves 
liked and well spoken of. Often they will even let 

eople spit upon them. So I cannot see how Por- 
phyrius, or any one else, can have practised methods 
of threats, and punishment, and banishment. 

Bish. Yes, this is the extraordinary thing, Theo- 
dorus, that they reached such a pitch of wickedness, 
that so far from being anxious to please men, they did 
not even give a thought to the disgraceful character 
of their doings; for wickedness outdoes wickedness 
in wickedness. Wickedness casts the net of vain- 
glory, when it hopes to catch simple folks by means of 

1 The word for “ ordained ”’ in the Church; cf. p. 59. 


2 Or, “ the belly of the serpent (Satan) that crawls upon his 
chest.’ The Greek is irregular. 


55] OLYMPIAS AND THEOPHILUS 139 


flattery; but when the quarry proves to be superior 
to flattery and the pleasures of the table, it brings 
up threats and torments, to terrify by cruelty and 
fear those whom it could not seduce by the pleasures 
of the table or by flattery. We have seen this in the 
case of the martyrs. Both methods were employed 
against them; the snare constructed of bribes and 
honours, which caught those who had their mouths 
open for worthless reputation, and also the threat of 
punishment, which provided the roasting iron, the 
rack, and the wild beasts, and every kind of horrible 
torture, and revealed the courageous and the lovers 
of God.! But to return to my story. The leading 
clergy of Antioch met in secret, without even going 
near the walls of the church, and all the leading 
women, for whose sake more particularly the covetous 
prelates have gone out of their wits. I need not tell 
you what happened in Constantinople, or what num- 
bers of people, as I told you before, left the church, 
and gathered in the open air, so that not even our 
rulers in ecclesiastical affairs had so many auditors—of 
their silence, for they never tried to speak. 


Olympias and Theophilus 

Deac. You have relieved the doubts which were 
in my mind, father, by your presentation of the facts 
to my eyes. The consistency of your narrative, and 
your ingenuous explanation, convinces me that these 
events really happened; for a fictitious narrative 
cannot be consistent with itself. If it will not burden 
you, please tell us about Olympias, if you know any- 
thing of her. 

Bish. Which Olympias? There are several ladies 
of that name. 

Deac. The deaconess of Constantinople, who was 
the wife of Nevridius the ex-prefect.? 

1 A very ungrammatical sentence. 
_ ® Pall., L. H., lvi., tells us that she was daughter of Seleucus 
the ex-count, grand-daughter of Ablavius the ex-prefect, 


and that she gave her silk dresses to the altars (ch. 1xi.). 
See pp. 86, 151. 


140 PORPHYRIUS [56 


Bish. I know her very well. 

Deac. What sort of a woman is she? 

Bish. Do not say woman, but manly creature; ἢ 
she is a man in everything but body. 

Deac. How so? 

Bish. In life, and in work, and in knowledge, and 
in her patience under afflictions. 

Deac. Why then did Theophilus revile her ? 

Bish. Which Theophilus ? 

Deac. The Bishop of Alexandria. 

Bish. You appear to me, Theodorus, to have 
buried in oblivion oceans of words. 

Deac. How so? 

Bish. The man who did not spare the truth, but 
trod it underfoot, as my narrative has established, 
and did not respect the Church universal, for 
whose sake the Only-begotten, as we proclaim, was 
done to death, that He might make it one, but dis- 
graced it by his behaviour—has he it in him to spare 
a widow woman, who spends her life in prayer? Look 
all round, and see if he ever reviled a bad man; he 
always has hated devoutness. Why do you not gather 
from his very letters, how contrary they are one to 
another? He vituperated Epiphanius, the blessed 
Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus, who for thirty-six 
years ruled the Church there, as a heretic, or a paltry 
schismatic, in the time of Damasus or of the blessed 
Sericius ; 2 but afterwards, in his letter to Pope Inno- 
cent, in which he reviled the blessed John, we find 
him calling Epiphanius a most holy saint. How often 
do you suppose te kissed Olympias’ knees, when he 

1 “ Anthropos,” “a human being ”’; below, p. 151, with the 
feminine article. Pall., L. H.,ix., ἐς Melania, the anthropos of 
God,”’ uses the same most unusual expression; "aner 1s 
generally used for a man, as opposed to a woman. “ This 
book . . . contains memoirs of women, who with masculine 


and perfect mind have accomplished the struggles of virtuous 
asceticism ”’ (Ibid. Intro.). 

2 Damasus, Fey of Rome, 367-384; Sericius, 385-398. 
The particle τ᾿ seems here, and elsewhere in the treatise, 
equivalent ἬΝ “and.” For Theophilus’ relations with 
Epiphanius, see p. 63. 


56] OLYMPIAS’ RECEPTION OF MONKS 141 


hoped to get money from her, the woman whom he 
now reviles; while she threw herself upon the ground 
in vexation, and shed tears at such things being done 
by a bishop. However, what were the grounds on 
which he reviled her? 


Olympias’ Reception of the Monks 


Deac. He said that she had received into her house 
the monks whom he had expelled. 

Bish. Well, is it right or fitting for a bishop to 
expel any disciple whatever; to say nothing of a 
monk ? 

Deac. Yes, if they have offended him, or slandered 
him. 

Bish. Even if they did, ought he to have satisfied 
his personal indignation? How then shall Theophilus 
look for the insults which Christ endured, when he is 
always thinking of his own reputation? Why did 
he never imitate the teacher who said, “ Being reviled, 
we bless” ὁ] 

Deac. Then what was he to do, if the monks were 
unorthodox ° 

Bish. Whatever they were, he ought to have 
corrected them and convinced them, not to have 
expelled them. 

Deac. But what if he did this, and they were so 
contentious, that they refused to be convinced ? 

Bish. He ought to have carried out the apostle’s 
precept, “‘ The man that is an heretic after one or two 
admonitions refuse, knowing that such an one is 
perverted.” 7 He does not say, expel him, and rob 
him, and drive him from his native land, under threat 
of magistrate’ s sentence. 

Deac. You tell me of rules for a perfect man, a 
lover of God, enduring of evil. 

Bish. And yet it is not a matter for great praise, 
to bear with an inferior. But if a man is not perfect, 
so far as is possible, how can he be a bishop? The 
imperfect will never have consideration for the 

1. 17 COL te. 7 Vitus 11 τὸ] 


142 PORPHYRIUS [57 


imperfect. And how can he be called Theophilus, 
if he does not love God, for Whose sake he ought 
readily to have borne the insults of men? And if 
he does not love God, clearly he does not love himself 
either; and how shall he who is his own enemy love 
others? So it is not at all strange, that he blamed 
Olympias for receiving the monks. 

Deac. 1 admit that Theophilus was carried away 
by his temper when he expelled them, whether they 
were orthodox or heretical; still, the deaconess ought 
not to have received them. 


The Rightfulness of Olympias’ Action 

Bish. Well, what did you think of it? That she 
did right or wrong? 

Deac. Isaid, that she did wrong. 

Bish. And doing good is sometimes judged ? 

Deac. Most certainly, when good is done to bad * 
people, and people who ought not to be treated well. 

Bish. Then what were the five thousand, whom the 
Saviour fed with five barley loaves—good or bad ? 

Deac. As they were fed by the Saviour, clearly they 
were good. 

Bish. Τί they were good, why did He feed them 
with loaves of barley ἡ 

Deac. Perhaps because wheaten loaves were 
scarce, and they were hungry. 

Bish. Then how is it that they are reproved for 
want of faith; as good, or as bad men? 

Deac. If they are reproved, clearly they were bad. 

Bish. Well, can the same man be both good and 
bad? 

Deac. Certainly. 

Bish. How? 

Deac. They can be good in comparison with the 
worse, and bad in comparison with the better. 

Bish. Splendid. According to this, the monks 
were both good and bad. And the most faithful 

1 The name “‘ Theophilus’’ means “lover of God.” Cf. 
Ρ. 149. 


57] 6ΌῸοΘθὔΟΙΥΜΡΙΑΒ JUSTIFIED 143 


deaconess provided hospitality for them, as good men, 
but our wonderful bishop expelled them, as bad. He 
ought not to have done so. 

Deac. But he will say to you, “‘ You received my 
enemies, to my hurt.” | 

Bish. 1 object. It was wrong for him to call them 
enemies at all. As an imitator of Christ he ought to 
endure insults. 

Deac. One moment; where are the five thousand 
reproved, as you said they were, by the Saviour? 
There is no record of reproof of them in scripture. 

Bish. When they assembled and came to Jesus the 
second time, and were told, “‘ Ye seek me, not because 
ye saw signs and wonders, but because ye did eat of 
the loaves, and were filled.’ 1 

That is very clear, said Theodorus. 

Bish. Ifa man is blamed, he is so far bad. 

Deac. Very true. 

Bish. Then were those whom the Saviour fed bad, 
or good ? 

Deac. J admit that they were bad; for “ they that 
are whole have no need of a physician, but they that 
abe sick, 55 

Bish. Well then; did Olympias do wrong in 
imitating her Lord, who “ maketh his own sun to 
rise, and sendeth rain, upon righteous and un- 
righteous”??? Even though the Pharisees reproach 
Him, and say to the disciples, ““ Your master eateth 
and drinketh with publicans and sinners.” 4 

Deac. It appears that, contrary to the general 
instincts of mankind, noble actions are being con- 
demned, and disgraceful actions approved. 

Bish. What makes you say that, Theodorus, most 
truth-loving of men? 

Deac. Imean that, if you had not made the matter 

1 John vi. 26, ‘‘and wonders ”’ occurs in one MS. 

ΗΘ Vv. 11: 3 Matt. v. 45, freely quoted. 

4 Matt. ix. 11; Mark ii. 16. The same combination and 
order of words, and the addition of “reproach,” are found 
in Pall., L. H., Intro. 11; a strong indication of common 
authorship. 


144 PORPHYRIUS [58 


clear to me, by your logical explanation, I should 
have been led astray to hold the same senseless 
opinion as other people; the babblings of Theophilus 
caught my attention more than the ideal of truth. 

Bish. Then conversely, if these holy men are 
proved not only to be not bad men, but men who have 
turned many from vice to virtue, clearly their perse- 
cutor deserves not to be persecuted in his turn, but 
to be pitied,! as one who is always oppressing the good, 
and receiving? the bad. 

Deac. Just so. Even if they cannot be proved 
to be wise and holy men, as most people say they are ; 
by the lines of reasoning we have been following, 
Olympias must be freed from blame, as she put into 
practice the imitation of the Saviour. 

_ Bish. And which testimony to the value of actions 
do you regard as strongest; that of the gospels, or 
that of Theophilus ? 

Deac. Hush, I beg you; I admit that he expelled 
the men through ill temper and love of domination, 
and that he reviled Olympias through superstition * 
and enmity, making the monks his excuse. The fact 
is, that when he found his servile flatteries fail in 
getting anything out of her beyond food and hospi- 
tality, he turned and reviled her; this is his way with 
every one. 


1 ““Weep with me, not for yourselves, but for those who 
rob you, who are more unfortunate than you” (Hom. in τ 
Tim. xii.). Plato (Gorg.lxv.) says that to do wrong is a greater, 
to suffer wrong a smaller evil. 

a ACtS XV. 27, ΧΙ 17.) See pp. 140,105. 

8 The word in Acts xvil. 22, cf. p. 64. Eusebius (V. C. liii.) 
mentions “ superstitious persons’? who built an altar at the 
Oak of Mamre. “ A false view of religion ’’ seems to be meant; 
“an unsuitable term ὁ (Savile). 


58] HIERAX AND AMMONIUS 145 


CHAPTER XV 
THE VIRTUES OF THE MONKS, AND OF OLYMPIAS 


Hierax and Ammonius 


Bish. Listen, then, best of deacons. [You are worth 
the trouble], for I see that you will do much good in the 
world; your youthful zeal is a pledge of an honourable 
old age. 

These men from their earliest childhood, brought 
up by Christian parents, submitted themselves to 
God, and when quite young refused to be the slaves 
of vanity, and to associate with the multitude, but 
found a desolate spot far out of the world, in the south, 
where they set up huts, to shield them from the fierce 
heat of the sun, and the dew from the air. Here they 
lived, spending their time in prayer and reading, 
producing by manual labour enough fruit of their 
toil to provide for their frugal nourishment ; thinking 
it better to herd with deer and sparrows and buffaloes, 
than to feast with people who knew not God. The 
eldest of them, who was called Hierax,? and is still 
generally known by that name, once an associate of 
the blessed Antonius,® had attained the age of ninety 
years, or thereabouts; another was Ammonius, sixty 
years old, and there were besides two anchorite 
brethren, and one bishop, who were put in pillory 
and banished under Valens, as all Alexandria knows. 
Such masters of learning were they, that not a single 

Oh Ba oe we 

2 Palladius (L. H., xxii.) heard one of his tales from ὁ the 
holy Hierax;”’ so below (p. 148), 45 he told us himself ’’—a 
frequent formula in the History. 

3 St. Antony, who about 305 retired to the Nile, later to 
the shore of the Red Sea, and was joined by many desiring 
the ascetic life. These he organized under rule, and is there- 
fore regarded as ‘“‘ the father of monasticism.’ He died in 


365, at the age of one hundred and five. The Lausiac 
History often refers to him with similar admiration. 


146 THE VIRTUES OF THE MONKS [58 


point of difficulty which men generally find in the 
scriptures escaped them. Two of them fell asleep, 
ending their days in Constantinople; Ammonius, 
as Aurelius and Sisinnius? related, had prophesied 
of his decease, that there would first be a great perse- 
cution and schism among the Churches, but that the 
originators of it would come to a most disgraceful 
end, and that so the Churches should be made one. 
This shall come to pass, as it has already come to 
pass in part. 


The Divine Punishment of the Perseculors 


For presently certain of the bishops, and of the lay 
people as well, were attacked by disease, which rent 
them with sufferings of various kinds, burning their 
vitals with slow fever, and setting up such intolerable 
itchings, that they excoriated with their nails the whole 
surface of their bodies, and by continual intestinal 
pains. One man had livid dropsical swellings in the 
feet ; another found the fingers which had written the 
unrighteous signature * shaking with discharges, now 
hot, now cold, which ran from his four limbs. The 
abdomen was inflamed, and putrefaction in one mem- 
ber exhaled a far-reaching stench, and bred worms. 
Other symptoms were asthma, and difficulty of breath- 
ing, and tensions of all the limbs; nightmares of 
ravening dogs changing to savages brandishing swords 
and yelling in strange tongues like the roaring of the 
sea, made their sleep to be no sleep. One had his right 
leg broken like a cabbage stalk, by a fall from his horse, 
and died immediately from the shock; another 
entirely lost the use of his voice, and for eight months 
suffered torments* upon his bed, unable to lift his 


1 Novatianist (7.e. Puritan), Bishop of Constantinople, a 
man greatly commended by Sozomen for his learning, his life, 
his character, and his humour. 

2 To Chrysostom’s sentence of condemnation. 

3 Lit. ‘‘ was pickled.’”’ So Chrysostom of the Thessalonians 
(Hom.i. in 2 Thess.; Hom. in Rom. xxi.), and often in the 
Fathers, of martyrs; Pall., L. H., xxxviii. 


58] MORE OF THE MONKS 147 


hand to his mouth, Another’s legs were almost eaten 
away as far as the knees, apparently by aggravated 
erysipelas; the tongue of another swelled so terribly, 
they say, with raging fever, that it pressed against 
his teeth, and blocked the [main channel of] the body. 
As there was no room for his tongue in the space 
naturally appointed for it, he wrote a confession of 
his sins upon a tablet. 

One could see the divine wrath carrying out its 
punitive operations by various forms of vengeance. 
For as they had provoked the Physician who brings 
relief to souls, and had driven His mouth-piece 3 from 
the workshop of salvation, they were delivered over 
for torture to physicians of the body, who adminis- 
tered pains by the drugs usually prescribed as remedies, 
and wrought no salvation. For who shall heal him 
who is being punished by God? As the prophet says, 
“Shall physicians rise, and praise thee?’’? Thus 
perished all who work against the peace of Thy 
Church. Ὁ Lord. 


More of the Monks 


On the other hand, it is said that the tomb of the 
monk Ammonius expels the shivering fever;* he 
was buried in the shrine of the apostles, beyond the 
sea. Bishop Dioscorus, they say, had made it his 
special petition, that he might see either the peace 
of the Church, or his own death; as the world was 


1 Socrates tells of Cyrinus, Bishop of Chalcedon, who died 
after repeated operations as the result of another bishop 
accidentally treading on his foot; of a terrible storm in 
Constantinople; and of the death of Eudoxia four days later. 
All these events were popularly attributed to the Divine wrath 
at Chrysostom’s expulsion. ‘‘ But whether this be so or not, 
God knoweth.”’ 

2 “ Hypophet,” like ‘“‘ prophet’; used from Homer down- 
wards of one who utters an oracle. Eusebius uses it so in 
TIGR SRO A: 

8 θὲ Ἰχχχν tt, LAs 

4 The same statement in regard to Ammonius is made by 
Palladius (L. H., xi.). The style of writing here, where the 
author is dealing with the same subject of monks, is noticeably 
like that of the History. 


m8 THE-VIRTUES OF THE MONKS [59 


not worthy of peace, he was granted death, and was 
buried in the martyr’s shrine facing the gate of the 
city,’ with the result that most of the women gave up 
taking oaths by the martyr, and now swear by the 
prayers of Dioscorus. As for the rest of the anchorites, 
the telling of the tale would take many words; and 
perhaps you cannot spare the time, famous sir. 

Deac. Nay, who is so sorely pressed, that he must 
refuse a hearing to tales of heroism? Speak, I pray 
you, and by every fair word at your command draw 
away my mind from earthly thoughts. | 

Bish. Well, there is another Hierax; though he 
bears a Greek name, his life is adorned by the beauty 
of his character. On first embracing the life of solitary 
retirement, he withdrew to Mount Porphyrites,? quite 
outside the boundaries of Egypt and Thebais, free 
from the breath of men; where he lived for four years 
of strict devotion, finding the virtues of the life 
themselves sufficient for his comfort. Then he spent 
twenty-five years in Nitria, with the fathers I have 
mentioned. He was assailed by demons, as he told 
us himself, who were transformed into angels of light, 
and tried to shake him from the hope set before him, 
by promising him a long life. “ You have fifty years 
to live,” they said; “ how shall you endure, here in 
the desert ?’’ But he with the intelligence of faith 
replied, ‘“ You distress me when you tell me of a period 
shorter than my purpose; I had prepared myself 
for two hundred years in the desert.’’ Hearing this 
they vanished howling. Such was the man, whom 
demons could not shake by the invention of a vast 
space of time to bring him to accidie,? whom Pope 


1“ At The Oak, where the synod was held” (Socrates). 
The martyr was Mocius (Sozomen). 

2 On the shore of the Red Sea, “‘ seven days’ journey from 
human habitations ’’ (Cassian). 

3 Cf. ‘‘ How do you endure, struggling with accidie ? ’—to 
a recluse, after ten years spent in a tomb (Pall., L. H., v.; cf. 
xxi. 1,etc.). See Paget, The Spirit of Discipline. The patristic 
writings make continual reference to such “ spiritual weari- 
ness,”’ the natural temptation of men living a life of contempla- 


60] MORE OF THE MONKS 149 


Theophilus drove from his home by an edict, and 
brought to such distress, that he made his way to the 
capital; a man who now has again, since the falling 
asleep of Ammonius, returned to the sheer desert, in 
fearful remembrance of the parable of the plough.? 

Another, a priest called Isaac, a disciple of Macarius 3 
the disciple of Antonius, a man who loved the desert 
to a fault, fifty years of age, who had the whole 
scripture by heart, and took up horned snakes in his 
hands unharmed, a virgin from his mother’s womb, 
who at seven years of age had taken to the desert, 
_ after forty years was sifted out ? by Pope Theophilus, 
with the aforesaid monks. 

Another priest Isaac, also the disciple of a disciple 
of Antonius, the priest Cronius,* whom he succeeded, 
extraordinarily learned, like the first Isaac, in the 
scriptures, hospitable if ever man was—so much so, 
that in his extraordinary love of his fellow-men, he 
established a hostel in the sheer desert for the refresh- 
ment of sick monks, and of strangers who visited the 
district to see the blessed fathers—a stranger, they say, 
to anger, who had lived for thirty years in retirement, 
was cruelly treated along with the others. The 
first of these Isaacs had a hundred and fifty ascetics 
under him; Theophilus, while he was really a Theo- 
philus,? appointed disciples of his, to the number of 
seven or eight, as bishops. The other had two hun- 
dred and ten, and many of his disciples, too, are on the 
roll of bishops. 

These are the men of whom I told you two days 
ago;® how they were driven by Pope Theophilus 





tion, with no human interests to occupy their thoughts, and 
under the physical strain of asceticism. ‘‘ My soul melteth 
away for very heaviness” (Ps. cxix. 28)—in LXX, “ for 
accidic.;” 

‘Luke 1x: 62: Pall., L.A, xxxv. 9, quotes the passage ita 
similar context. 


SOL ran ὙΠῸ, Ve δ᾽ Luke xxi 11. 
+ Also spelt Chronius* “cf,.Pall.; CL. H., xxi., etc. 
ΟΕ p, 142. 


§ The dialogue is represented as spread over several days. 


150 THE VIRTUES OF THE MONKS [60 


from the desert, on account of Isidore the priest. 
Those are the men, whom priests and Levites passed 
by, and whom to the shame of men a manly woman 
received, and to the condemnation of bishops a 
deaconess hospitably entertained; a woman whose 
praise dwells in the Churches for many reasons. She 
followed .the example of the famous Samaritan, 
whoever he was, who found the man maltreated by the 
robbers half dead in the descent to Jericho, and set 
him on his own beast, and brought him to the inn, 
and mingled the oil of love for his fellow-men with the 
astringent wine, and so healed his swelling wounds. 


The Life of Olympias 

Now I must leave the monks, to speak οἵ her. 
What wealth of money or of goods she distributed to 
the needy it is not for me to say, but for those who 
benefited by her generosity ;! as I lived elsewhere, I 
had no need to be a burden to her. But listen while 
I tell of greater virtue yet. She was an orphan, and 
married; but she was not allowed by the foreknowing 
God, Who sees the issues of men’s lives before they 
come to pass, to be the slave of the pleasure οἱ the 
flesh which claims the obedience of all, even for twenty 
months; her husband being speedily called to pay the 
debt of nature. It is reported by common rumour 
that she is still a virgin; while she might have yielded 
to the apostolic rule, “‘ I will that the younger widows 
marry, keep the house,” 3 she could not bring herself 
to do so, although she had all the advantages of noble 
birth, and wealth, and an expensive education, as 
well as personal beauty and the grace of blossoming 
womanhood—but leapt free as a gazelle over the snare 
of second marriage. “‘ For the law is not laid down 
for a righteous man, but for lawless persons, profane,’ 4 
insatiate for destruction. 

Poy Al A Pac A πὶ: 2 Tbhid., x. 8. 

3 1 Tim. v. 14. Chrysostom offersa warning against second 


marriages, though he does not condemn them (de Virg. xxxvii.). 
* 1 Tim. i-.9° 


61] THE Pith OF OLYMYPTAS 151 


Now it happened that through some kind of satanic 
malice, her premature widowhood was reported to 
the ears of King Theodosius, who at once set him- 
self to marry her to a kinsman of his own, one Elpidius, 
a Spaniard. He again and again urged the brave 
creature ! to consent, but to his vexation she refused, 
declaring, “ΠῚ my King had desired me to live with a 
husband, he would not have taken away my first ; 3 
but as He knew me to be unsuitable to the conjugal 
life, since I am unable to please a husband, He at 
once set him free from the bond, and delivered me from 
the burdensome yoke, and from slavery to a husband, 
while He laid upon my mind His gentle yoke of contin- 
ence.’ At this reply, he ordered the prefect, that her 
property should be held under trust, until she reached 
_ her thirtieth year. The officer, instigated by Elpidius, 
carried out the king’s command by causing her all 
possible annoyance; she was not allowed to have any 
dealings even with the most eminent of the bishops, 
or to attend church, in the hope that in utter weariness 
she might be driven to prefer the proposed marriage. 
But she rejoiced all the more, and gave thanks to God, 
and made answer to the king: “‘ You have shown 
towards my humble self kindness worthy of a king, 
and suitable to a bishop, in commanding this very 
heavy burden, which caused me anxiety, to be put in 
trust for proper administration; you will do better 
yet, if you order it to be dispersed among the poor, 
and the Churches. Indeed, it has long been my 
prayer, to be delivered from the vainglory which might 
come from distributing it in charity, that I may not 
be so engrossed in material things as to lose the soul’s 
true wealth.’ Hearing on his return from the war 
with Maximus 3 of her enthusiasm for the disciplined 


1 © Anthropos,”’ cf. p. 140. 

2 Cf. Pall., L. H.,1xi., where Melania says to her husband, “ If 
God had wished us to have children, He would not have taken 
away my children untimely.” 

3 a.D. 388. Maximus was a rebel, who actually secured 
rule over Britain, Gaul, and Spain. 


M 


/ 


152. THE VIRTUES OF THE MONKS [6x 


life, the king ordered that she should have the control 
of her property. 

Deac. Then John had good reason to hold her in 
honour, if she was so strict in her self-discipline. 

Bish. Yes indeed; she abstains from flesh food, 
and seldom visits the baths; if her health requires it 
(she has chronic stomach troubles) she enters the 
water in her chemise, because, they say, modesty 
forbids her to look upon herself. 


Olympias’ Charities 

Deac. It is reported that she has entirely main- 
tained the blessed John. 

Bish. Even if she has, what kindness did she show 
to him that was worthy of his virtue? She certainly 
spared him anxiety for his daily barley bread; and 
this is no small thing for Christ’s workers, whose care, 
night and day, is for the things of Christ. As Paul 
says, in saluting Persis, who probably had _ toiled 
like Olympias; “Salute,’’ he writes, ‘‘ Persis the 
beloved, who laboured much in the Lord,” ! “ for all 
seek their own, and not the things of Christ.” ? I know 
that she did more to maintain the blessed Nectarius— 
so much so, that he took her advice even in ecclesiasti- 
cal affairs—and I need not mention Amphilochius, 
Optimus, Gregorius, Peter the brother of Basil, and 
Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus, those saints to whom 
she actually made gifts of lands and money. When 
Optimus was dying in Constantinople, she closed 
his eyes with her own hands. Besides these, she 
generously provided everything they required for the 
wretched Antiochus, Acacius, and Severianus; and 
to put it briefly, for every priest who visited the city, 
and a host of ascetics and virgins.® 

1 Rom. xvi. 12. 

2° Pay 1. 21. 

8.“ Seeing her bestowing her substance on all who asked for 
it, John said to her, “1 commend your purpose; but he who 
aims at the height of godly virtue must be a careful steward, 


while you, adding wealth to those who are wealthy, simply cast 
your goods into the seas Of your own free will you have 


61| CHRYSOSTOM’S ACCEPTANCE OF FOOD 1 53 


Chrysostom’s Sparing Acceptance 


However, as John had decided that he was sent to 
be a pattern, so to speak, to future bishops of the 
manner of life required of them, and therefore, that 
he should preach Christian repentance, as Paul says, 
at his own charge, without touching anything that 
belonged to the Church, he accepted meat for each 
day as it came, and avoided anxiety about such things. 
They say that he was like a man ashamed of himself,? 
when he partook of material food. When apples are 
fully ripe, they cannot endure to stay on the branch, 
but look for the hand of their master; so it is with the 
saints. When they rise above nature in their love 
for the beauty of heavenly things, they long, even be- 
fore the time appointed for their decease, to attain 
to the promise. We see the same thing in the children 
of great houses; when they know that honey-cakes 
are to follow, they often refuse to touch the food set 
before them, so as to save their appetites for the sweets 
with which they look forward to satisfying themselves. 
I leave my observations to the judgment of those 
who have set out upon the same track in the spiritual 
journey; for “if the wise man hear a prudent man, he 
will commend him, and add unto it.’ 3 








dedicated your substance to the needy, and as you have been 
appointed to manage your money, you will have to render your 
accounts. Therefore regulate your giving by the need of 
those who ask it.’ Soz. viii. 9; cf. p. 140. 

1 1 Cor. ix. 18; but in different words. 

2 “*T am ashamed when I partake of irrational food.’ 
Pall 1g. 

a Celis: xx1.-15- 


154 CHRYSOSTOM’S IDEALS [62 


CHAPTER ΧΟ 
CHRYSOSTOM’S IDEALS 


The Example of St. Paul 


Deac. You have eased my mind, honoured father, 
by your painstaking and complete explanation; your 
narrative is quite consistent with the rumours which 
had reached our ears, but gives them a new flavour 
of grace. Yet I must say, that the maintenance of 
the bishop would have been no burden to the Church, 
if the holy John had taken his share from the Church ; 
as the writer says, “For the labourer is worthy of his 
food,’”’ 1 and again, ‘“‘ Who feedeth a flock, and eateth 
not of the milk of the flock? Who planteth a vine- 
yard, and partakes not of its {γα} 2 Do we not 
find these words, and many others to the same effect, 
in scripture ? 

Bish. Appropriately and _ intelligently spoken, 
Theodorus; but add to the texts you have quoted 
the words that follow. True, the sacred law gives 
to those employed upon sacred things the right to eat 
of the sacrifice, but note what Paul, ever covetous of 
the good, adds: “1 did not use the power ”’ ὃ in things 
of the body, ‘‘ that I may be a partaker of the gospel’’ 4 
in things of the spirit. He would not be “astumbling- 
block to the weak”’ ; as he says, ‘‘ If any one see thee, 
who hast knowledge, sitting at meat’’ in weakness, 
‘“‘ will not his conscience, as he is weak, be edified’”’ ® 
into imitating thy weak doings? If the matter ended 
with us, and there were none coming after us to receive 
in their turn maintenance from the laity, it would be 
possible for an offender to say, Let us live as we will, 
and enjoy the good things of life. But as those who 
come after us treat us as teachers, and set our rule and 
our behaviour before their eyes, we are bound to live 


1 Vim. τ 18: Food tor. reward. ar Corie ἡ. 
SER OL. ΙΧ 172. ΠῚ ΟΕ tx 2. ΤΟ ΟΥ vill. ὁ. 


62] THE SENSE OF RESPONSIBILITY 155 


not only for ourselves, but for Him Who died and rose 
for us;+ to constrain the weakness of the laity, and to 
lead their ranks to a higher standard of temperance 
and simplicity, admonishing ourselves. As the writer 
says, ““ What man is he that feareth the Lord? He 
will lay down for him a law in the way that he hath 
chosen.” 2 


The Sense of Responsibility 


For the Master lays down the law for the self-willed 
and miserable people who sin in thoughtlessness, 
welcoming the spirit of bondage; as the psalmist 
David says, “‘ The Lord shall lay down a law for sinners 
in the way,” 3. but will punish transgressors. But the 
righteous man, breaking the bounds of the law of 
bondage, for his love of the Master, presses on to his 
rights of sonship by adoption, and becomes his own 
law-giver. Such was Job, both in deed and word— 
““T made a covenant with my eyes; I will not look 
upon a maid.’”’* Now what was this covenant? 
That they who rebel against temperance should have 
their eyes cut out.° In the same way David says, 
‘““T have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed, to keep 
thy righteous judgments;’’® where his will was 
hesitating and wavering, he bound it with an oath. 

John followed the example of these fathers, as no 
bastard, but a true son, and in his longing to make the 
way easy for the common herd of men, enervated 
through divers lusts, to a sounder standard of life, he 
made himself his own law-giver;? steeling himself 
by an unalterable decision, he withdrew himself 
from drinking parties and gatherings of triflers, jokers, 
and gossips, arming the eye of his soul with the panoply 
of the spirit, lest folly should find an entrance through 
revelry and improper talk, and make havoc of temper- 

* 2 ΟΥ 15: Φ MO. 8 2 12. 

3. Bi Fey o'4 baits 2 : JO XExt, 3. 

5 So Bigot, explaining by reference to Matt. v. 29. He 
suggests an emendation—‘“ that those who rebel should be 


guided into temperance.” 
©) PS.-Cxix,. 106, Ci Pall: J... ΣΣΕΙ ἢ. 


16 CHRYSOSTOM’S IDEALS [63 


ance. As the writer says, “ Evil communications 
corrupt good manners.” ἢ 


Chrysostom’s Action in Accordance with Scripture 


This is why plots were laid against him; for even 
when his light shone brightly, he was offensive to them, 
as a lamp is offensive to watering eyes. Such was 
his fellow-sufferer, Jeremiah, who lamented with tears 
the faithlessness of the rulers and the priests, crying, 
‘Who will give to my head water, and fountains of 
tears tomy eyes? And I will weep for my people day 
and night ;”’ and again, “ Who will give me a lodging- 
place, the furthest in the desert? And I will leave 
my people, and go from them, forall commit adultery.’’ 2 
He calls the assembly of the false prophets and priests 
a gathering of them that disannul the law.? So in 
another passage he appeals to God, not because God 
did not know, but because we have to follow his 
example: ‘‘ Lord, if I have sat in the assembly of 
them that make merry; but I lived in godly fear 
away from thy face; I sat alone, because I was filled 
with bitterness.’ * Similarly David sings, “1 have 
not sat with the assembly of vanity, and with the 
transgressors I will not enter ;’’ and he adds, to make 
his meaning clear, “1 have hated the congregation 
of the evil-doers, and with the ungodly I will not sit ; 
I will wash my hands’’—my active powers—“ in 
innocency, and will go round thine altar, O Lord.’’ ὃ 

But these men cared less than he for the altar, and 
_ turned their back upon it, not only in purpose,’ but 
in their manner of life; not content with defiling it 
with unwashed and blood-stained hands, with giving . 
and accepting bribes, and making false statements in 
writing, they trampled upon it with muddy feet. 
It is of them that Ezekiel speaks in figure: ‘‘ And 
he brought me to the door of the court, and I saw, 
and behold a hole in the wall. And he said unto me, 

oy τον Ἐν. 3, 2. eb ΣΟῚ ὦ. 


ΘΟ εἴ το Cl fer ΤΌ ΧΧ'. 
ΘΕ αν 17: 5 Ps. xxv. 4-6. 


63] CHRYSOSTOM’S CONDUCT SCRIPTURAL 157 


Dig through, son of man. And I dug through, and 
behold, a door. And he said unto me, Go in, and see 
the wicked lawlessness, which they do here. And I 
went in, and behold, every likeness of creeping thing, 
and beast, and vain idols, abominations. And he 
said unto me, Thou hast seen, son of man, what the 
elders of the house of Israel do in the dark, in the 
chamber”’ (he means, in their minds). “ For they 
said, The Lord seeth us not, the Lord hath forsaken 
the earth. And he said unto me, Thou shalt see yet 
greater lawlessness, which these do. And he brought 
me to another place, and showed me; and behold, 
there sat women weeping for Tammuz.’ And again, 
“He brought me into the inner house of the Lord; 
and behold there, twenty and four men, and their 
faces turned away, and their backs to the altar. And 
he said unto me, Are these small things, that the house 
of Israel doeth?”’ } 

We could not help calling to mind the passage of 
the prophet, at the thought of these particularly 
reckless people, who think that they are somewhat 3 
and deceive themselves; who disturb the peace of 
the Church, because they have given their backs to the 
Lord’s table, ‘‘ Whose judgment ceaseth not, and their 
destruction slumbereth ποῖ; * ‘‘ who mind earthly 
things.’ 4 Of them Judas the brother of James says, 
‘“ These are they who are hidden rocks in your love 
feasts, feasting with you without fear, shepherds that 
feed themselves; clouds without water, carried along 
by winds, wild waves of the sea foaming out their 
own shame, wandering stars, for whom the blackness 
of darkness hath been reserved for ever.’ ® In calling 
them “ clouds without water,” he suggested the evil hail 
with which they mar the vine; ‘ wandering stars ”’ 
more distantly suggests the plot against the ship. 
Both ship and vine are the Church. What conse- 
quences are bound to follow from such things? Hear 
again the same prophet Ezekiel, telling us: “ And he 

1 Ezek. vill. 7-17. *_ Gals. 6. , 4a Pete: 5. 

4 nil. 11. 10. Ε]ΏΠΠΘ 12, 12: 


158 CHRYSOSTOM’S IDEALS [64 


showed me, and behold men came from the way of the 
upper gate, which looketh toward the north, every 
man with his slaughter weapon in his hand. And one 
man in the midst of them, clothed down to the feet, 
and a girdle of sapphire upon his loins. And they 
went in, and stood beside the brazen altar, and the 
glory of the God of Israel which was upon them went 
up from the cherubim to the threshold of the house. 
And he called the man who was clothed down to the 
feet, who had the girdle upon his loins. And the 
Lord said unto him, Go through the midst of the city, 
even Jerusalem, and set the sign upon the foreheads of 
the men that sigh and that cry for all the lawlessness 
that is done in the midst of them. And to them he 
said’’—clearly, to the six who had the slaughter 
weapons—‘ in mine hearing, Go into the city after 
him’’—clearly, after the man who put the signs upon 
their foreheads—‘ and smite; Jet not your eye spare, 
neither have ye pity; slay utterly the old man, the 
young man, and maiden, and little children and 
women. But come not near any man upon whom is 
the sign, and begin at my sanctuary. Then they 
began at the elders which were in the house of the 
Lord: > 


A Piece of Exegesis 


If any one should imagine that this prophecy is 
concerned only with occurrences in Judza, I should 
consider him to be in ignorance of the fact of the Lord’s 
sojourn upon earth; for Ezekiel was not a priest prior 
to the Captivity. Under the dispensation of God, he 
was carried into captivity while quite a child, with the 
rest of the tribe of Levi, and only in his thirtieth year, 
_ while fulfilling his office as a priest among the exiles, 
was he found worthy of the vision of things to be; 
as he tells us himself, ‘“‘ And it came to pass in the 
thirtieth year, in the fourth month, on the fifth day 
of the month; and I was in the midst of the captivity 
by the river Chebar.” 2 And again, shortly after- 

1 Ezek. ix. 1-6. 2 Ezek. i. 1-3. 


64] A PIECE OF EXEGESIS 159 


wards: ‘“‘ The word of the Lord came to Ezekiel, the 
son of Buzi, the priest, in the land of the Chaldeans 
by the river Chebar.”’ 

If our objector, finding himself in difficulties, should 
now say to us: It is the Saviour who went first and 
set the sign of the cross upon the foreheads of the men, 
and then, when they would not believe the Saviour, 
the Roman empire followed, in the days of Vespasian, 
who forty years later destroyed the synagogue which 
had worked iniquity; we accept! [as a Christian] 
a man who holds these views, but we urge him, as a 
son of the New Covenant,” to follow the guidance of 
Paul our instructor in these mysteries, who says of all 
the books of this kind, ‘“‘ These things happened to 
them in figure, and they are written for our admonition, 
upon whom the ends of the world are come.’’ ὃ 

Now I do not say this because I make it my prayer 
that the sword may come upon the enemies of God. 
God forbid. The prophet does not indicate a sword 
of steel, but some other punitive force, of which the 
same Ezekiel says, ““ The land upon which I bring a 
sword”’ (“I bring’”’ for “I will allow’’), ‘and the 
people of the land take a man, and set him for their 
watchman, and the watchman seeth the sword coming, 
and bloweth with the trumpet, and warneth the people, 
and he that heareth hear, and keepeth not guard; 
and the sword come and take any one, his blood will 
I require of him, because he heard not the sound of 
of the trumpet.” And again: “ But if the watchman, 
seeth the sword coming, and blow not the trumpet, 
and give not warning to the people, and the sword 
come and take any one, his blood will I require at the 
watchman’s hand, because he saw the sword, yet did 
not blow.” 4 

Now the blessed John slept not the sleep of unbelief, 


ΑΘ Ἐν! 27. 

2 A Jewish boy at the age of thirteen became “a son οἵ the 
law.’? ‘‘ Spiritual persons are the sons of the font Ὁ. (Basil of 
Seleucia, Ov. xxvii.). 

oie COt Sirs. 4 Ezek. xxxiii. 2-6. 


160 _ CHRYSOSTOM’S IDEALS | [65 


nor was he heedless with the heedlessness of pleasure- 
seeking, but with this peril ever before his eyes, he 
cried more clearly than a trumpet;! no uncertain 
sound he uttered,? but gave men certain knowledge 
of the sword of the devil, and urged all men to flee from 
it. And all who had a clear conscience like a sign 
upon the forehead of their souls, by the grace of God 
were saved with you the faithful of Rome,®? while all 
whose conscience is defiled set people and priests on 
fire with quarrels among themselves, so as to hide 
their own in the general wickedness. 


The Use of the Opportunity 


Deac. Admirably said. But it is admitted that 
it is impossible for a man to be found blameless and 
perfect in this earthly life; for the Scripture says 
repeatedly, ‘““ Who shall boast that he hath his heart 
pure? Or who shall be confident that he is clean from 
sin?’’4 Be that as may be, the blessed John at any 
rate did not know how to use the opportunity, for one 
ought not to interfere with those in power.® 

Bish. My good Theodorus, I believe you are a 
rascal. At first you showed us the sympathy that 
we expected of you, and a certain amount of com- 
punction ; © but little by little you are proving to have 
a liking for scurrilities. Why, even his recognized 
enemies never found such severe fault with his 
behavieur. 

Deac. Why are you angry, father, you who have 
the reputation for being a lover of truth, because I 
said that the blessed John did not grasp the opportu- 
nity? The scripture says, “‘ Stand not in the place 
of rulers,”’ 7 and again, “‘ Buying up the opportunity.’’® 

1 “More clearly than a trumpet do I lift my voice” (Oy. 
lxiv. de Jej.). 

1 Cor. xiv: 8. 3 Rom. i. 8. * Prov, xx. ὁ 

5 The quotations next given by the deacon make this 
rendering of the passive participle preferable to “‘ the estab- 
lished order of things.”’ Cf. p. 33. 

"Ct. Apis 0,37, 7 Prov. xxv.6. ΘΟ IV 5. 


65] BUYING UP THE OPPORTUNITY τοὶ 


A specially necessary rule-in dealing with men who 
will not accept advice or improvement. 

Bish. Blessed are ye, who so interpret the scrip- 
tures. The verse in Ecclesiastes! ‘“‘ Stand not in 
the place of rulers,’ is addressed to those who are 
unworthy of, and unequal to, the priesthood, to 
prevent them from seizing upon it. By “ rulers,” 
he means the teachers of righteousness; first the 
apostles, who were rulers, clothed with the spirit of 
power, and next, those who follow their example. 
And the phrase “‘ to buy up the opportunity ”’ is used, 
not to make us hypocrites, but to bid us, when the 
opportunity of sin arises, to buy the opportunity by 
means of virtue, and not to sell it to sin. He who 
little by little thus buys up the opportunity, finds 
that he has bought up his whole existence; he has 
passed by the pleasures of life, to find those that are 
above life.2 This is what the martyrs have done; 
they gave away their life in the flesh, and inherited 
immortality. So they bought up the opportunity 
in the true sense. 


Scriptural Illustrations 


If my view is unsound, it will appear that Moses, 
Elias, Michaiah, Daniel, John the Baptist, Esaias, — 
Peter and Paul, not to mention others, were ignorant 
of their own opportunities, Moses, because he reproved 
a man, secured his safety by flight, and fed the flocks 
of a Gentile upon the mountains; Elias, overcome by 
drowsiness in his grief, fell asleep, but as he could 
find no shade of wall or rock, it was under a juniper 
bush, which gave him scanty shelter. Esaias was 
sawn asunder; Daniel for his piety was let down into 
a den of lions; Michaiah was kept a prisoner in gaol 

1A slip. 

2‘°The opportunity is not yours; ye are strangers and 
pilgrims. Seek not honours and. powers, but endure all 
things, and so buy up the opportunity, as a man in a big house, 


attacked by robbers, surrenders all, in order to buy himself 
from them,” is Chrysostom’s comment on the passage. 


162 CHRYSOSTOM’ S IDEALS [66 


(by which we must understand some underground 
chamber), condemned to be fed with the bread of 
affliction and a bare allowance of water, that after 
prolonged languishing there his life might be cut 
short through his bad treatment; all because of his 
outspoken language to one of the kings. What 
will you say to me of John, unequalled among them 
that are born of women? Did he not know how to 
use the opportunity, because he had his head cut off 
for his undisguised reproof of the king’s adultery ; he 
who showed the same care for Herod as a physician, 
when he cuts away, or cauterizes, the incurable ailment 
of a patient ? 


No Shrinking from Reproof 


On the same principle, John reproved his patients, : 
from pity or from affection. If the Baptist did not 
know the opportunity, how is it that he recognized 
the Artificer and Maker of the ages, when he said, 
‘“ Behold the Lamb of God, who beareth the sin of the 
world’’?! And how is it that Paul and Peter did 
not know the opportunity ; those pillars of the Church, 
who even after their deaths shut and open the oppor- 
tunities of repentance to those who desire it, and 
knock at the door? I suppose they were specially 
ignorant, as one was crucified with feet in air, as a 
sign of his heavenward journey, the other beheaded, 
because of his bold speaking in Christ ; that he might 
not fall away from the Head Who is Head indeed. 
Do not then listen to those who criticize and revile the 
bold speaking of the saints. This is the practice of 
the Gentiles, and of those who think themselves 
clever, to whom life, and scurrilous jests at the courage 
of the saints are dear. 


Reproof must not be Personal 
No, the sword must not be blunt, and the bold word 
must not be left unspoken. Kindness and_ bold 
speaking are as inseparable as scent and perfume. [1 


2 Jou +2530. 


66] AVOIDANCE OF PERSONALITIES 163 


will admit that if reproofs were offered personally,' 
before a man’s own household, or friends, or relatives, 
in whose presence he would not like even to blush, 
the bold speaker would be open, possibly, to the 
charge of ignorance of the right opportunity or place ; 
but if the Church is like a butcher’s shop, in which 
praise is given to those who do well, and blame to 
those who are careless, why should we be vexed at 
reproofs given without names being mentioned, and 
for our good? That means feeding our faults, instead 
of obeying him who said, “ All that is sold in the 
shambles eat, asking no questions.’’* Otherwise, 
we shall again ® find the saints to have been the occa- 
sion of stumbling to some cities and countries through 
their reproofs, and to have ruined others by their 
praises. 


The Universal in the Particular 


Job is the first instance in point; he censures the 
land of Phoenicia,* for inviting his enemy, Satan; as 
he says, ““ The peoples of the Phoenicians part him 
among themselves.” > Next, Moses and the prophets 
censure Egypt, and call it an iron furnace,® and 
darkness, while they praise Palestine, and call it a 
land of promise; yet Egypt proves to be a land of 
promise to the good, and Palestine, not only an iron 
furnace, but outer darkness, through unbelief, to the 


1Jn answer to the charge brought against Chrysostom of 
speaking of Eudoxia as “‘ Jezebel ”’ and ‘“‘ Herodias’ daughter.” 
‘““ Let no one be vexed with me; I shall not speak personally ἢ 
(Hom. in Eph. iii.). 

πὰ O00 525; 

3 Like Moses, Elias, and the others. 

4 Though he speaks of Pheenicians, etc., by name, he is not 
attacking their personal faults, but using them as examples 
of faults common to all men. 

5 Job xl. 25, LXX (xli. 6, Ἐν) “‘ Shall they part him ” 
—pbehemoth, the hippopotamus—“‘ among the merchants ? ”»— 
in Hebrew “‘ among the Canaanites,’’ whose name, as famous 
merchants, is used for ‘“‘merchants” generally. Palladius 
is right in regarding ‘‘ Phoenicians”’ as a general term for 
“merchants,” but his exegesis of behemoth 15 unsound. 

$ Deut..iv; 20. 


164 CHRYSOSTOM’S IDEALS. [66 


sluggard. It is not the places that are blamed or 
praised, but the practices of their inhabitants. How- 
ever, I need not elaborate my argument at length; it 
will serve for a beginning, briefly to suggest instances. 
When Paul calls the Cretans liars,! and the Galatians 
foolish, and the Corinthians puffed up,? and so on, 
was he thinking only of the faults of these particular 
peoples, and reproving them alone, or of those of men 
in general? Or again, when he calls the Romans 
faithful,t and the Ephesians, to whom he writes in 
a loftier strain, enlightened,® and the Thessalonians, 
lovers of the brethren,® was his commendation 
intended only for those peoples? Certainly not; 
guided by the Spirit, he bestowed praise and blame, 
that the man who is worthy of praise may know it, 
and be strengthened in his zeal, while he who is 
otherwise may be distressed as he reads, and purge 
himself from the cause of blame. So the Galatians 
are not the only foolish people, the Cretans the only 
liars, the Corinthians the only proud; for all these are 
universal failings, because the human nature which 
sins and works righteousness is one, and in one and 
the same matter tends to sinfulness or to righteousness, 
according to the man’s conscious choice. 

This was the principle of John’s boldness of speech 
in the Church; 7 it would be more true to say, that to 
the hungry he gave their portion of the meat of 
virtue, and banished sin with open reproofs, in 
obedience to him who said, “‘ Him who sins, reprove 
before all, that the rest also may fear.” ὃ But if 
some people are so grievously afflicted with pride or 

| dees 4.72. * Gal. iii. &. 

αι Cot, v2. Rom 1.3: 

5 Eph. i. 18, but the word here is ‘‘ mystics,” “ initiated 
ones.” 

Se theses y; 11 

ΤΟΥ ΟἹ will say, Do not lay such a burden upon your 
hearers; you make us blush. But I cannot tolerate such 
objections. If I was asking for myself, there would be some 
ground for shame; but I ask it for your good, and therefore 


I am bold of speech ” (Hom. in 1 Cor. xl. 3). 
oS τη V2; 


6η] THE EXAMPLE OF OUR ΤΟΝ. 165 


folly, that they wish the pleasures in which they 
indulge to be commended, the servants of God have 
no such custom. You see, those who are indignant 
at reproof given to covetousness, and fornication, and 
other foul pleasures, virtually declare simply that 
these offences, however poisonous, ought to be accepted 
(as Christian). 


CHAPTER XIX 


A DEFENCE AGAINST THE CHARGES OF PRIDE 
AND INSOLENCE 


Pride shown by Self-isolation 


Deac. Very many thanks, father, for the visit of 
your brotherly love; it has been helpful to us, and a 
remembrance for all our lives. 

After these high compliments, Theodorus held his 
peace ; but one of the company burst in with : 

Well then, how do you account for his being 
haughty,?! if he was adorned with all these excellencies ? 

Bish. Did you know him to be haughty by personal 
experience, or did some one tell you that he was so ? 

The speaker answered : 

I do not know the man; but I heard the remark 
made by a certain tanner, that it was rare for him 
to enter into company, except in the Church, and that 
he chafed at lengthy interviews with persons who 
wished for them. It is a proof of conceit and pride,? 
to avoid intercourse with those who desire it. 


The Example of Our Lord and of the Baptist 
Bish. Ah, a tanner; a man who takes the stench 
of his workshop home to live with him. Quite the 
right man to find fault with John’s philosophy.’ 


Kom, 1,30; 2: tim, 11, 2, RV: 
21 Lim. 11. G, Vic 4; 91 1.95; 2, 


166 PRIDE AND INSOLENCE [67 


If it is a proof of conceit to avoid crowds, according 
to your argument, John the Baptist must have been 
a conceited man, when he retired into the deserts. 
One step further, and it will be the Saviour Himself; 
for it is written, “‘ Jesus, seeing the multitudes, went 
up into a mountain, and when he was set, his disciples 
came unto him’’4—not the multitudes—and again, 
“Seeing the multitudes, he withdrew apart.’’? It 
was to follow His example, so far as he could, that 
good Bishop John too withdrew from the multitudes, 
while he delighted in the company of those who 
really wished to learn. 
_ Deac. A good argument from scripture proofs. 
But what have you to say to the charge that he was 
insolent,® when he kept himself in retirement not only 
from large gatherings, but even from the society of 
one or two individuals ? 


A Single Person can be a Crowd 


Bish. A single person can be a _ particularly 
unprofitable and misleading crowd. Such was the 
man who said to Jesus, ‘‘ Master, I will follow thee 
whithersoever thou goest.’””4 Do you not see that 
the Saviour was escaping from the crowd, when He 
said, “‘ Foxes have holes,” etc.? But you cannot 
convince me, that after his baptism John ever swore, 
or made another swear, or slandered, or lied, or cursed, 
or indulged in frivolities.° 

Deac. No, I make no assertion of this sort; only 
that he was insolent. 

Bish. My excellent friend, how was it possible for 
the man who was guilty of none of these things to be 
insolent, and lose control over his tongue? A small 
sin defiles as much as a great one. 

Deac. Well then, tell me, what do these popular 
statements mean? And when will they cease? 

ΔΈΟΝ τ: * Matt. viii. 18. 

δ. Nom: 1:40, 2 1011 11. 4 Matt. viii. Ig. 

5 “ He never lied, nor swore, nor abused any one, nor spoke 
without necessity.” Pall., L. H., 1x. 


68] CHRIST SIMILARLY. REVILED 167 


Chnist Himself was Similarly Reviled 


Bish. Hear the whole story, and do not pay 
attention to idle reports ; you will never find an excuse 
for doing that. People whose lives are not upright 
never have upright thoughts; they are for ever 
gossiping, and have no time for anything else, 
especially if no one dares to disagree with them. 
Why, they made all sorts of monstrous statements 
about the Saviour—God Himself, Who in life, and 
speech, and act, was above man, above prophet. 
They heaped insult upon insult, as thick as a herd of 
swine or a swarm of flies; such was the manner of the 
time. Some said, ‘He deceives the να !. 
others, ‘““ He casts out devils in Beelzebul, chief of the 
devils ;’’ 2 others, “‘ Behold a gluttonous man and a 
wine-bibber ;’’ * others again, ““ He isa Samaritan, and 
has a devil.’ * What would be the good of my 
gathering all their vapourings together? The Saviour 
Himself knew what was going on, when He said to His 
apostles, ““ Whom do men say that I, the Son of Man, 
am?’’?® The disciples replied by mentioning the 
most complimentary of the current ideas about Him: 
“Some say Elias, some Jeremias, others, John the 
Baptist ;’’ they do not quote the language of the 
vilest of men. So He asked them again, distinguishing 
them from the “ men’ of whom He had spoken 
before (and rightly; for in mind they were not men, 
but the sons of God, for to us the Word “ gave power 
to become children of God’’),® “ But whom say ye 
that I am?” Then Peter, expressing the mind of 
them all, answered, “‘ Thou art the Christ, the Son of 
the living God.’ The Saviour accepted the correct- 
ness of this answer, and declared, ‘“‘ Thou art Peter, 
and upon this rock,’’ that is, “‘ the confession,” 7 
“ T will build my Church, and gates of Hades shall not 
prevail against it.” 

*Jonn vit 12. 2 Luke xi. 15 8. Luke vii. 34. 

4 John viii. 48. Matte αν 13: * Joni, 12. 

7 So the Fathers generally, and Chrysostom in loc., ‘‘ That 
is, on the faith of his confession.”’ 


N 


168 PRIDE AND INSOLENCE [68 


Abuse of the Living turns to Honour of the 
Dead 


You will find the same characteristics in the blame 
or praise given not only to John, but to all. Just as 
at that time all the work of Christ and His apostles 
was being reviled—the Ephesians shouted, ‘‘ These 
are they that have turned the world upside down,”’ !— 
but all that has ceased now, and they are glorified ; 
so you will find it when this generation has passed. 
John will be honoured as a martyr,? when those who 
are set against his good reputation are brought to dust ; 
people on the level of pigs or dogs will say, ‘“‘ He 
deceives the world,’’ etc., while disciples will honestly 
and cautiously inquire into his conduct, and say,’ 
“Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.” 
And if, in the case of the Saviour Christ, among so 
many thousands of men only twelve were found at 
first to recognize Jesus, while the majority even to this 
day talk nonsense about Him; why need we be so 
particular as to what is said about John, a man who 
was not fit to be compared with the spittle of Christ ? 
With the spittle, do I say? Not with the hem of His: 


1 Acts xvii. 6. It was the Jews of Thessalonica who said so. 

* He was doubtless so honoured at the time the Dialogue 
was written. ‘‘ Bishop Proclus won back to the Church 
those who were in separation because of the deposition of 
John, prudently comforting their distress. He brought back 
to Constantinople the body of John, which had been buried 
at Comana, and laid it with much public ceremony in the 
Church of the Apostles, on January 27, 438. And I marvel, 
that il-will touched Origen after his death, and spared John. 
Origen, two hundred years after his decease, was excommu- 
nicated by Theophilus, John, thirty years after it, was received 
into communion by Proclus”’ (Socr. vii. 45). The Emperor 
Theodosius II laid his face on the reliquary, and implored 
forgiveness for the wrongs done to Chrysostom by his father 
and mother. His remains were placed in the Church of the 
Apostles at Constantinople, but later removed to Rome, and 
now lie in “‘ St. Chrysostom’s Chapel ”’ in St. Peter’s Cathedral. 
January 27 is still his feast-day in the Roman Church; in the 
Greek Church Basil the Great and Gregory the Divine are 
commemorated with him on January 30. 

37. e. use language corresponding to. 


69] SCRIPTURAL REPROOFS SEVERE τόν 


garment. ‘All the nations,’ says Esaias, “shall 
be counted as a drop from a bottle, and as spittle.’’ 1 


Jesting Words taken Seriously 


As for what you said about his being insolent, the 
facts are these. In the first place, it was impossible 
for him to grant favours, much less to be insolent, to 
everybody; but in dealing with any of his genuine 
disciples, or clergy, or bishops, if he noticed them 
boasting of their abstinence from anything, or of their 
correctness in the practice of bodily discipline, he 
playfully rallied them, by giving them nicknames 
expressing the opposite.2 For instance, he would 
call the teetotaller a drunkard, the man living in 
holy poverty covetous, the charitable man 4 thief. 
It is a kindly method of instruction for true men, to 
strengthen qualities which they possess, by speaking 
of qualities which they do not possess. The truth is, 
that he used to honour a self-restrained youth more 
than a licentious senior, a studious senior more than an 
ignorant junior, a layman who had embraced holy 
poverty more than a trained scholar who was covetous, 
a virtuous man living in the world more than an idle 
monk, 


Scriptural Reproofs far more Severe 


Perhaps people who are always on the look-out 
for honours call this insolence ; but John says to those 
who came to put themselves under his instruction, 
Ὁ generation of vipers, who hath warned you to 
flee from the wrath to come?’”’?? And Paul, in the 
Acts, says to the chief priest, ‘‘ God shall smite thee, 
thou whited wall;’’ * and the Saviour in one place 
says to the Jews, “ A wicked and adulterous generation 
seeks after a sign,’ ° and in another, to all the apostles, 


τ19α. Χ| τὸ; 

* At The Oak Chrysostom was accused of using insulting 
language to clergy. 

* Luke ni. 7. * Acts xxiii. 3, 5 Matt. xii. 39. 


170 PRIDE AND INSOLENCE [69 


“O fools and slow of heart.’?! In yet another He 
calls Peter, Satan—‘“‘ Get thee behind me, Satan; for 
thou art an offence unto me.’?? Yet there was no 
grave offence, which called for these severe expressions. 


The Purpose of Self-isolation ; with Scriptural 
Examples 


Let us then make the love of learning ® our delight 
in silence, as we cannot judge spiritual persons.* 
They are not insolent to us because they hate us, 
nor do they love solitude because they are puffed up 
with pride; their one aim is service springing from 
love. This again is why we find all those that are 
described to us in the holy records as good men, 
declining and turning away from ignorant ° persons, 
for fear that they may in time become used to their 
ways through familiarity, and so adopt a lower 
standard of virtue, or acquire their failings. Let 
Sarah be our first instance. She urged her husband 
Abraham to banish from the domestic hearth the son 
of the bond-maid, while he was still quite a child; for 
she objected to his playing with her son Isaac, for 
fear that if they amused themselves together, he 
might be demoralized by Ishmael’s behaviour and 
manners. Then Jacob secured his safety by flight, 
and set out for Mesopotamia, to sojourn there. Next, 
Lot was warned by the angels to move from among 
the impious men of Sodom; yes, and Moses, as I said 
before, when he grew up, and had refused to be called 
the son of Pharaoh’s daughter,® determined to 
separate himself from the tyrant and his men-at- 
arms,’ and warned those who were of the same mind 
as himself to start off with him, and make the exodus 
their first care. The prophets, too, shunned the 


1 Luke xxiv. 25. “*' All the apostles ”’ is an error. 
Σ Matt. xvi. 23. 
3 Rather than reputation. fi Cor a, Το. 


5.2 Tim. ii. 23. Ignorant of Christian instruction or discipline 
(Eph. vi. 4; 2 Tim. iii. 16). 

ies Colo Feb. ¢ aye ᾿ 

ΤᾺ word frequently used to express pomp of any sort. 


70] “REL SHINGO 1) ALi ΜΕΝ 171 


worthless crowd, and generally lived in the deserts; 
the apostle said of them, ‘“‘ They wandered in deserts, 
and mountains, and caves, and the holes of the earth.’’! 
This was to avoid mingling with the lawless, and 
because they knew that association has power to 
deceive, and reduce to a common level those who 
spend their days together, and more, that such inter- 
course is of itself blameworthy and poisonous, and 
even disgraceful. It is against nature to put up with 
a thing one dislikes, or even to 2 tolerate it for a short 
time; for like always attracts like (as the saying 15, 
“Every beast loveth his like;’?? but the unlike is 
hostile and alien). Who in the world can train a 
grain-eating dove or pigeon to feed with carnivorous 
martens or ravens? Or the herbivorous goose or 
crane to herd with vultures that pick bones? For 
what communion hath light with darkness,’ or virtue 
with vice, or the bad with the good ? 


The Meaning of “all Things to all Men” 


Deac. How then is it that the apostle says, “I 
became all things to all men, to the Jews as a Jew, 
that I might gain Jews; to the weak as weak, that I 
might gain the weak; to them that are without law 
as without law, that 1 might gain them that are 
without law’’ ? ὃ 

Bish. This quotation, my dear sir, does not support 
your contention; for Paul did not say, I became 
careless to the careless, or frivolous to the frivolous, 
or covetous to the covetous, or anything of the sort, 
but, ‘“‘I became as this or that’’—not, 1 became 
this.’ For “I became as this’’ is not the same as 
“I became this.’”” The words and deeds of the 
apostle are “such as”’ (those of others). His con- 
descension possibly did no great good, but it certainly 
did no harm; “1 became to the Jews as a Jew, that I 
might gain Jews.’’ And yet he was of the Jews, for 
he was circumcised ; in what sense then does he say, 

1 Feb. xi. 38. 


2 Or, by a slight correction, “‘ though one may.”’ 
5. Hecles ΧΗ 15; “2 Cor. Vi. 14. Pa Cor 4x. 20, 21 


172 PRIDE AND INSOLENCE [70 


“As a Jew,” not; “1 became a Jew’’? He was 
often to be found keeping the Sabbath, and fasting, 
with Jews, without detriment to the teachings of the 
Saviour, in hopes of leading them on to a more perfect 
knowledge, through familiarity and companionship 
with 1 him; just as physicians do not always stay with 
their patients, or suffer from the same complaints 3 
or the same delirious cravings as they. The manner 
of life which befits a teacher requires that he does not 
spend much time among crowds, but that he keeps 
quiet, and investigates the differences between various 
characters by careful research. This is the method 
of scientific physicians. They devote themselves 
mostly to their books, and so can diagnose the causes 
of complaints, and prescribe the remedies for them; 
they only come near to the sick so far as is necessary 
to discover the mischief, and administer the medicine, 
and do not play, or take meals, with them. Medical 
skill does not profess to be able to eat or play with 
patients, but to restore the sick to health. 

Have done then, I beg, and do not keep worrying 
me with the same objections. Virtue is never van- 
quished by the cavils of chatterers. Instead of that, 
accept my view, and set a guard at the doors of your 
ears, to keep them from reporting everything they 
hear, and receiving it into the store-room, to the 
disturbance of your mind. And now allow me to tell 
the rest of my story; for I must hasten on my way. 

And Theodorus said— 

Deac. Where are the bishops who were sent with 
our delegates, Eulysius and Palladius, and Cyriacus and 
Demetrius? ® We have heard a ee rumour that 
they were banished. 

Bish. Vf my account of the career of the blessed 
John appears to you clear, and to contain no hidden 
falsehood, and if you bear in mind what I have said, 
I will answer any question you wish to ask. 

1 Lit. “ walking with ’’; but not a New Testament word. 

2“ Skilful physicians should have had all manner of diseases 


in their own persons.’ Plato, Republic, Ὁ. 408. 
* See p. 178. 


70] VALUE OF SAINTLY EXAMPLE 173 


CHAPTER XX 


THE SUFFERINGS OF THE SAINTS, AND THE 
PROVIDENCE OF GOD 


The Value of Sainily Example 


‘Deac. Jam as fully persuaded of the truth as if I 
had been on the spot myself. The best proof of my 
acceptance of your narrative is the attention I have 
paid to it. While I have the recollection of it still 
ringing in my ears, I shall possibly commit it to writing 4 
in ink, upon a prime piece of parchment, as a memorial 
to our own generation, and for the benefit of those who 
aspire to the episcopate; so that they may either be 
such as was the holy John, or such as you, who have 
emulated the way of the martyrs on behalf of the 
truth, or else may give up trying to bear a burden 
beyond their strength, and be content with the 
unadventurous life of the layman.? 

When experienced pilots are available, it is better 
to pay one’s fare, and get safely to port as a passenger, 
than to take the pilot’s place oneself, and lose vessel 
and cargo together by shipwreck. You have given us 
an account of the career of the blessed John; of the 
strict ordering of his life, of his splendid work in the 
Churches of Antioch and Constantinople, of his advance- 
ment, of the plots formed against him, and of all his 


1Pall., L. H., Intro. ‘‘ This book is written with a view to 
stirring to rivalry those who wish to realize the heavenly 
mode of life, and desire to tread the road which leads to the 
Kingdom of Heaven.” 

2‘* The bishop cannot sin unobserved. Let him be angry, 
let him laugh, let him dream of a moment’s recreation, and 
many are offended, scoff, call to mind previous bishops, 
and abuse the present one. Yet if he enter the palace, who is 
first? If he go to visit ladies, or the houses of the great, none 
is preferred before him. I speak not wishing to put bishops 
to shame, but to repress your hankering after the office.” 
Hom, in Acts iil. 


1704. THE SUFFERINGS OF THE SAINTS [71 


bitter trials, laboriously brought upon him by ill- 
disposed persons in carrying out these plots. You 
have told us, too, about Porphyrius, and the eunuch 
of Ephesus. Now tell us the rest. Who died in 
prison? Which of those in communion with John 
were banished? It is but common justice that we 
should hold such men in memory, to encourage the 
living. In things which belong to earthly life, servants 
who for their masters’ sake suffer imprisonment, or 
blows, or torture, are rewarded by them with kindness 
and emancipation; how much more do those deserve 
honour and good-will from the Church who suffer for 
the sake of Christ? The apostle says of them, “ As 
prisoners with the prisoners, evil entreated with those 
that are evil entreated, as being yourselves in the 
body.” 2 For “right dear in the sight of the Lord is 
the death of his saints.’’ ὃ 


The Sufferings of Chrysostom’s Adherents 


Bish. Excellently spoken. Listen then. At first, 
a rumour was circulated that the bishops had been 
thrown into the sea; but the true account shows that 
they were sent into banishment beyond the boundaries 
of their native provinces, into barbarian climes, where 
they are still kept under the guard of the police. A 
deacon who had been their fellow-traveller told us on 
his arrival that Cyriacus * was at Palmyra, the frontier 
fort of Persia, eighty miles further inland from 
Emesa5; that Eulysius of Bostra® in Arabia was 
about three days’ march away at a fort called Misphas, 
near the land of the Saracens; Palladius was under 
guard in the neighbourhood of the Blemmyans,’ 

1The Greek may equally well be rendered “‘ Eunuchus 
of Ephesus.’”? Migne prints the word with a capital, as a 
proper name. See p. 131, n. 

* Heb. xiii. 3, freely quoted. PPS CXVis TS: 

ft see y 5 On the east bank of the Orontes. 

6 In the oasis of the Syrian desert, south of Damascus. 

7A turbulent tribe inhabiting the Upper Nile. They 
invaded the Thebaid about a.p. 450, and were driven into the 
district between the Nile and the Red Sea, where they are still 
represented by five tribes, speaking a language of their own. 


ar] CHRYSOSTOM’S ADHERENTS 175 


a tribe of Ethiopians, at a place called Syene ; ἷ Deme- 
trius was far inland at Oasis—the one in the neighbour- 
hood of the Mazici (there are other Oases)—and that 
Serapion, accused of countless unproved charges, 
sustained personal injuries from his savage judges 
(who went so far, it is said, as to draw his teeth), and was 
then banished to his own native country.? 

Hilanius,? a holy man, advanced in years, was 
transported to the innermost Pontus, after being beaten, 
not by the judge, but by the clergy; a man who for 
eighteen years had not tasted bread, but lived on 
nothing but herbs and boiled wheat. Antonius went 
into voluntary exile among the caves of Palestine; 
Timotheus of Maroneia,* and John of Lydia, are said 
to be in Macedonia; Rhodon of Asia made his way to 
Mitylene; Gregory of Lydia is said to be in Phrygia; 
Brisson, brother of Palladius,® of his own free will left 
his Church, and is living on his own little farm, working 
the land with his own hands. Lampetius, they say, 
is being maintained in some place in Lydia, by one 
Eleutherus, and devoting himself to reading ; Eugenius 
is in his own native country ; Elpidius, the great Bishop 
of Laodicea, and Pappus, have spent three whole years 
without coming down the house-stairs,® in their devotion 
to prayer. Heracleides of Ephesus has been confined 
for these four years in the prison of Nicomedeia. 

As to the rest of the bishops in communion with John, 
some lost heart altogether, and communicated with 
Atticus, and were transferred to other Churches, in 


1 Assuan. Pall., L. H., Intro.,“‘I lived with them in Libya and 
the Thebaid and Syene.”’ 

27.e. Egypt. Hehad fled from Heracleia, and taken refuge 
among the Goths. 

3Chrysostom considered his presence in Constantinople 
of such importance that he wrote to tell him not even to visit 
his own diocese without his written permission. 

il Cold Brey: ts oe 

5 Pall., L. H., lxxi, speaks of “‘the brother who has been with 
me from my youth unto this day ”’; but he is clearly referring 
to himself. Nothing more is known of Brisson, except that 
Chrysostom writes two letters to him from Cucusus. 

Wl hall: He Ke ΚΣ 


176 THE SUFFERINGS OF THE SAINTS [72 


Thrace; others are lost to sight. Anatolius is said to 
be in Gaul. 

To turn now to the priests; some were banished to 
Arabia and Palestine; Tigrius! to Mesopotamia. 
Philip escaped to Pontus, and died; Theophilus is 
living in Paphlagonia; John, son of Aethrius, founded 
a monastery in Casarea; Stephanus was banished to 
Arabia, but was taken by the Isaurians out of the 
hands of the guard, and allowed to go up to the Taurus 
district. Salustius is said to be in Crete. I under- 
stand that Philip the anchorite, priest in charge of the 
school,? is lying sick in Campania. Sophronius the > 
deacon is in prison in the Thebaid; Paul the deacon, © 
the assistant steward, is said to be in Africa: another 
Paul, deacon of the Church of the Resurrection, is in 
Jerusalem. Helladius, the presbyter of the palace,? 
is living on his own little farm in Bithynia. A large 
number are in hiding in Constantinople, others have 
gone to their own native countries. Silvanus the holy 
bishop is in Troas, supporting himself by fishing; 
Stephanus the ascetic was flogged at Constantinople, 
and thrown into prison for ten months, simply for 


1 He was stripped of his clothes, scourged, tied hand and 
foot upon the rack, and his limbs disjointed (Sozomen). 

* Basil (Reg. Fus., xv) urges that education is to be part of 
the work of monks. The Church had to provide her own 
education, aS an antidote to the material and anti-Christian 
instruction of the pagan schools and teachers of rhetoric, such 
as those by whom Chrysostom was taught “letters.” The 
training was:to be given free, especially to orphans, and to be 
such as would prepare the young for the monastic or the 
ministerial life. Hence no mention of ancient Greek litera- 
ture is made in his curriculum. We do not know where 
Philip’s “‘ school’ was, but there would naturally be one at 
Constantinople, if only for the training of clergy. 

30 ΟΡ. Lit. Ὁ The presbyter. he of* che palace 
Migne prints the word with a capital—“ the son of Palatius.”’ 
He may have been a kind of Court chaplain, or the words may 
refer to his early life. Sozomen mentions a Helladius, Bishop 
of Caesarea, whose son had ‘‘ obtained a splendid commission 
at the Court.” If he bore his father’s name, this may be the 
man. Chrysostom, Ep. xiv, asks Olympias to send some 
important letters by him. 





72] CHRYSOSTOM’S ADHERENTS 177 


having brought the letters from the Church of Rome. 
He was offered his freedom, on condition of communi- 
cating {with Atticus], and on his refusal had the skin 
most cruelly torn from his ribs and breast; I myself 
have seen the marks. However, in the gracious care 
of Christ his life was preserved, possibly for struggles 
yet to come, and after ten months of medical treatment 
he was banished to Pelusium. 

A soldier named Provincialus, of the Imperial guard,* 
accused of being a lover of John, was first flogged 
repeatedly and tortured unmercifully, and then 
banished to Petre. A servant of Elpidius the priest 
accepted a bribe, they say, of fifty pieces of money, 
to kill the holy John by treachery, but was caught 
in the attempt with three swords upon his person, 
and injured seven of his captors one after the other. 
Four of them were at once buried, and three were 
under treatment for a long time before they recovered ; 
yet the murderer was acquitted.? The blessed 
Eutropius, undefiled of women, a singer,* was terribly 
flogged, and the skin torn from his ribs and forehead ; 
his eyebrows were torn off, and finally his ribs were 
laid bare on both sides, and burning oil-lamps placed 


1 There is no previous mention of this messenger; but 
evidently many letters were sent. Sozomen tells of a famous 
monk Stephanus, a Libyan, who was living in Mareotis 
some thirty years before these events. 

2 Lit: ‘‘ schools”; a late term given to the royal body- 
guard. 

3 Sozomen (vill. 21) gives an account of this attempt. 

4 The order of singers seems to have arisen early in the 
fourth century, owing to the decay of congregational singing. 
The Council of Laodicea forbids others to sing in the church 
than the canonical singers, ‘‘ who go up onto the ambo, and 
sing out of a book’’; though this rule seems soon to have 
fallen into disuse. They were appointed by the priest, not 
by the bishop, with the words, ‘‘ See that thou believest in 
thy heart what thou singest with thy mouth, and that what 
thou believest in thy heart, thou prove by thy works.” 
Sozomen tells how Sisinnius (p. 146) was led by a dream to 
search for the one good man in the city, named Eutropius, and 
found a reader of that name, who was tortured on the 
charge of setting fire to the church; probably this man. 


18 THE SUFFERINGS OF THE SAINTS ‘v2 


against the bones, until he expired upon the rack, 
and was buried at midnight by the priestly perpe- 
trators of the crime. But God bore witness to his 
death, by a vision of singers, in token of its likeness 
to the passion of the Saviour. 

The deacon who came back to us from the bishops ! 
reported that the prefect’s officers in charge of them 
treated them so badly, in accordance with instruc- 
tions received from some source or other, that they 
prayed for death and release from life. 

They robbed the bishops of every penny they had 
for the expenses of the journey, and divided it among 
themselves; they set them on bare-boned asses, and 
made a two days’ journey into one, going on till late 
at night, and starting off before it was light in the 
morning, until their stomachs could not keep down 
even the meagre food allowed them. They never 
lost an opportunity of insulting them with foul and 
disgraceful language. They carried off the servant 
of Palladius, and compelled him to surrender his 
ledger. One of those in charge, who had cruelly 
ill-treated Demetrius, so as to reach Zibyne late in 
the evening, was racked with pain from head to foot, 
and died in agony; inspired men recognized this as 
the punishment for his cruelty. Palladius had told 
him before, as a fellow-soldier who returned informed 
us, that “‘ Thou shalt not make another journey, but 
shalt die in misery.” They would not allow them to 
go near a church, but lodged either in inns, where 
there were numbers of prostitutes, or in the syna- 
gogues of Samaritans or Jews, mostly from Tarsus; 
where their distress suggested to them a new thought, 
which had not occurred to them before. Said one of 
the bishops :? ““ Why should we trouble about our 

1 Palladius now takes up again the story of the Eastern 
bishops who joined the deputation from Rome (p. 31), 
whom we last sawat Lampsacus. Hence the detailed account 
here. The introduction of this ‘‘ deacon,”’ and the “ fellow- 
soldier ’’ below, is quite in accordance with Palladius’ methods 


Ci Gey Seay > 
2 No doubt Palladius himself. 


γ3] HISTORY REPEATS ITSELF 179 


lodgings? Does it lie with us where to stay, so that 
we can be responsible, as if we misbehaved ourselves 
of our own choice? Do you not know, that by 411 
this that has happened, and will happen, God is 
being glorified in all things?! How many of these 
prostitutes, who have forgotten God, or never had 
the knowledge of Him, have been brought by the 
sight of us in this condition to the fear and thought 
of God, and so perhaps been turned to better things, 
or at least been kept from plunging into worse? It 
is no small thing, to a reasonable soul, in a time of 
suffering, to have even a little respite; we must 
regard it as a stimulus to self-control. Paul the 
seer, who himself suffered like us, says: ‘ We are a 
sweet savour of Christ among them that are being 
saved and among them that are perishing, because 
we have been made a spectacle to angels and to 
Medan 5 

The local bishops in communion with Theophilus 
all over the East went so far in their savage cruelty, 
that some of them, so far from showing ordinary 
humanity, actually bribed the officers to get them 
out of the cities more speedily. The chief offenders 
in this respect were the Bishops of Tarsus and An- 
tioch, Eulogius,? Bishop of Cesarea in Palestine, and 
especially the Bishop of Ancyra, and Ammonius, 
Bishop of Pelusium, who made the soldiers in charge 
of them still more savage against them by bribes or 
by threats, urging them not even to allow those of 
the laity who wished to do so to give them hospitality. 


History Repeats Itself 


On similar grounds the blessed John, writing to 
Gaius, in his Catholic epistles, condemns a certain 
bishop, but commends the hospitality of Gaius, and 
exhorts him not to imitate wicked bishops. The 
words are these: “‘ Unto Gaius the beloved, whom I 

ΓΕ Ὁ οὔ. 5.1 ΟΌΤΟΙν 9; 2 Cored 15: 


3. Chrysostom, unaware of this, writes to him (Ep. 1xxxvii.) 
commending his devotion. 


180 THE SUFFERINGS OF THE SAINTS [74 


love in truth. Beloved, I pray that in all things 
thou mayest prosper and be in health, even as thy 
soul prospereth. For I rejoiced greatly, when some 
came and declared to me, that thou walkest in truth, 
and wherein thou didst refresh the saints. I have 
no greater joy than this.’ 1 And after this he adds, 
“I wrote unto the Church; but Diotrephes, who 
loveth to have the pre-eminence among them, 
receiveth us not, prating against us with wicked 
words; and not content therewith, neither doth he 
himself receive the brethren, and them that would he 
forbiddeth, and casteth them out of the Church.” 
A little later he gives him the advice, “ Beloved, 
imitate not that which is evil; for he that doeth 
good is of God; he that doeth evil hath not seen 
God.” ? 

I have quoted this whole passage, relating to the 
wickedness of by-gone days, to pourtray the mind of 
the Diotrephes’ of to-day. 

But (my friend) praised and admired the bishops 
of the second Cappadocia, for their deep sympathy, 
even to tears, with the banished bishops; especially 
the most gentle Theodorus of Tyana, and Bosphorus 
of Coloneia, a bishop of forty-eight years’ standing, 
and Serapion of Ostracine, who has held the epis- 
copal office for forty-five years. 


The Problem of the Prosperity of the Wicked 


Long was Theodorus speechless with distress, and 
at last said— 

Deac. What shall we say to all this, father? Can 
it be that it is the last hour, and the falling away of 
which Paul speaks is being ushered in by these events, 
“that the son of perdition, who opposeth, may be 
revealed’??? The thought of the wicked prospering, 
and succeeding in their aims, and going on for so 
long, and having such power, while the good are 


1 3 John 1-4; Philem. 7. 2 3 John 9-11. 
δ᾽ hess 0. 


74] THE TEST .OF SUFFERING 181 


being persecuted and pillaged, fills me with dread 
that this person is near at hand. 


The Last Hour 


Bish. Very certainly, most intelligent sir, the end 
is near; as we read, “‘ Little children, it is the last 
hour;’’? and δ The master of the house went out 
about the eleventh hour to hire labourers into his 
vineyard.” 2 The last hour is the twelfth; and if 
the apostle spoke of the last hour four hundred years 
ago, much more, by all showing, is it the last hour 
now.® 


The Test of Suffering 


Again, we have to remember that from the first 
these things have occurred by the permission of the 
Lord, for the training of the saints; the devil desires 
to have them, as the word of the Saviour says, 
“Simon, Simon, Satan asked to have you, that he 
might sift you as wheat; but I made supplication 
for thee, that thy faith fail not.’ * Assuredly the 
Lord did not pray for Simon alone, but for all who 
have Peter’s faith; the sieve can only mean, the 
circle of earth filled with pleasures and pains, which 
form, so to speak, holes through which earthly people 
fall down to hell, separated as dust from nourishing 
grain by the perforations. 

Some pass through the hole of gluttony—those 
“whose god is their belly”’ ;° some through that of 
love of pleasure, those of whom the prophet speaks, 
who were “ led astray by the spirit of fornication ”’ ; ® 
for “‘ neither fornicators, nor adulterers, nor abusers 
of themselves, shall inherit the kingdom of God.” ? 
Others pass through the hole of covetousness—those 
who have espoused the bride of idolatry; others 

tr Onn 11: 18; 7 MALE... χὰ, ὁ. 

So Fall., ΣΝ iv. 6, — Littl children, it was wotten 
four hundred years ago, it is the last hour. Why do you 
love to linger in life’s vanities ? ”’ 

Ὁ ike ΧΧῚ 3%, 5. ἘΠῚ} ὅἰ τὸ: 

ΓΕ ον 12, Eb AX: πα σεν, 10. 


« 


182 THE SUFFERINGS OF THE SAINTS [74 


through that of anger and passion—those who loved 
bestial darkness, of whom John says, “He that 
hateth his brother is in darkness until now,” 1 for 
“ Anger,” says the author of Proverbs, ‘“‘ destroys 
even the prudent;’ ? others through accidie and 
forgetfulness, because they do not persevere in sleep- 
less remembrance; whose address to God is, “ My 
heart slept through weariness.’’ 3 ‘‘ Woe unto you,” 
the word warns them, ‘“‘ who have lost patience, and 
what will ye do when the Lord shall visit you?’ 4 
Others pass through the hole of senseless ostentation ; 
of whom the Psalmist declares, ‘‘ For God hath 
scattered the bones of the men-pleasers;’’ ὅ others, 
again, through that of false pretension ® or pride, 
which is arrogance. It is these whom the prophet 
rebukes as deserters—‘‘ The proud have transgressed 
exceedingly, yet have I not swerved from thy law.’ 7 
Each of these vices is followed by others, worse 
than itself; pride by envy, covetousness by hatred, 
and stinginess® and lying, passion by anger or 
revengefulness, insolence, and envyings; ® fornication 
by forgetfulness, deadness of conscience,!® idleness, 
indifference, unprofitable loss of sleep; vainglory by 
meddlesomeness, acts of bribery, idle fancies, hypo- 
crisy, respect of persons, deceits; pride by foolish 
ideas, pitilessness, impiety, folly; and so on. I need 
not over-weight my argument by giving further 
illustrations, as what I have said is perfectly clear. 


Righteousness Revealed through Trials 


To each of these vices God has appointed its 
contrary virtue; for instance, self-control is opposed 
to lust, temperance to greediness, justice to covetous- 


1a ΤΟΠῚ 1.0 τον Ay. π * Ps, 6x 26, 
4 Ecclus. ii. Τὴ. © ἘΠ 6x. 
oj α9: iv 16>. Jon 11: τὸ: oa. CxO: gk 


8’ In Aristotle (Eth. Nic., iv., 1) one extreme, profligacy 
being the other, of the series in which liberality is the 
mean term. 

® Phthonos, probably in error for Phonos, murder. 

10 Lit. ‘‘ want of fear.” 


75] PROSPERITY OF THE WICKED 182 


ness, gentleness to anger, joy to sorrow, mindfulness 
to forgetfulness, patience to accidie, good sense to 
folly, courage to cowardice, humility to vainglory, 
and so on; and to all, holy scripture. Only to pride 
has He not given its contrary virtue, because of its 
exceeding viciousness, but has reserved Himself as 
its contrary, as He said, “‘ God resisteth the proud.” # 
So, too, the prophet prays, “ Lift up thine hand 
against their pride, even to the end,” ? and again, 
“Render to the proud their desert.’ ? And just as 
the tree is known by its fruit (as the Lord says, “ By 
their fruits ye shall know them’’),* so is each man, 
whether he be a saint in fact, or only in name. 


Scriptural Illustrations 


This is why the happiness of the wicked is always 
long-continued ; because God bears long with them. 
This is always His property; He has told us to 
expect it, in the part played by the afflicted saints 
in times past, as an encouragement to us who suffer 
to-day. Look first at Job, the son of patience; 
what says he, after much suffering? Mark it well. 
“As for me, is my reproof of men?” he points to 
his blamelessness. ‘“ Why should I not be impatient ? 
Look unto me, and be astonished, and lay your hand 
upon your mouth. For if I remember, I am troubled, 
and pains take hold of my flesh. Wherefore do the 
wicked live, and become old in riches? Their seed 
is according to their desire, and their children are 
before their eyes; their houses prosper, nowhere is 
fear; the rod of the Lord is not upon them. Their 
cow casts not her calf; she is preserved from heat ; 
she is with young, and faileth not. They abide as 
sheep for ever. Their children play, taking the 
psaltery and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the 
psalm, they fulfil their life in good things, and they 
sleep in the rest of Hades. Yet he saith unto God, 
Depart from me, I desire not to know thy ways.” ὃ 

- Jas, iv. 6. a PS. ARR, oy ks + Si ΤΟΙ 2. 

e Matt. Vil, 20; ὅν Job ΧΧῚ 4-14, 
O 


184 THE SUFFERINGS OF THE SAINTS [75 


David the forbearing, the singer of the divine 
judgments, uses similar language: “I will sing to 
thee of mercy and judgment, O Lord.’ 1 “‘ How good 
is God to Israel, even unto them that are pure in 
heart. But my feet ere almost shaken; my steps 
had_ well-nigh slipped.” WY? For 1 was 
stirred at the lawless, nee I saw the peace of sinners.” 
And in another passage he inveighs against their 
wealth, as follows: ‘‘ Their oxen are fat, their sheep 
bring forth abundantly, abounding in their streets; 
their garners are full, affording store from this unto 
that; their daughters are beautiful, adorned in the 
likeness of a temple.’ And he adds, in astonish- 
ment at the harmony and peace which they enjoy, 
“There is no outcry in their streets, nor falling of a 
fence in their houses.” Then he attacks the cor- 
rupted opinions of the common herd of men, saying, 
“They counted as blessed the people who have 
these things.’ And he adds, “ Blessed is the people 
whose helper is the Lord God of jacobs 2 

I must not end my quotations here, or I shall 
imperil my argument for want of completeness. 
Hear what Habakkuk says, as he seems to beat 
his breast in his distress at the same problem: “ O 
Lord, how long shall I cry, suffering wrongfully, and 
thou wilt not hear?”’ He calls the wrongs of his 
neighbour his own; and in his love for his brethren 
he adds, “I will cry unto thee, and thou wilt not 
save. Why didst thou show me iniquity, and that 
I should look upon labours that lead to hardship and 
impiety? Judgment is against me, and the judge 
taketh reward. Therefore is the law perverted, and 

τ ΡΒ Cot. ged Ἐ5: bo 6? τι 

3 Ps. cxliv. 14 ff. The exegesis of the LXX rendering is 
correct; these are the words of the “‘ strange children, whose 
sonsare ... their daughters ai 4) ere. RV. represents 
the Hebrew by restoring ἡ our’”’ for “ their,’ and translates 
“who ”’ by “‘ when,”’ with a semicolon only before “‘ Blessed.” 

—‘‘ When our sons shall be... when... no outcry in our 
streets ; Blessed is the people. . . .᾿᾿ Delitzsch considers that 


some verses have been introduced into the text which do not 
properly belong to this Psalm. 


76] SCRIPTURAL ILLUSTRATIONS 185 


judgment goeth not forth, unto the end; for the 
wicked doth oppress the righteous.” ὦ 

In the same spirit Jeremiah, the most sympathetic 
of the saints, perplexed beyond all other men, cries, 
“Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I shall plead 
with thee; yet will I speak judgments unto thee, O 
Lord. Why doth the way of the wicked prosper ? 
All they that set at nought are at ease; thou didst 
plant them, and they took root’’ (this is instead of 
saying, “they spend their days in profligacy’’) ; 
“and they bore fruit’? (certainly not of the spirit). 
“Fhou art near their mouth, and far from their 
reins.” 2 The prophet Sophonias* the wise has a 
passage to exactly the same effect. He is reproaching 
men for slandering their neighbours, finding fault 
with the providence of God,‘ and calling the saints 
unhappy. ‘‘ You,” he says in the person of the 
Lord, ‘‘ made your words stout against me, saith the 
Lord. And ye said, Wherein did we speak against 
thee? Ye said, He is vain who serveth God; and 
what profit, that we kept his charges, and that we 
walked as suppliants before the Lord Almighty? 
And now we call strangers happy, and all that work 
lawless things are built up, and they resisted God, 
and are delivered. These things spake they that 
feared the Lord, each one to his neighbour.”’ 

Paul, the preacher of piety, adds his testimony to 
the same truth: “ But evil men and impostors shall 
wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.” ὃ 


1 Hab. i. 2-4. Spek Mag 

3“ Sophonias ”’ is the LXX name of Zephaniah (2 Esdr. 
i.40). The quotation is really from Mal. ili. 13-16. ‘‘ Sophos ”” 
is the Greek for ἡ wise.”’ 

4 Chrysostom tells of those who denied that Providence 
extended to all things beneath the moon (Hom. in Acts xxviii.). 
““ Does a charitable person meet with disaster? <A labourer 
who receives his food gets less wages at the end; so does the 
charitable man who receives blessings in this world” (Jn 
1 Cor. xliii.). ‘If you see an evil man prosper, know that 
he once did some good, and receives his reward here, and 
loses his claim on that which is to come ”’ (Or. lxv.). 

5. 2 Tin, 1: 23; 


186 THE SUFFERINGS OF THE SAINTS [76 


Then he points out the low esteem in which the saints 
are held: “ For I think that God hath set forth us 
the apostles last of all, as men doomed to death; for 
we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, 
and to men. For even unto this present hour we 
both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and have 
no certain dwelling-place, and labour, working with 
our own hands”’ (a description of his bodily sufferings) ; 
“ being reviled, we bless, being persecuted, we endure, 
being defamed, we entreat, we are made as the filth 
of the world, the offscouring of all things even until 
now.’’! The good and just God spreads the world 
before us, for certain ineffable reasons, like a race- 
course; and has given us free will, that we may deal 
with circumstances according to our own choice, and 
pay the just penalty for our deeds. As the law says, 
“J have set before thy face, death and life, choose 
what thou wilt.” 2 Why He set it so, it is not for 
us to say in this present life; the fact. remains, that 
He has so set it. It would not have been wise for 
us to be created impeccable,’ with no struggles 
before us, and minds not established in righteousness. 
Impeccability is the attribute of the eternal Godhead 
alone. 

Deac. You have met our difficulty admirably and 
wisely, father; you have given eyes to the souls of 
our friends here, who have found this matter a con- 
tinual perplexity, arising partly from their lack of 
acquaintance with scripture, partly from the very 
fact that the Church is throughout the ages appointed 
as a training school.4 She points to ‘her victors, 


τ Gor, αν. 9 i: :. ECCS evo: 

3 It seems as if “‘or’’ had here dropped out of the text, or 
as if ‘‘not’’ had crept in before ‘‘ established.”’ If we had 
been created impeccable, we should have needed no trials, 
because already established in righteousness. This would 
have made us machines, with no moral virtue. The alter- 
native to this was, for our minds not to be established; then 
we need trials. 

4 “To-day is the time of wrestling; thou art come to 
learn how to strive manfully, to take part in every contest. 


72] THE BLESSEDNESS OF TRUTH τὸν 


men and women alike, as not having eaten of the 
flesh of Christ in times past without paying a price. 
Yet the disorders among you, and the break-up of 
the Church, cause us distress. 


The Blessedness of Truth Countervails all Suffering 


Bish. You astonish me, most honoured of men. 
You almost unreservedly admit the beneficial results 
of suffering, and then turn round and say something 
to the contrary effect. You call us blessed, as 
victors, and yet you call us miserable, as banished 
men, because we have been deprived of our Church 
buildings.1 You seem to me to be in the same 
state of mind as the rustic spectators at the Olympic 
games, who gape with delight at the prizes, but shed 
tears of pity at the blows exchanged between the 
combatants. To my mind, it is better to hasten 
away to ravines, and thickets, and seas, in company 
with the truth, than to be burdened with falsehood, 
while enjoying high honour for what is in this life 
considered prosperity. For if I possess truth, I shall 
possess all things, for all things are her servants; if 
I have made falsehood my own, I do not possess even 
myself, as I am not hers. But if I possess truth, I 
do not wish to possess her merely as a mistress, or a 
servant, or a neighbour, but as a sister; nay, if it 
be possible, as a bride, whose sweetness I may enjoy 
and presently inherit? as my very own wife. For 
she is the sister of the absolute truth, whose son-in- 
law the good man is. For he that bears this seal 
becomes young a second time, grows not old, and 





No man coming to the training school lives in luxury ; nor 
in the time of conflict does he seek for tables ” (Hom. in 
Mart., ii. 799). ‘‘ Perhaps my flesh deserves chastisement, 
and it is fitting that it should pay the penalty now, rather 
than when I have quitted the arena ”’ (Pall., L. H., xxiv.). 

1 Bigot’s conj. for ‘‘ places’’; which, however, might refer 
Ὁ ‘‘ position in the Church,”’ as Acts i. 25, I Cor. xiv. 16. 

2 Or possibly, ‘“‘ have as my heir’’; the text is uncertain. 
But the contrast is between the sweetness of the betrothed 
and the bliss of the married life. Cf. Wisd. viii. 2. 


188 THE SUFFERINGS OF THE SAINTS {77 


fades not away; he has zeal fiercer than fire, words 
sharper than swords, life freer than an eagle’s; he 
devotes himself untiringly to meditation upon the 
scriptures, as to a house-mother; he never ceases to 
blossom with gladness, he is not overcome by fear, 
he holds up his head undaunted, he dances in his 
holy enthusiasm, he hates no man, he pities those 
who misuse life, he calls blessed those who mind their 
own business in contentment, he sorrows with the 
sorrow of the spirit at the careless lives of priests, of 
whom the apostle said, “‘ Grieve not the Holy Spirit, 
whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption.” ! 
He it is that grieves the Spirit, who turns his back 
upon Him in carelessness. 

And at last (there is much that I must pass by) in 
his out-spokenness he dies; he has given pain to 
none, save to the demons, and to those who are like 
them. His time has been more than enough; he did 
not higgle away his days in evil doings. He doubled 
the money? that was given to him, he forwarded 
interest, of good works, in a short time he fulfilled long 
years; he makes no will? disposing of his property, 
for by his life and thought he wrestled with it, and 
gravelled it. Did Death knock at the door of his 
frail flesh? Before he sees him outside, he cries, 
Let us go hence, and sings, “ Woe is me, that my 
sojourn has been so long;’’ ὁ and were it not for the 
Master Who sent him on his mission, he would have 
served him with a summons, and sued him at law, 
for coming too late. Well content is he, when at 
last he is set free from the frail flesh, with its manifold 
ailments, as if he were leaving a ruinous hostel, 
threatening to fall; he pricked up his ears at the 
voice of Him Who says, “ Well done, good and faith- 
ful servant,” > confident of hearing the rest as well. 


1 Eph. iv. 30. * Bigot conj.. grace.” 

3 “A man of great wealth, he wrote no will when he came 
to die, and left no money to his sisters, but commended them 
to Chrnst, Pall. δ. ., 1. 

Po xk. οἱ © Matt: xxv. 2], 


78 | THE MISERY OF FALSEHOOD 189 


Take this torrent of words as a proof of my con- 
tention; “‘ for out of the abundance of the heart the 
mouth speaketh.” } 


The Misery of Falsehood 


But he who dwells with falsehood has a disturbed 
life; one moment in boundless delight at an addition 
to his wealth, or to his poor little reputation, or at 
the friendship of a wretched harlot, or at the mis- 
fortunes of his enemies; the next, sick to death with 
sorrow, dreaming of changes and uncertainties. He 
passes restless or sleepless nights, he imagines plots 
made against him by his closest friends, he has no 
confidence even in himself, and distrusts all men, 
as liars. Such is he; cowardly as a hare, bold as a 
pig, deceitful as a chameleon, unreliable as a_par- 
tridge, pitiless as a wolf, untameable as a mouse; 
his own enemy, unceasingly jealous, inevitably 
punishing himself, though he does not know it; for 
he who is always planning evil against another, first 
brings evil upon himself. 

Did Death prick his skin? He gives away every- 
thing, to gain a little respite, so precious is his life 
to him; the time given him he higgled away to no 
profit, so far from doubling his penny? he did not 
even keep it safe. He trembles continually, like 
a leaf, in his dread of the approach of old age; he is 
troubled with the silly ideas of old men, he fears 
death as a god; for to him the visible world is God. 
And what then? He turns pale, he shivers with 
fright, he is in an agony of distress; he anticipates 
the judgment of God, and inflicts punishment upon 
himself. His conscience torments him without mercy, 
and reminds him of his evil doings one by one, till 
his sufferings are more terrible than those of criminals 
under the lash. He grovels like a slave to those in 
office for the moment,? and flatters the world to his 
disgrace; instead of One Lord he has ten thousand 

1 Matt. xii. 34. 2 Lit. “* denarius,’’ Matt. xx. 2, 
3 In contrast with God’s eternity. Cf. p. 134. 


100 THE SUFFERINGS OF THE SAINTS 198 


masters, to save himself from being the servant of 
the truth. He does all he can to get himself feared, 
yet he himself fears every one. 


The Decision of the Church of Rome 


I will say no more; I have done all I can. If any 
one can speak more truthfully or elegantly, and put 
my nothingness right, I will gladly welcome him as 
a corrector of error and a lover of the brethren, and 
give thanks to the Saviour for all things.1 Now do 
you in return give me an account of the decision of 
the western synod, and set the seal upon my words, 
if they commended themselves to you as being of any 
value. So the narrator ceased, and Theodorus said— 

Deac. The Lord grant to you who have given us 
this narrative, to find mercy in that day,? for your 
refusal to hold communion with such people, and 
for the clear account you have given us. And may 
the Lord remember every sacrifice of John, because 
he surrendered not his out-spokenness, even unto 
death. The decision of the Church of Rome was, 
under no circumstances to communicate with the 
eastern bishops, especially with Theophilus, until the 
Lord grants the opportunity for an ecumenical 
synod,’ to heal the putrefied limbs of the men guilty 
of these crimes. For though the blessed John has 
fallen asleep, yet the truth is awake, and for the 
truth search will be made. 

ΤΡ. 6: ΕΣ iio 8. ae 

3 Sozomen says only that Innocent in his letter to 
the clergy of Constantinople urged the need of an inquiry 
by an ecumenical synod, and that after Chrysostom’s exile 
he sent five bishops and two priests of the Church of Rome, 
with the deputation of eastern bishops, to Honorius and 
Arcadius, to ask for a synod, and for place and time to be 
fixed. There seems to be no record of any decision of a 
western synod. But it is very possible that the ‘‘ Home 
Synod”? (p. 117, n.) might pass such a resolution without 
records having survived. The passage is considered by some 
to be against the authorship of Palladius, as Theophilus died 
in 412. But how could the deacon be represented as 
knowing of it, directly after Chrysostom’s death (p. 33)? 


79] CHRYSOSTOM’S ENEMIES ΤΟΙ 


Chrysostom’s Enemies Interrogated 


As for those that have committed these offences in 
the Church, gladly would I meet them face to face, 
and ask them, Where is your priesthood? Where 
is the holiness required of you? Where is the 
gentleness and unselfishness! of the Christian 
character? Where are the commandments of the 
Saviour—* If thou art offering thy gift, and remem- 
berest that thy brother hath aught against thee, go 
thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and so 
offer thy gift’??? Where is that saying, “If any 
man smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the 
other also”? ?3 Where is your meditation upon the 
scriptures? What of the verse, ‘‘ Behold, what is 
beautiful, and what is pleasant, but for brethren to 
dwell together in unity’’?* Or, “ Let brothers be 
helpful in times of necessity’? ?® Why have you 
perverted by your actions the words, “‘ A brother 
helped by a brother, is as a strong city’’?® <A brother 
falsely accused, or robbed, by a brother, is like a city 
distressed and defenceless. Why in the world then 
did you, who are wretched, nay, wretched to the 
third degree, try to carry through this project of 
yours, as if no reconciliation were possible?? On 
what principle did you let your murderous rage 
against John run its course, as if he were your enemy ? 
And how has it come to you, to be so savage towards 
one another? Why did you let the world see such 
an extraordinary change in you, from gentleness to 
ungentleness and savagery? I am amazed, indeed, 
I am overwhelmed with amazement at your per- 
version ; as I see everything thrown into this hopeless 
state of confusion. 

And why have you so far exalted yourselves in 
your daring, as to insult this suckling, nursing 

+ 1 Tim. vi. 18, “ ready to communicate.” 

2. Matt.v. 23. 8 Matt. v. 39. cil sa. ὌΣΣΕ τ 

Ὁ ΤΟ, κυνὶ τ cook ΡΟΝ XVine 16, ΧΟ: 


“POL, tims Use ΘῈ“ ΠΉΤΩΙΧΘΟ ὁ cf, ΒΕ, ¥, G10. 23, 
Soz. viii. 3. 


192 THE SUFFERINGS OF THE SAINTS {79 


mother, this teeming womb, the Church of God, 
and hack her in pieces? In you is fulfilled the 
prophet’s words, “‘ Because they did pursue their 
brother with the sword, and brought to destruction 
the womb upon the earth.” Ὁ With this womb the- 
divine and saving Word combined, to sow and to 
plant you and John alike, for good and profitable 
works without number. What has happened to you 
that instead of helping one another to do your duty, 
you have made up your mind that you will not keep 
quiet, and live at peace, even in the future? You 
were created for mutual service; why did you mis- 
handle the grace of God, and instead of lightening 
other men’s burdens, actually thrust them away 
from you, and cut them off from their own kindred ? 
while the prophet cries to you, “ Have we not all 
‘one Father? Did not One God create us?” # 


The Real Law-Breakers 


But you will tell me that John sinned against the 
law. What law? The law which you trod under- 
foot, and shivered into fragments by your wicked- 
ness. Where, then, is the law of nature, which bids 
us to right wrongs with gentleness? Why, pray, do 
you abuse even the law which holds between enemies, 
and persecute them, and carry out these schemes 
which you devise against them, schemes bearing all 
the marks of hostility? How much better would it 
have been, to live in harmony with them, and to 
share their life; to join with one another in counsels 
for the common good, unto rendering of thanks and 
well-pleasing of the Father of you all? Harmony in 
their enjoyment of blessings is one of the virtues of 
children; and this is specially acceptable to their 
parents, who look for nothing else from their offspring, 
save this. And be assured that there is no other 
bond of friendship and goodwill, but to be in earnest, 
and to do everything as it is well-pleasing to the 


1 Amos i. 11, LXX. 2 Mal. ii. τὸ. 


80] DIVINE VENGEANCE IN STORE τ93 


Father, to Him Who is the source of our being, of 
our sustenance, of our preservation. 


The Divine Vengeance in Store 


But you have despised Him as a fool, and kindled 
wars within the Church, as the prophet said, “ They 
established madness in the Lord’s house;’’ 1 instead 
of spurring and urging one another forward. More, 
you have carried on truceless wars among one another, 
contrary to? the mind and purpose of the Father. 1 
will go further, and say, that the thing sorely maddens, 
and stirs to wrath, even God Himself, and all who 
draw nigh to Him—His sons, your brethren—and 
suffers Him not to hold His peace. For He is not 
neglectful, or unmindful of the welfare of His children. 

Therefore is He wroth at your folly, and at your 
tyrannical oppression of those whom you wrong; 
and therefore He judges it not right to pass you over 
without punishing you, as indeed He has begun to 
do. For this would not be becoming in Him, nor 
would it be without peril to you; your complaint is 
intolerable, and needs more than ordinary treatment. 
He sees you actually the worse for bruises, and weals 
without number, the result of your chastisement. 
Yes, a cloud of senseless and most obdurate wrong 
rests upon you, your brothers, your kinsfolk, and 
your households, even your allies, those who share 
with you bed and board, those who are bound to 
you by the closest ties of blood—all these relation- 
ships you have perverted into the bitterest hatred; 
insomuch that they are expelled from their own 
countries and from their family hearths, and wander 
far away, without a city or a home to dwell in. 
Further yet, you have made them exiles, so far as 
it was in your power, and‘ that, not with a limit of — 
time fixed for their exile, but for ever, so far as it 
lay with you; so savage were you, so desperately 
thrown off your balance. | 


siios. Ix. δὶ 
2 The text has “‘ according to ’’; which is clearly wrong. 


194 THE SUFFERINGS OF THE SAINTS [80 


Chrysostom the Blessed 


This is what you have gained by your victory 
over them, and the blessed John; by fanning your 
spiteful enmity, and letting your tongue run wild 
against him, like a sharpened sword. Instead of 
profitable instruction, you nurse your ill-temper, and 
pour out upon the Church your false accusations, 
defiling the ears of those who hear them; accusations 
against men to whom the Lord in mercy and loving- 
kindness will give according to their works. But 
for you, O blessed John, with what words shall I 
weave you an unfading crown? I need not fear to 
praise you now, as you have passed from the field of 
combat, the fiercest waves of struggle breasted. 
Shall they be the words of the law of Moses, which 
he used in the blessing of Joseph the strenuous, and 
Levi the contemplative, the priest? For in you I 
see both of these. ‘‘ Blessed of the Lord be his land, 
and from the mountains of heaven, and dew, and 
abysses of springs beneath, and in the time of fruits, 
the turnings of the sun and the comings together of 
the months, from the heads of the mountains which 
are from the beginning, and from the heads of the 
everlasting hills; they shall be on the head of 
Joseph”’ (and every man who shall be as Joseph) 
“and upon the head of the brethren whom he ruled, 
glorified among his brethren as the first-born.1 The 
beauty of a bull are his horns, his horns are the 
horns of an unicorn; with them he shall push the 
nation, even unto the end of the earth.” 

And to Levi he said (and to whosoever imitates 
him), “‘ Give to Levi his signs, and his truth to the 
holy man, whom they tried in trial, and reviled at 
the water of contradiction. Who saith to his father 
and mother, I have not seen thee, neither did he 
acknowledge his brethren, he observed thine oracles, 
and kept thy covenant; he showed thy judgments to 


1 We have no MS. support for this punctuation ; which can 
hardly be due to a slip of the memory. 


81] THE CURSE OF AMBITION 195 


Jacob, and thy law to Israel. He shall ever place 
incense upon thine altar upon thy feast day. Bless, 
Lord, his strength, and accept the works of his hands ; 
smite the eyebrow of the enemies that rise up against 
him, and let them that hate him rise not up again.” ὦ 
And I would weave with these one word more: “ Let 
them that love him, O Jesus Christ, be not ashamed ; 
for Thine is the power for ever. Amen.” 

Bish. This is the constant effort of your under- 
standing mind, Theodorus, seeker of noble thoughts, 
to bring forth from the treasure of your mind, as the 
Saviour said, “‘ Things new and old;”’ 2 things old, 
the lessons of human wisdom; things new, the 
oracles of the Holy Spirit. From these treasures 
you have given its due to each side of his character. 
It was worthy of your sound judgment to express 
yourself in language so well suited to the offences 
committed, and to weave from the blessing of Moses 
the crown John deserves; who served as a priest 
without thought of self, and in his extraordinary 
righteousness did indeed know not father or mother, 
or ties of blood, but only those who love, and practise, 
the word of God. But those who in our time profess 
to be bishops, have run their muddy breed aground 
upon money-getting, and military operations, and 
high position; transgressing the law which says, 
“The priests shall not give their sons to be rulers, 
and them that run beside the king,’ ? while they 
waste the things of the spirit upon plots, and vexa- 
tions, and imprisonments, and banishments, drinking 
madness undiluted, thinking by these methods to 
dishonour the friends of virtue. 


The Curse of Ambition 


Of them the Saviour said, ‘‘ The days shall come, in 
which they who kill you will think that they do God 
service.’ 4 I take it that He did not speak of Gen- 

1 Deut. xxxiil. 13-17, 8-II. 2 Matt. xili. 52. 
2 A reminiscence of Lev. xviii. 21, LX X. 
* youn -xvi.2 (ireely). 


196 THE SUFFERINGS OF THE SAINTS [81 


tiles, for then He would have said “ gods,” as they 
profess not one, but many, gods; when He made 
mention of the One and Only God, He pointed to 
those who are now despoiling us, under pretence of 
benefit to the Church. They hide their own depravity 
and jealousy, representing themselves in words as 
concerned for the welfare of the Church which they 
have ruinéd by their deeds. But however clever 
they are, the outcome of events will prove them to 
have been underlings of him who boasted, “I shall 
never be shaken from generation to generation, 
without evil.’ 1 For the serpent, the deviser of - 
lawlessness and cultivator of the vilest covetousness, 
as he could devise no more novel form of heresy, 
goaded those in authority in the Church to mutual 
destruction, to satisfy their craving for high position, 
and the highest position of all; ? for the sake of these 
they rent the Church in twain. 


The Satanic Work of Chrysostom’s Enemies 


For if the harmony of God the Spirit had existed 
among the bishops, and John deserved deprivation 
from his office, whether for causing wrong-doing, or 
as being unworthy of the priesthood, or, as Theophilus 
maintains, as being guilty of pride; the all-powerful 
wisdom of God 3 was well able to debar him from the 
exercise of the priesthood by constitutional restraints, 
or devise means by which he could be expelled without 
all this confusion and lamentation, whether by death, 
or by paralysis, or by loss of voice—as we know some 
of those who have thrown themselves against him 
have suffered, and others will suffer. But seeing 
that the steps taken against him were unworthy of 
the Saviour—he was not deposed, but exiled *—it is 

Pore XG. 

2 “‘ Philocathedria.’’? Formed (‘‘ phil—”’ as in ‘‘ Theophilus,” 
p. 142) like ‘‘ Protocathedria ”’ (“‘ protos,”’ “ first ἢ), the word 
in St. Matt. xxiii. 6; ‘“‘cathedra’’ being used in Church 
language for the ‘‘ seat’ or ‘‘ cathedral chair”’ of a bishop. 

oh E15": Vp. Ban de σαί Ὁ. 

4 z.e. by the civil authorities. 


82] GOD HAD NOT FORGOTTEN τ97 


abundantly clear that it was the work of the devil, 
whose kingdom was being destroyed by John’s 
teaching. [ know that John deservedly deposed 
from their office six persons, of whom-I spoke earlier, 
for buying the dignity of the priesthood. Who wept 
then? Whose nose bled? What spider’s web was 
broken? Who left his home? Who was fined a 
farthing? Whoin the whole of Asia—vagabond, mob 
orator, farm-labourer, cobbler, or plebeian—was not 
glad at what had been done to vindicate the sacred 
laws? ‘ How,’’ each cried, “are thy works mag- 
nified, O Lord? In wisdom didst thou do them 
all.”’1 For where God is at work, all is done in 
wisdom; where the malevolent demon, everything 
is correspondently done in unwisdom. And upon 
unwisdom follow monstrous evils—envyings, murders, 
strife, emulations, evil tempers, quarrels, discord, 
noise, conspiracies of ignorant men, hot-headed 
actions of men in authority, crucifixions, tortures, 
burnings, streams of blood, intolerable fines, stakes, 
breaches of the divine ordinances, contempt of law, 
rejection of self-control, world-wide schism, watch 
set upon land and sea, engines employed on ship- 
board, on horseback, on foot, to hinder those who 
travel for the truth’s sake. 


God had not Forgotten 


How then can they dare to say, John was expelled 
in the dispensation of God? I ask those who use 
such words, Was the all-powerful wisdom of God, as 
I said, without resource to stop John, if he was 
unworthy, by unseen power? Or to persuade those 
who disagreed with him, patiently to bear with his 
action, without all this exercise of force by the 
magistrates? For if God is the same God Who worked 
with Moses for the freedom and obedience of Israel, 
when Pharaoh openly cried, “1 know not God, and 
I will not let the people go,” 2 how, in dealing with 


le erat os Be 5. oo "2. 


198 THE SUFFERINGS OF THE SAINTS [82 


John, did He need the help of earthly magistrates ? 
He had grown old, I suppose, or weak, or resource- 
less. And was He Who brought to light the adulteries 
of some, the unnatural crimes of others, and again 
the impostures of others, now without resource to 
convict John? Or again, He Who made the tongue 
of a man to swell with constriction, until he had to 
make his confession in writing, and allowed another 
to meet with his death from a sudden seizure; He 
Who tormented another with a brood of worms, as 
he lay speechless upon his bed for nearly a whole 
year, or laid upon another unspeakable horrors from 
chronic gout, or burnt the legs of another, because 
He so willed; or Who prematurely snatched away 
another, whom every one knows, by a nauseating 
death; was He too weak, as you assert, in the case 
of John, if he was a sacrilegious man, to do any of 
these things, but was in need of so and so, before He 
could expel John in disgrace, and thereby add to 
His glory? 


God will Recompense 


No. They deceive themselves, in their ignorance 4 
of the command of the word of God. For he cannot 
properly be called sacrilegious, who distributed to 
the poor gold, and silver, and fabrics of silk, the food 
of moths 2; but he who for money and reputation 
and the pleasures of the table sells the teachings 
and ordinances of the Saviour; and after him, he 
who ruins a holy man, adorned by his life and words, 
through whom, as by a chalice or a piece of plate, 
the Saviour oft gave the drink of the word, the diet ὃ 
of their salvation, to those who love the word of 
God. No, let them be called sacrilegious, who have 
sacrilegiously robbed the apostolic Church, and 


1 Bigot supplies this word, which is not in the MSS. 

Σ Matt. vi. 19. ‘‘ Do you boast of your silken robes? They 
are the spinnings of worms, the inventions of barbarians.’’— 
Cir. Oe) Ax, 

3 A medical term. 








82] GOD WILL RECOMPENSE 199 


deprived her of such teachers, and who sell ordina- 
tions for money; whom divine justice will pursue, 
to correct their wickedness. For if those who 
corrupted the law of Moses were for their wanton 
heedlessness driven out of the temple by the Saviour 
with a scourge, a scourge of cords, because they were 
selling doves within it; what punishment shall they 
have, who higgle the priesthood of the New Testa- 
ment, except to be shattered by the Chief Shepherd 
with His rod of iron? As the apostle says, “ἃ man 
that hath set at nought Moses’ law dieth without 
compassion on the word of two or three witnesses. 
Of how much sorer punishment, think ye, shall he 
be judged worthy, who hath trodden under foot the 
Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the cove- 
nant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, 
and hath done despite to the spirit of grace? For 
we know him who saith, Vengeance belongeth unto 
me, 1 will recompense, saith the Lord. It is a fearful 
thing to fall into the hands of the living God.” 1 

May God, Who glorified this holy man, this saintly 
shepherd, this lamp of righteousness, grant to us to 
find part and lot with him, in His awful day of righteous 
judgment ; to Whom belongs glory, honour, majesty, 
and magnificence, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now 
and ever, and unto all ages. Amen. 


+ Teb. x. 28-31. 


I am greatly indebted to Mr. P. R. Norton, Rhodes 
Scholar, of Christ Church, Oxford, for revising my proof- 
sheets. 












gti as ie, i ie tS 





KEY-WORDS TO PARALLEL PHRASES 





AND EXPRESSIONS 








Dial. Laus. Hist. 

(Ed. Migne) (Ed. Butler) 
aBaphs 60 c 32. 12 
᾿Αθανάσιος sid 158.5 
ἄθλιος 78 f 20: 15 
αἰδοῦμαι 616 16. 3 
αἰσχύνομαι 25. 6 Hig vay) 
ἀλήθεια 77b Sie ΤΙ 
dua. : ΒΑ, 24. 5. 711 6. Εἴθ. 52 1 
᾿Αμμώνιος. 59 54. 15 
ἀνδρεῖος (56 4), 60b 128.1 
ἀνεμόφθορος 53d 140. II 
ἄνθρωπος, ἢ 60e 161.9 
ἀντιπράττω 16c, 410 49. 21 
ἀξίωμα 17a, 108 T3403 
ἀπό. : : Id 19. 19 
ἀποδημία. Ξ 8d, 49d 11. τ 
ἄροτρον ποῖ 104. 4 
᾿Αυγουστάλιος. 24a 134. 16 
βλαβή 70a 14.14 
γραφικός. 6a, 39a, 67d 92.1, 30.14 
*yuvatkoepak . 44c 161.14 
Δανιήλ, 20 Ὁ tof | 
δῆθεν 6e, 10d, 21d, etc. 42. 8, 20 
διαθήκη 78 16.10 
διασκορπίζω . 61a 38. 2. 150: 0 
διηγέομαι. GOa (7! Ὁ) 2.6. Χ2},.10..22; 21..3; 46:11 
διορατικός. 546 44. ὃ 











* This word apparently does not occur 


literature. 


201 


elsewhere in Greek 


202 KEY-WORDS TO PARALLEL PHRASES 








Dial. Laus. Hist. 

(Ed. Migne) (Ed. Butler) 
ἐγκύκλιος 52ς 64.9, 152.8 
εἴ τις 5406, etc. 34.9 
εἰ ἐβούλετο 60e 15. 17 
εἰσφρέω 5if 9.9 
ἐλευθέρα. 276 44. 28 
ἐμβάλλω. ΙΟς 146. 20 
ἐμός. δος 146.4 
ἐντυγχάνω 66 f 80. 17 
ἔξοδος 80 b 78.15 
ἐξυφαίνω. 6b 146. 3 
ἐπανθέω 32b 14. 20 
ἐπισκοπέω aod 104.8 
ἐργαστήριον 20 b, 59a 101: 15 
εὐλογία 45e 79. 18 
εὐχάριστος 2/3 141. 12 
εὔχομαι 53a 115.15 
Ouppew - 138, 51b 75-9, 99. 49 158.9 
Ἱέραξ 59d 60: 11 
ἰλιγγιάω. 32.4 42, 05 
Ἰσίδωρος . 22a, 23a E520, 16: ὃ 
κάλλιστα. 264. 36c 50. 13 
καλογήρως 11 5» 53. 8, 102. 15 (56. 16) 
KapTepew . 59e 21.17.5025 
κατάστασις 19 d, f ΟἹ. 4 
KEVT POS 19:1 251 11 
KAluaE : “11 86. 9 
Κορίνθιοι. 66 f 70.2 
κοσμέω . 59d, 6ο 65, etc. 10, ὃ: 10:25 
κύριος 4od Ἃ1..17 
τὸ δὴ λεγόμενον 56b 82. 6 
λιπαρεω 226 18. 16 
μάρτυς 28 b 154.9 
μέλισσα. ° 27-5 142. 20 
μισόκαλος. 16e (38a), 81d Ὁ: 9 
uynorevomat 19 b, 373 86. 6, 160. 
νομοθέτης. 621 Or 2 
ξενόδοχος . ° 224 15-9 











KEY-WORDS TO PARALLEL 


PHRASES: .205 











Dial. Laus. Hist. 

(Ed. Migne) (Ed. Butler) 
656s . 40b 13.7 
οἶμαι. 76 102.9 
Ὀλυμπιάς. 56a, 60c, d 1τ0: 2. 5 
ὄμνυμι 678 20. 12 
ὁμολογέω. A 39 b, 56g, etc 22.10 
ὀνειδίζω ἘΠ 12.30 
οὖν. 24c, 25b, 34, d, 8 passim 
παρά ; AS Coal 50. 1 157.4 
παρασκευάζ. 23f, 25d, 49d, etc. 20.9, 79.6 
παρεδρεύω. 18d 130, 21 
παριππεύω 134, τὸιο 23:25 
περιπίπτω. 2b 10.25, 78: 2 
περίστασις 32 Ὁ, σ0 Ὁ 1 Ὁ, τὸ. 7 
πλεῖστον. 54 b, 68 b Gis 
πλύνω 10a 65.8 
πολία Troster. 14.12 
πρᾶγμα 6d, 35 ἃ, 39, εἰς. 83.7, etc 
προέχω 19d, 32a 103.1, Tj. ly [5.2..12 
ῥῖγος 59 b 34. 15 
σεμνολόγημα 44 Ὁ 150.9 
σοφίζομαι. 6e 23,10 
συγκροτέω 22d (72 δ) 165. 20 
συκοφαντέω 13.655 b 97-9 
guvavaoTpepw . 58c 10. 4 
* συνασμενισμός 69 ¢ 163.7 
συντείνω. 40 d (47 f) 83.5, 116. 4 
σφριγάω 168 16, τό: 1101-02 
ταριχεύω. 58 1 (82 b) 119: 17, 143.9 
τετρακόσιος 74b 147. 11 
τημελέω 18e 78. 4 
ὑπερβολή. 27 g, 31 b, 60a, etc. | 32. 20, 58. 6, 152: 15 
ὑπόθεσις 444, 45. 40. 3, 80. 20 
φαντασία. 58e 76.2 
φιλομαθήῆς 5if 1.2. ἘΠῚ ἃ 
φρονέω 18e 117. 10; 155: 0 
χρέος 5d BES 


























* This word apparently does not occur elsewhere in Greek 


literature. 


gives three more close parallels, 


Abbott Butler in his 7. 7. S, article (p. Xxiv, 0.) 


INDEX 


ACCIDIE, 148, 151, 182 f. 

“* Agrapha,”’ 34 

Almsgiving, 48, 50, 152 

Ambition, clerical, 40, 59, 
62; 00, 325, ΤΟΙ, τὸ f- 

Angels, 85, 87 f., 101 


Anthropomorphism, 54, 62 ‘' 


τ Anthropos,”’ fem., 140 

ASIANS, 47.74.2970, 123 125 

Auditors of the Dialogue, 6 
60, 119, 165 

Ὁ Augustalian,”’ 56 


> 


Baths, 46, 66, 94, 152 
Bishop of the Dialogue, 6 f., 
59: ΤΟ 133 2150-04721. 
BI DES~ τι 30; 30; 52, 50, 
O3,-0F, 124.127, £30,134, 

136, 139, 156, 179 


Celibacy, 46, 136, 177 
Civils power, χὶ τ τ 1 24) 
32, 49, 55, 59, 62, 73, 2. 
79, ΟἹ, 93, 196 
» Comes, = At, 70 
τ Cunosus.* 15 
Ὁ Cyclopean meals,” 66, 97 
CANONS AND LAws— 
** Apostolical Constitu- 
tions,’’ 36, 46, 97, 132 
Canons of Antioch, 74 
of Chalcedon, 13, 26, 56, 
0. 118, 522.126 
of Constantinople, 12, 


14 

of Ephesus, 8 

of Laodicea, 21, 177 

of Nicaea, 11 f., 22, 28, 
40544, 501. ὁ; 60: 
ELO, 235 

General, II, 14, 20, 22, 49, 
ἊΣ 5 it Let Poy, ΤΟΥΣ 
196 


204 


OF SUBJECTS 


CHuRCH BuILDINGS— 
Baptistery, 120 
Chancel, 17 
Churches in Constanti- 
nople, 59, 88, 176 
Expenditure upon, 51, 115, 
118 
Fonts, 17 
Hospitals, 45 
Hostels, 50, 149 
Sanctuary, 128 
Shrines, 42, 62, 80, 95, 148 
Treasury, 88 
Vestry, 86 
CHURCH OFFICIALS— 
Acolytes, 38, 68 
Archdeacons, 12 
Arch-priests, 56 
Deaconesses, 26, 46, 86 
‘*Defensor Rerum Publi- 
carum,’’ 129 
Deacons, 10,12; Τὸ; 27, 
644.7 130 
Guestmasters, 50, 102 
Metropolitans, 56, 65, 117 
Patriarchs, 8, 12,'128 
‘’PODEG, 5, 52, 50 
Readers, 7, 38,135 
Singers, 177 
Stewards, 26, 54, 176 
Subdeacons, 38 
CHURCH ORDINANCES, ETC.— 
ASCELICS|< 206; 35) ΟἿ; 152; 
Ἐ75: 

Asylum in Churches, 41, 52 
Baptism, 37535, 56, 80, 
32, 57 

Burial rites, 97 

Celibacy, 46, 136, 177 

Christmas, 78 

in ‘Communion 211. 
20, 49 1., 59, 07, 75, 175. 
179, 190 


INDEX OF 


CHURCH ORDINANCES, ETC. 

(continued) 

‘* Diocese,’’ 12, 56, 59 

Easter, 57, 75, 00,204 

Ὁ ΕΠ ΟΡΊαΣ,Σ 113 

Exemptions of clergy, 
27 

Finance, 12, 45 

Great Sabbath, 17, 79 

«Lent, 76,30 

Letters of Commendation, 
24,20, 50 

Litanies, 46, 137 

Marriage of clergy, 
128 

Marriages, second, 150 

Monks, 53 ff., 57, 65, 141 ff. 

PAviysteties..: 18., 36, «57, 
80, 84, 19:1: 80 

Night Services, 46, 80 

““Omophorion ” (Tippet), 


53 

Ordination, 35, 42, 55, 57, 
δ Οὐ Σὺ το. ΤΌΣ, 
137 

eared 12. 57, 

Pentecost. 1, 81 

Plate oo. 15S, 120 135 

PrOVInCe, 12, 1, 19; 22, 
56, 59 

Reservation, 18 

Ἢ SACiiliCe,. 1290 

Salutation of People, 73, 
120 

SChOOIS;. F370, 1.77 

Sign of the Cross, 96, 137, 
Foon. 

~ Symbols,” 57, 64, $2, 96 

Synods,7,. 420 τῶι 15) 21 ἢ 
2. ΣΤ, 55, 62, 69, 73; 
PLS; 127. 535. 100 

Veils (‘‘ Maphoria ’’), 84 

Virgins, virginity, 3, 26, 
44, 97, 106, 150, 152 

Widows, 32, 46, 86, 140, 
150 


118, 


Deacon of the Dialogue, 6, 
145, 173 


SUBJECTS 205 

Divine Punishment, xii, 52, 
64, 88, 90, 146 f., 159, 193, 
196 ff. 


Edicts: 24 1. 9%, 436 
Egypt, knowledge of, 36 
“Enlightenment,” 56, 78 


i Plattety 25.090, G4, 108: 
134, 138 
Free will, 186 


‘ Gits, 120 
Gluttony, 45, 98, 103 ff., 181 


Heretics, dealings with, 141 
Hospitality, 1oo ff., 149, 152 


** Tllumination,”’ 120, 131 
εν ΤῊ ΠΟΙ ΘΠ “117 

Ὁ ΙΔ 0} 18,1304. 
Insolence, 166 

** Introduced ’? women, 44 


pe SG Uo Ysa Cras ie: 


Last hour, 180 f. 

Lausiac History, xv ff. . See 
Palladiis= in > mde< 
of Persons.”’ 

‘ese Majeste ΣΙ 


Mammon, 114 
Missionary work, 92 


Nitria, Mt., 53 ff., 148 


Oak. τ Θυησα Ol is, .25. 
60: 65», 68; 735,120, 123, 
126, 148, 169 

Oaths, 90: 120, 148 

Origenism,. 54, 60, 62,65, 
7A 117. 126; 135/105 


Pastille, before Communion, 
64 

Patriarch of the Jews, 128 

‘** Philosophy,”’ 93, 165 

Priestly ideais,-11 3, 130, ΤΟΙ 


206 


** Princeps,”’ 62 

Proconnesus, 63, 125 

Prosperity of wicked, 180 ff, 

Providence, 39, 44, 100, 150, 
185 


Riches, 2, 45, 47, 100 

Rock (St. Matt. xvi. 13), 167 

Rome, influence of Church 
Ol, 25 £..56,.76 


Scripture, study of, 38 f., 57, 
98, 102, 131, 146, 149, 159, 
183, 486, 188 


INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


Senate, 88, 121 
Simony, 5, 118, 
129, 134, 199 


1:25: 127; 


“Tables,” 64, 99 f., 106, 112, 


138 

“Tall Brothers,” 54-62, 141- 
148 

Thanksgiving, 96, 190 

aheatres, 47, 87, 13: 15. 
137 : 

Truth, eulogized, 33 f., 
190 

Tumult in church, 18, 81 f. 


18, 


PERSONS MENTIONED IN THE TEXT 


ACACIUS,;DD.; 23, 25, 32; 353 
48, 50, 65, 72, 76, 79, 81, 
84,5530, 152 

/Emilius, bp., 28 

Ammon, bp., 117 

Ammonius, bp. (Laod.), 75 f. 

Ammonius, bp. (Pelus.), 179 

Ammonius, monk, 54, 65, 
141, 145 f. 

Amphilochius, bp., 152 

ADLIOCHUS. Dp... 23,32, 49, 
65. γῦ, 76) 7o1 81, 8.1. 
136, 152 

Antoninus, bp., 118 

Antonius (St.), monk, 145, 
149 

Antonius, monk, 175 

Anysius, bp., 24, 29 

Arabianus, bp., 117 

Arcadius, Fmp., 27, 4%, 59, 
G2. 65,070 t.. 77 1. 82; 
Ga 1.320, 126 

Arsacius, bp., 25 ff., 30, 90 

Athanasius (St.), 74, 76 

Atticus, bp., 30, 91, 175 


Basiliscus, mart., 95, 97 
Bonifacius, prt., 28 
Bosphorus, bp., 180 

Brisson, brother of Palladius, 


175 


Cassianus, deac., 25, 148 

Chromatius, bp., 21, 28, 30 

Chrysostom, John, birth and 
education, 37; monastic 
life, 38; ordained deacon, 
40, pitest, 40.7. 116. at 
Antioch, Vill t;, 40; 1273; 
bp. of Constantinople, 42 ; 
reforms, 42 ff.; secures 


207 


recognition of Flavian, 50; 
dealings with tall 
Brothers,”’ 58 ff.; letters 
to “Theophilus, Go. 60; 
trouble caused by Euse- 


115... 119 3) Vise 10 
Ephesus, 125 ff.; deposi- 
tion of bishops, 116 ff., 


126, 197; forebodings, 66; 
consoles his friends, 66 ff.; 
first expulsion and return, 
15; 2 Quiet work, 7s; 
attempt’ on his: life; -177- 
letter to Innocent, 8 ff.; 
demands synod of inquiry, 
17,20: 0; Second: €x- 
DulSiON, 87 ΗΠ; “exe. τὸ 
Cucusus, 89f.; to Arabis- 
5115, 92... 10." ityus,. Oa. 
death and burial, 96. 
Abstemiousness, 98 ff., 
192) 15; Chaper.oL.. 
ΤΌ; Character: vist, 33, 
41, 194 ff.; charges against, 
253. 25, 45, Ὁ 71: Ὁ. bo, 
ΤΙ, 123, 100, 163) τὸς - 
generosity, 45, 198; hon- 
oured aS martyr, 168; 
humour, 169; ideals, 4o, 
LOS)" F113) ττο ἢ iss a, 
1054 411 -nealth, 240; 04, 
OS; letters, 100, 1.25, 170]; 
literary work, vili, 100; 
“Liturgy of,” 96;, mis- 
sionary work, 92, 123; out- 
Spokentiess, 335, 42. 65. 
72, 78, 90, 96, 153, 160, 162, 
164, 190; retirement, love 
of, 155, 166; self-control, 
119, 166 
Constantius, bp., 135 ἴ. 


208 PERSONS MENTIONED IN THE TEXT 


Cronius, prt., 149 

Cyriacus,; bp., 24, 28, 30 f.; 
172, 174 

Cyriacus, deac., 10, 89 f. 

Cyriacus, prt., 136 


Cyrinus, bp., 23, 77, 84, 126, 


147 | 
Cythegius, bp., 28 


Damasus, bp., 50, 140 

Demetrius, bp., 9f., 14, 26, 
20; 431,.05;, £72, 178; 1.78 Ὁ. 

Dioscorus, monk, 54, 61, 65, 
ΤῊ, 127 Ὁ 

Diophantes, prt., 136 

Domitian, steward, 26 


Elpidius, bp., 77, 175 

Elpidius, prt., 177 

Epiphanius, bp., 62 f., 71, 117, 
140, 152 

Eudoxia, Empress, ixf., 33, 
Ἵν, ΠῚ O24 721, 78; 
80,90, 11, 103 

Eugenius, bp. (Heracl.), 9 f. 

Eugenius, bp. (Phryg.), 175 

Eugraphia, 33, 65 

Eulogius, bp., 179 

ROULVSIG, (OD. c LA, 2... 11 
O7.1:,.89 1,492, 174 

Eusebius, bp., 117 ff. 

Eusebius, deac., 8 

Eutropius, eunuch, 41f., 48, 72 

Eutropius, singer, 177 

Evagrius, bp., 40, 50 


Flavian, bp., 40, 50, 135 


Gainas, 41, 122 

Gaudentius, bp., 28 

George, biographer, vii, xv f. 
Germanus, prt., 14, 25, 68 
Gerontius, bp., 116 

Gregory, bp. (Cpl.), 152, 168 
Gregory, bp., 175 

Helladius, prt., 176 


Heracleides, bp., 74, 126, 175 
Hesychius, bp., 123 1, 


Hierax, monk, 145 

Hierax, monk, 148 f. 
Hilarius, monk, 175 
Honorius, Emp., 27, 41, 190 


Innocent, bp., 8, 21, 24, 53 
Isaac, prt., 149 

Isaac (2), prt., 149 

Isaac Syriscus, monk, 48, 70 
Isidore (Pel.), viii, 51 
Isidore, prt., 42, 50 ff., 150 


Jerome, 8, 45, 62, 80 
John, bp., 175 
John, prt., 176 


Lampetius, bp., 175 
Leo, biographer, vii. 
Leontius, bp., 75 f. 
Lucius, 81, 86 
Luppicianus, bp., 146 


Macarius, monk, 149 
Marianus, bp., 30 
Martyrius, deac., 22 
Miletus, bp., 38 f. 


Nectarius, bp., 30, 40, 86, 90, 
152 

Nevridius, 86 

Nicarete, deaconess, 86, 92 


Olympias, deaconess, 46, 86, 
80. ΟΖ, 100; 1101, 150.0. 
176 

Optatus, prefect, 26, 89 

Optimus, bp., 152 

Origen, 54, 131; 168 


Palladius, bp. of Helenopolis, 
life, xv; commissioner of 
inquiry, 123; with Chrys- 
ostom at Ephesus, 126; 
at Constantinople during 
εἰ synod *’ of The Oak, 66; 
arrives at Rome, 25; mem- 
ber of deputation to Con- 
stantinople, 29 ff.; journey 
10: Syone, Ἐπ; 178 ἢ 


PERSONS MENTIONED IN THE FEAL. 209 


Question of authorship, 
sav, (ΠΣ similarities of 
Style, ete;, 16. those Οἵ 
Lausiac Hist., 36, 390, 70, 
Ὁ3 100, 1124; ΤῊ -730 f., 
115, ΤῊ, £47, 151,153; 
155, LOG τ ͵9 1.151; 5671.5 
see ‘‘ Index of Key-words.”’ 

Pansophius, bp. (Nic.), 116 

Pansophius, bp. (Pis.), 9 f., 
120 

Pavers, prt... 23 

Eappus, pp: 94175 

ἘΠῚ bp. (Crat.), 80; 126 

Pally Dp. (eracl.), 23, 65 

Pavi.deac., τὸ, 39, 176 

Paulinus, bp., 40, 50 

Pentadia, deaconess, 86 

Peter, Dp, 152 

Peter ΘΙ, 22. 

Pharetrius, bp., 75 

Philip, ascetic, 176 

Philip, prt.;-276 

Photius; hist:; vil, Xvii, ὁ 

Potphyiius,. bp... 24. 91 f.; 
ΤΟΊ ere | 

Procle, deaconess, 86 

Provincialus, 177 


Rhodon, bp., 175 
Rufinus, 41, 68 


Salustius, prt, 176 

Serapion, archdn., 
20, 60, 68, 79, 175 

Serapion, bp., 180 

welus, Dit. 1 

Severlanus, pi, 232, 25, 22, 
45, 05,70, 76, 78; 81, 84, 
93, 136, 152 

Severus, prt., 68 

Silvanus, bp., 176 

Silvina, 86 

Sisinnius, 146, 177 


Vill, 52, 


Socrates, hist., vii 
Sophronius, deac., 176 
Sozomen, hist., vii 
Stephanus, prt., 176 
Stephanus, ascetic, 176 


Syncletius, bp., 123 f. 
Theodore, biographer, vii, 
XV 


Theodorus, bp., 75, 180 
Theophilus, bp. of ae 
dria, early life, 8; reconciled 
to Flavian, 50 hostility 
to Chrysostom’s ordina- 
tion, 42; expels monks, 
53.0., τῆσ τ attack ion 
monasteries, 56; corre- 
spondence with Chrysos- 
tom, 61, 69 f.; summoned 
to Constantinople, 62; ar- 
rival and _ rudeness~ to 
Chrysostom, I1; returns, 
16; excommunicates Isi- 
dore, 50 ff.: <at The: Oak: 
68 ff.;. return to Egypt, 
74; Suggests use of Antio- 
chene Canons, 74; notifies 
Innocent, 8; excommuni- 
cated in the West, I90. 
Apostrophized,; “for τ: 
character, Xi, 43, 49, 5%; 
53,174; 115, 117, 140m 
Theophilus, prt., 176 
Theotimus, bp., 117 
Tigrius, prt., 26, 68, 176 
Timotheus, bp., 175 
Tranquilius, bp. 77. 


Valentianus, prt., 28 
Vallagas, prt., 28 

Venerius, Dp., 21, 25 
Victor,*bp., 131, 174 


INDEX ΟΕ TEXiS 


Gen. iv. 8 . ° 
vili. 8, 22 : 
x. IO 
xi. 2 
XXVIil. 20 
XXXi. 40 
EXN1X. 22 
ἘΠῚ 23, 

Exod. iii. 14 
V.2 
be at 1. 
>. @.o at ig ee 


Deut. iv. 20 
Cece 6,50, 15 
RXxi: 8. 1 

Judges i. 15 
lil. 15 

r Sam. iii. 15 
vii. 17 
Xvi. 7 
MAVi27 Ὁ 

2 Kings v. 15 
ΝΙ τὰ : 

1 Chron. xxvii. 22 

Job v. 26 
ΧΧΙ. 4-14 
> 9. GES Fay | 
ἜΧΧΙΣ 
DO. ΧΙ 18 
ἘΠ ΖΡ 

Εσ αν 2 
Vii. 5 
Ἑ Ὁ 
XV. 5 
xxiv. 8, 12 
EXV. 4. 5,.0 
ΧΙ 1 
xlvili. 5 . 

lil. 6 
Iba kh bese @ i 
lxiv, 6 


85, 


bo. 


69 
IOI 
IIo 


Ps iss. τ 
Ib o.ai tee ae 
Ἰχσχτιν τὸ 
IxxXvli. II 
XCili. 2 
ΟἽ 
ὉΠ Ὁ 
Ο111: 24 
xvi το. 
ΣΙΝ 28. 51 
Gxix, 106 
Cos 
CXxKit 7 
Cxik 3 
cxliv. 14 ff. 

Prov. i. 20 
ΧΙ ἢ 
Χ11 727 
DGG | 
RVI ET. 
XV1ll. 19 
<0 
XV; Ὁ 
ἜΧΟΙ 22 : 

Eccles. 11. 5, 11, 18 
Xilil. 15 

isa. 1.272 
Volt £2 
Ὁ. 20 
1x. 6 
ΧΟΤ 
ἘΠ) τ 

Jeli πὸ 
v. II 
v. 28 
vil. 15 
Sb duty Ba 
ix: 21 
X11. IO 
V7 
ΣΙΣ 5 


- 174 
ΧΧΙ foe 
155 
188 
ΤΟΙ 
34 
184 
126 
ΧΧΊ Or 
136 
182 
ΙΟῚ 
ΤΟΙ 
160 
160 
134 
115 
L7t 
102 " 
104 
EIL 
ΤΟΙ 
117 
169 
45 
156 
ΤΩ2 
ao 
156 
99 
113 
150 
130 


INDEX OF FEXIES 


Ezek. 1. I-3 : 155 


vili. 7-17 : τς 157 
ix τ-ὸ ς : MLSS 


KVEAQ 7 104 
XXXlll. 2-6 : 150 
ἈΧχιν 2 ; ἘΠ ὙΤ15 
Danii 21 : ᾿ς ΤΟΥ 
Hos. ν΄ 12 : Reino 
ΧΙ 9; ΤΊ : eas 
viii. 8, 9 : ἘΠῚ 2.5 
πὶ ὃ : : 2 1053 
Amos i. II : Roe fey 
vi. 4-0 . : τ 104 
Wii. ΤΥ 12 : ΕΠ ΤΟ9 
Mic. iii. I1 e290 
Hab. 1. 2-4 Ξ ἐν hos 
Malin 7. : oe 1LO 
i. τὸ : ᾿ ΤΟΣ 
111. 13-16 : ee OS 
WVISd 4.6". : sO 
Wi. Ta : : Po 
Vit, 21: : ΤΟΣ 


1X87. ὁ apes £016) 
X11. 9 : : τ ΚΘ Θ 


Ecclus. ii. 6 : Be e097) 
WAIT Οὐ ἢ ς Ἶ ἘΧῚ ὉΠ 
i203. : ΕΣ ΤΟΥ 
mv CO. : 80 
ΧΙ 10. Aen EN 


Bel and Dragon, 4 Σ᾽ 1 ΠΈΘῚΕ, 
1 Macc. i. 51 : oe 70 
MACG ν᾿ τ΄. : 100 


1 4.15 92 
Maly : 108 
wees : 120 
ν..20 Ἶ 153 
ν- 30 : 101 
Vv. 45 : 143 
ME. τὸ: . 198 
aia ae. Sate So ΤΤΆ 
Mit Oo, [2 koa 
vill. 18, τὸ ἐπ 200 
ΜΠ. 20. : 43 
ἐπ ΤΙ ΧΧ 175 
ἘΠ 25 : ΟΙ 
ΧΙ Τὸ <x ΤΟῸ 
ΧΙ 2... 48, 189 
ἘΠῚ 539 ὃ 60 


Matt. xii. 36 


ἘΠ: 52 
SV 13 
Ἔν 253 
Vil. ΤΟ. 
Xviii. 6 
xVIN, 17 
Xi, ΤῸ ta 
Kika 7 
x. 2 

<x! 6 
ἜἘΧΙ 52 

po οὐ θῖν δ, 
ΧΧΙν 15 
ἘΣ cE’. 
ΧΥν 35 


Mark j 1 24 


Ἢ 10 


Luke ii. 25 


11 ἡ 
ΝΞ 
vi. 26 
vi. 30 
vil. 34 
1Χ ay 
ἘΠῚ ἘΝ 
ΜΠ): 27, 


ἘΜ. 2 
ἈΝ! 33 


Acts i. 18 ἢ 


1.25 
Ho 37 
Vie 


189 
181 
ΧΑ Τοῦ 
196 

1321 
188 

99 


sds 
XX, 143 


- 9 
108, 169 
143 

100 

114 TOE 
167 


INDEX OF TEXTS 


Βι 2-Cor 1.15 
9 


é i 57 
: 5 11 τ 
: 85 ν. 15 
Ae ie) vi. 14 
: :- 108 ΧΙ 6 
ΟΣ tad ΣΙ. 20 
144, 159 xii. 9 
a 09 ΠῚ ea 
τ O03 (81 τοῖο ἡ: 
; 05 li. 18 : 
: 86 11. I : 
τ 790 1. Τὴ Ὁ 
kad His coi. 
το Eph st roo. 
: ἘΠ 137 iv. τὸ 
+75, 100, 104 20 
: 7024208 iv. 30 
150 Vr 
165, 166 VES. ΤῸ 
fo OO Vi EE 
"τι 97 vi. 4 
Tor xi 
Bios er hilet 2.1 
49 ΠΤ 
21 111. Τὸ 
152° Col: ν 
170° 1 Thess. vi ὃ 
: 6 ν ok : 
170 185. 2°Eness, 1-3 
ΣΤΡ ὙὙΤΙ Τ' Τῇ 
164 1: Ὁ - 
22 1:15 : 
ἘΠ ΉΤΘΤ ili. 6 ; 
GS; 115 IV 135. 
: ae Uy ν: τὴ : 
154 v. 18 : 
38 ν 20 : 
153 ν 22 : 
171 vi. 4 : 
112 Vic τὸ: 
159 Visi dhe 
163 Vito 
1-2 1m 1.19 
160 il. 23 ; 
187 11: 2 
130 iii. 10 
III iu ΤΆ 
156 lil. 16 


03, το. 


2 Tim. iv. 2 
Iv. 5 
lv. 6 
ἵν. 7 
tus as 5 
1 12 
11 τὸ 


Philem. 7 . 


Rie. V4 

ν ἡ 

v1. 6 

x. 28-31 
Dc is te} 
x12 4 
ἘΠ 20 
ΠῚ 2 
t+ 7 
pati Bee 


INDEX OF TEXTS 


Heb. xiii. 14 
Jas. lil. τὸ 
iv. 6 
ἵν 102. . 
tet. 1 6. 
1 17 
1: 2 
11. ΤΊ 
ἵν 1 
2 Pet 1 τὸ 
i 3 
1 15, τὸ : 
1 John τι. ὁ; Τὸ 
11. 18 : eH 
11. 22: 23 
3 John 1-4, Q-I1 
Rev. vi. 9°. 


213 


182 


PrinTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
RicHARD CLay & Sons, LiMiTED, 
BUNGAY, SUFFOLK. 








PUBLICATIONS » 
OF THE 


“1 κ 





BOOKS FOR 
STUDENTS 


AND 
O TEES 








SsOCiIn iy FLOR PROMOTING 
CoakIsTIAN KNOWLEDGE 


LONDON: 9 NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, W.C,2 
Book Shops: 64 NEw Bonp STREET, W.1 
43 QUEEN VICTORIA STREET, E.C, 4 
BRIGHTON: 129 NORTH STREET. BATH: 39 GAY STREET 
New York: THe MacmILLAN Company 
Toronto: THE MACMILLAN Co. OF CANADA, LTD. 


And of ail Booksellers, 








BOOKS FOR STUDENTS 


Translations of Early Documents 


A Series of texts important for the study of Christian 
origins. Under the Joint Editorship of the Rev. 
W. O. E. OESTERLEY, D.D., and the Rev. Canon 
GH Box, 9.0: 


The object of this Series is to provide short, cheap, and handy 
textbooks for students, either working by themselves or in 
classes. The aim is to furnish in translations important 
texts unencumbered by commentary or elaborate notes, which 
can be had in larger works. 








FIRST SERIES—Palestinian-Jewish and 
Cognate Texts (Pre-Rabbinic) 


1. Jewish Documents of the Time of Ezra 
Translated from the Aramaic by A. ἘΣ CowLey, Litt.D., 
Sub-Librarian of the Bodleian Library, Oxford. 
As; 02. NEU. 


2. The Wisdom of Ben-Sira (Ecclesiasticus) 
By the’ Rey. Κν. ΟΣ E. Omsteriey; D.D, Vicar oe 
St. Alban’s, Bedford Park, W.; Examining Chaplain to 
the Bishop of London, 45. 6d. net. 


3. The Book of Enoch 
By the Rev. R. H. CHARLEs, D.D., Canon of West- 
munster, «. 39.00. neti 


4. The Book of Jubilees 


By the Rev. Canon CHARLES. 45. 6d. net. 


5. The Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs 
By the Rev. Canon CHARLES. 35. 6d. net. 


6. The Odes and Psalms of Solomon 
By the Rev. G. H. Box, D.D., Rector of Sutton, 
Beds., Hon. Canon of St. Albans. 


7. The Ascension of Isaiah 


By the Rev. Canon CHarRLes, Together with No, τὸ 
in one volume. 45. 64. net. 
2 


ee a ae 


Translations of Early Documents (continued) 


8. The Apocalypse of Ezra (ii. Esdras) 
By the Rev. Canon Box. 35. 6d. net. 


9. The Apocalypse of Baruch 
By the Rev. Canon Cuar.es. Together with No. 12 
in one volume, 45. 6d. net. | 


10. The Apocalypse of Abraham 
By the Rev. Canon Box. Together with No, 7 in 
one volume. 4s. 6d. net. 


11. The Testaments of Abraham, Isaac 


and Jacob 
By the Rev. Canon Box and S. GASELEE. 


12. The Assumption of Moses 
By Rev. W. J. FERRAR, M.A. With No.9 in one 
volume. 35. 6d. net. 


13. The Biblical Antiquities of Philo 
iby ΜΟΙ; Jamis, Litt.D.. PBA. Elon. Tate 
Dublin, Hon. LL.D., St. Andrews, Provost of King’s 
College, Cambridge. 8s. 6d. net. 


14. The Lost Apocrypha of the Old Testament 
By M. R. James, Litt.D. 55. ὁ; net. 


SECOND SERIES—Hellenistic-Jewish Texts 


1. The Wisdom of Solomon 
By WO. O8steRLey, 1.10... 3s. 64. net, 


2. The Sibylline Oracles (Books ii-v) 
By the Rev. H. N. Barr, M.A., Examining Chaplain 
to the Bishop of London. 35. 6d. net. 


3. The Letter of Aristeas 
By H. St. JoHn THackeray, M.A., King’s College, 
Cambridge. 45. 6d. net. 


4. Selections from Philo 
3 


Translations of Early Documents (continued) 


5. Selections from Josephus 
ΒΥ τ. J. Taackuray, M.A. cs, net. 


6. The Third and Fourth Books 


of Maccabees 
By the Rev. C. W. Emmet, B.D. 35. 6d. net 


7. The Book of Joseph and Asenath 
Translated from the Greek text by E. W. Brooks. 
35. 6d. net. 


THIRD SERIES—Palestinian-Jewish and 
Cognate Texts (Rabbinic) 


*1, ‘The Sayings of the Jewish Fathers (Pirke 
Aboth). ‘Translated from the Hebrew by W. O. Ε. 
OESTERLEY, D.D. 5s. net. 


*2. Tractate Berakoth (Benedictions). Trans- 
lated with Introduction and Notes by A. Lukyn 
Wituiams, D.D. δὲ. net. 

*3. Yoma. By the Rev. Canon Box. 

*4, Shabbath. By W. O. E. Ozsrerey, D.D. 


*5. Tractate Sanhedrin. Mishnah and Tosefta. 
The Judicial procedure of the Jews as codified towards 
the end of the second century a.p. Translated from 
the Hebrew, with brief Annotations, by the Rev. 
HERBERT Danpsy, M.A. 6s. net. 


*6, Kimhi’s Commentary on the Psalms 


(Book I, Selections). By the Rev. R. 6. Fincu, 
BoD, = 75: Og.. net. 


7. Tamid 11. Megilla 

8. Aboda Zara 12. Sukka 

9. Middoth 13. Taanith 

10. Sopherim 14. Megillath Taanith 


* It is proposed to publish these texts first by way of experiment. If 
the Series should so far prove successful the others will follow. Nos. 1, 
5 and 6 are now ready. 


4 


Translations of Early Documents (continued) 


Jewish Literature and Christian Origins: 


Vol. I. The Apocalyptic Literature. 


» Il. A Short Survey of the Literature of 

Rabbinical and Medizval Judaism. 
By Ws ΟΣ BE. Ousturiny, MA. D.D., and G, Ἡ: 
Box. VA 42s. ὦ: net, 


The Uncanonical Jewish Books 
A Short Introduction to the Apocrypha and the Jewish 
Writings 200 B.C.-A.D. 100. By WILLIAM JOHN FERRAR, 
aos. OG. net. 





Translations of Christian Literature 


General Editors : 
W. J. SPARROW SIMPSON, D.D.; W. K. LOWTHER CLARKE, B.D. 


7X NUMBER of translations from the Fathers have already 

been published by the S.P.C.K. under the title “ Early 
Church Classics.” It is now proposed to enlarge this series 
to include texts which are neither “early” nor necessarily 
“classics.” The divisions at present proposed are given below. 
Volumes belonging to the original series are marked with an 
asterisk. 


SERIES 1.—GREEK TEXTS. 
Dionysius the Areopagite: The Divine Names and 
the Mystical Theology. By C. E. Rott. 7s. 6d. net. 


The Library of Photius, By J. H. Freese, M.A. In 
6 Volss ΜΟΙ τος net; 


The Apocriticus of Macarius Magnes, By T. W. 
CRATER. DA). 95. 62. net. 


*The Epistle of St. Clement, Bishop of Rome. By the 
Ἐν kev, |; 0. τοῦ, 00. 1s.:02. net. 


*Clement of Alexandria: Who is the Rich Man that 
is being saved? By P. M. BarnarD, B.D. 15. 9d. net. 
*St. Chrysostom: On the Priesthood. By T. A. Moxon. 
25,02, EL, 
5 


Translations of Christian Literature (continued) 


SERIES I.—GREEK TEXTS (continued). 


The Doctrine of the Twelve Apostles. By (Ὁ. Bice, 
D.D. Revised by the Right Rev. A. J. MActEan, D.D. 
35. 6d. net. 


*The Epistle to Diognetus. By the Rt. Rev. L. B. 
RADFORD, 1).1). 2s. Gd. net. 


St. Dionysius of Alexandria. By C. L. Frettor, D.D. 
“Ὁ. net. 


*The Epistle of the Gallican Churches: Lugdunum 
and Vienna. With an Appendix containing Tertullian’s 
Address to Martyrs and the Passion of St. Perpetua. By 
1. DINDLEY, 19: τὸ ας: net, 


*St. Gregory of Nyssa: The Catechetical Oration. 
By the Ven. 1. H. SRAwLEY, D:D. 25. Ga. net 


*St. Gregory of Nyssa: The Life of St. Macrina. By 
ἣν Κα LowTHER CriarKeE, B.D. τὸ od. net. 


Gregory Thaumaturgus (Origen the Teacher): the 
Address of Gregory to Origen, with Origen’s 
Letter to Gregory. By W. Merca.tre, B.D. 35. 6d. 
net. [ Re-zssue. 


*The Shepherd of Hermas. By C. Taytor, D.D. 2 vols. 
2s. 6d. each net. 


Eusebius: The Proof of the Gospel. By W. J. FERRAR 
2 vols. 305. net. (Διο sold separately.) 


Hippolytus: Philosophumena. By F. LrEcGE. 2 vols. 
30s. net. (Wot sold separately.) 


The Epistles of St. Ignatius. By the Ven. J. H. 
SRAWLEY, D.D. 4s. net. 


*St. Irenaeus: Against the Heresies. By F. R. M. 
Hitcucock, D.D. 2 vols. 2s. 6d. each net. 


Palladius: The Lausiac History. By W. K. LowTHER 
CLARKE, B.D. 5s. net. 


*St. Polycarp. By B. Jackson. 1s. od. net. 
6 


Translations of Christian Literature (continued) 


SERIES I.—GREEK TEXTS (continued). 


The Dialogue of Palladius concerning the Life of 
Chrysostom. By HERBERT Moore. 8s. 6d. net. 


Fifty Spiritual Homilies of St. Macarius the Egyptian. 
By A). MASON, D:D; τος net. 


SERIES Il.—LATIN TEXTS. 


Tertullian’s Treatises concerning Prayer, concerning 
Baptism. By A. Souter, D.Litt. 35. net. 


Tertullian against Praxeas. By A. Souter, D.Litt. 
55. net. 


Tertullian concerning the Resurrection of the Flesh. 
By A. Souter, D.Litt. 


Novatian on the Trinity. By H. Moore. 6s. net. 


*St. Augustine: The City of God. By F. ΒΕ. M. Hircn- 
COCK, 0.1). 735. net: 


*St. Cyprian: The Lord’s Prayer. By T. H. BInDLEy, 
DAD. 25. net. 


Minucius Felix: The Octavius. By J. H. ἘΈΒΕΒΕ. 
35. 6d. net. 


*Tertullian: On the Testimony of the Soul and On 
the Prescription of Heretics. By T. H. BInDLey, 
Des 25. Od. net, 


*St. Vincent of Lerins: The Commonitory. By T. H. 
BINnDLEY, D.D. 2s. 6d. net. 


St. Bernard: Concerning Grace and Free Will. By 
WartTKIN W. WILLIAMS. 75. 6d. net. 


The Life of Otto: Apostle of Pomerania, 1060-11309. 
By Eso and HeErgsorpus. ‘Translated by CHarues Η. 
Rosinson, D.D. 8s. 6d. net. 


Anskar, the Apostle of the North, 801-865. By 
CHARLES H. Ropinson, D.D. ‘Translated from the Vita 
Anskarii by BisHop Rimpert, his fellow-missionary and 
successor. 45. net. [Published by S.P.G.] 


7 


Translations of Christian Literature (continued) 


SERIES II.—LATIN TEXTS (continued). 


Select Epistles of St. Cyprian treating of the 
Episcopate. Edited with Introduction and Notes by 
T. A. Lacey, M.A. 


SERIES HI.—LITURGICAL TEXTS. 
EDITED BY. ΘΟ FELTOE, D.D. 


St. Ambrose: On the Mysteries and on the Sacra- 
ments. By T. THompson, B.D., and J..H. SRaw ey, 
D.D. 4s. 6d. net. 

*The Apostolic Constitution and Cognate Documents, 
with special reference to their Liturgical elements. 
By De Lacy O’LEary, D.D. τὸ 9d. net. 


*The Liturgy of the Eighth Book of the Apostolic 
Constitution, commonly called the Clementine 
Liturgy. By R. H. CRESSWELL, 25. net. 

The Pilgrimage of Etheria. By M.L. McCuurg. 6s. net. 

*Bishop Sarapion’s Prayer=-Book. By the Rt. Rev. J. 
WoRDswoRTH, D.D. 425. net. 

The Swedish Rite. By E. E. YELVERTON. 85. 6d. net. 


Twenty-five Consecration Prayers. With Notes and 
Introduction by ARTHUR LINTON. 175. 6d. net. 


SERIES IV.—ORIENTAL TEXTS. 
The Ethiopic Didascalia. By J. M. Harpen, B.D. 95. net. 


The Apostolic Preaching of Irenaeus (Armenian). By 
Je As IROBINSON, DD). . 753.62. net: 


SERIES V.—LIVES OF THE CELTIC SAINTS. 
EDITED BY ELEANOR HULL. 


St. Malachy of Armagh (St. Bernard). By H. J. 
Lawtor, D.D. 12s. net. 


The Latin and Irish Lives of Ciaran. Translated and 
Annotated by R. A. SrEwarT MACALISTER, Litt.D., F.S.A. 
ros. net. 


_ St. Patrick: Life and Works. By N. J. Ὁ. Wuite, D.D. 
- 305,02, net, 
8 


Translations of Christian Literature (continued) 


SERIES VI.—SELECT PASSAGES. 


Documents Illustrative of the History of the Church. 
Word, fo- 4D. 313, Edited by Β.. 1 Kipp, Da), 
WSO. fel, 


SERIES VII.—MODERN EUROPEAN LANGUAGES. 


Lives of the Serbian Saints. By Vovzestav YAnicuH, 
1010 and C.. Py ἬΛΝΚΕΥ M.A. 6s. 07: πεῖ: 





Handbooks of Christian Literature 


The Letters of St. Augustine. By the Rev. Canon 
W. J. SPARROW SIMPSON, D.D. fos. net. 


The Early Christian Books. A Short Introduction 
to Christian Literature to the Middle of the Second 
Century... By..the. Rev... W.: JOHN. PERRAR, ΝΜ Δ. 
25, Od. net; 


The Inspiration and Authority of Holy Scripture. 
A Study in the Literature of the First Five 
Centuries. By G. Duncan Barry, B.D. 4s. 6d. net. 


The Eucharistic Office of the Book of Common Prayer. 
By the Rev. Lustre Wricut, M.A... B.D, ΡΖ: net. 





Helps for Students of History 


Edited by C. JOHNSON, M.A., H. W. V. TEMPERLEY, 
WEA. and). Ὁ. WHITNEY, [50.1.01 


1. Episcopal Registers of England and Wales. By 
R. C, Fower, ΒΔ; F.S.A. 6d. net. 


2. Municipal Records. By F. J. C. HEARNSHAw, M.A, 
6d. net. 


3. Medieval Reckonings of Time. By REGINALD L. 
Poouse, LL.D., Litt.D. ‘6d. net. 


4. The Public Record Office. By C. JoHnson, M.A. 6d. net. 
9 


ὃ, 
6. 
η. 


Io. 


ΓΤ; 


12. 


17. 
12. 
Pe 
16. 
17. 
τὸ: 


19. 


Helps for Students of History (continued). 


The Care of Documents. By C. Jounson, M.A, 6d. net, 


The Logic of History. By C.G. Crump. 8d. net. 


Documents in the Public Record Office, Dublin. 
By R. H. Murray, Litt.D. 8d. net.: 


. The French Wars of Religion. By ArTuHurR A. TILLEY, 


M.A. 6d. net. 


By Sir A. W. WARD, Litt.D., F.B.A. 


. The Period of Congresses—I. Introductory. 8d. net. 


The Period of Congresses—II. Vienna and the 
Second Peace of Paris. 15. net. 


The Period of Congresses—III. Aix-la-Chapelle 
to Verona, 1s. net. 
Nos. 9, 10, and rz in one volume, cloth, 35. 6d. net. 


Securities of Peace: A Retrospect (1848-1914). 
Paper, 25. net; cloth, 3s. net. 





The French Renaissance. By A. A. Tittey, M.A. 
8d. net. 


Hints on the Study of English Economic History. 
By ὟΝ. Cunnincuay, D.D., F.B.A., F.S.A. 8d. net. 


Parish History and Records. By A. HamiLTon 
THompson, M.A., F.S.A. 8d. net. 


A Short Introduction to the Study of Colonial 
History. By A. P. Newron, M.A., D.Litt. 6d. net. 


The Wanderings and Homes of Manuscripts. By 
M.R.JaMEs, Litt.D., F.B.A. Paper, 2s. ; cloth, 3s. net. 


Ecclesiastical Records. By the Rev. CLAUDE JENKINS, 
M.A., Librarian of Lambeth Palace. 1s. 9d. net. 


An Introduction to the History of American 
Diplomacy. By Cari RUSSELL Fisu, Ph.D, 1s, net. 
Io 


Helps for Students of History (continued). 


20. Hints on Translation from Latin into English. 
By ALEXANDER SouTER, D.Litt. 6d. net. 


21. Hints on the Study of Latin (A.D. 125-750). By 
ALEXANDER SOUTER, D.Litt. 8d. net. 


22. Report of the Historical MSS. Commission. By 
Re A. Roperts, -F.R-Hist.S.. 256d. net. 


23. A Guide to Franciscan Studies. By A. G, LITTLE. 
15. 6d. net. 


24. A Guide to the History of Education. By Joun 
WILLIAM ADAMSON. δώ, net. 


25. Introduction to the Study of Russian History. 
By W. F. Reppaway. 6d. net. 


26. Monuments of English Municipal Life. By W. 
CunnincHaM, D.D., F.B.A. το net. | 


27. La Guyenne Pendant la Domination Anglaise, 
_1152=1453. Par CHARLES BEMoNT. 1s. 4d. net. 


28. The Historical Criticism of Documents. By R. L. 
Marsnarn, ΜΙΆ. LL.D. 1s. 32. net. 


29. The French Revolution. By G. P. Goocn. 8d. net. 
a0, Seals. By EH. 5. KINGSFORD. 15. 3d, net. 


31. A Student’s Guide to the Manuscripts of the British 
Museum. By Juuius P. Gitson, M.A. ts. net. 


32. A Short Guide to some Manuscripts in the Library 
of Trinity College, Dublin. By Ropert H. Murray, 
ΤΠ}. 15. od. 


33-35. Ireland. No. 33, 1494-1603; No. 34, 1603-1714; 
No. 35, 1714-1829. By R.H. Murray, Litt.D. Each, 
τὺ Cts 7 
Nos. 33-35 in one volume. 35. 6d, net. 
11 


50: 


37: 
38. 


39. 


40, 


44. 
45. 


Helps for Students of History (continued). 


Coins and Medals. By G. F. Hit, M.A, F-.B.A. 
is; 6d. “net. 


The Latin Orient. By W. MILLER, M.A. ts. 6d. net. 


The Turkish Restoration in Greece, 1718-1797. 
By WILLIAM MILLER, M.A. το 3d. net. 


Sources for the History of Roman Catholics in 
England, Ireland and Scotland. From the Reform- 
ation period to that of the Emancipation, 1533-1795. 
By JoHN HUNGERFORD POLLEN, S.J. 15. 3d. net. 


English Time Books.—Vol. I. English Regnal 
Years and Titles, Hand=lists, Easter Dates, etc. 
Compiled by J. E. W. Wa.tis, M.A. 4s. net. 


. Knights of Malta, 1523-1798. By R.CoHEN. 2s, net. 
. Records for the Early History of South Africa. ΒΥ 


C. GRAHAM BoTHA. Ts. net. 


. The Western Manuscripts of the Bodleian Library. 


By H.-H. E. Craster, D.Litt. 1s. 3d. net. 
Geographical Factors. By H. J. FLeure. 6d. net. 


The Colonial Entry Books. A Brief Guide to the 
Colonial Records in the Public Record Office 
before 1696. By (. 5. 5. HicHam, M.A. 15. 6d. net. 





The Story of the English Towns 


The Times Literary Supplement says: ‘‘ This attractive series.” 
The Bookman says: ‘A series that is to be commended.” 


Popular but Scholarly Histories of English Towns, for the 
general reader, but suitable also for use in schools. With 
Maps, Plans, and Illustrations. Cloth boards. 4s. net. 


The City of London. By P. H. DircHrie.p, M.A., F.S.A. 
Birmingham. By J. H. B. MAsTERMAN. 

Harrogate and Knaresborough. By J. 5. FLETCHER. 
Hastings. By L. F. Sauzman, M.A., F.S.A. 

Leeds... By |. δὲ FLercner, 

Nottingham. By E, L, Guri_rorp, M.A. 


[2 


The Story of the English Towns (continued) 


Peterborough. By K. and R. E. ROBERTS. 
Plymouth. By A. L. SALMON. 

Pontefract. By J. 5. FLETCHER. 

St. Albans. By W. Paces, F.S.A. 

Sheffield. By J. 5. FLETCHER. 

Westminster. By H. F. Westiake, M.A., F.S.A. 


In the Press— Bath, Halifax, etc. 





Studies in Church History 


Some Eighteenth-Century Churchmen: Glimpses of 
English Church Life in the Eighteenth Century. 
By G. Lacey May, M.A. With Illustrations. Cloth, 
Os. net. 

Christian Monasticism in Egypt to the Close of the 
Fourth Century. By W. H. Macxgan, D.D. 
Cloth boards. 8s. net. 


The Venerable Bede. His Life and Writings. By the 
Right Rev. G. F. Browne, D.D. With Illustrations. 
Cloth boards, tos. net. 


The Reformation in Ireland. A Study of Ecclesiastical 
Legislation. By ΤΙ. HOLLOWAY, M.A. 2 Clog, 
7s 0d, net. 


The Emperor Julian. An Essay on His Relations with 
the Christian Religion. By Epwarp J. MartTIN, 
B.D. Cloth boards, 35. 6d. net. 

The Importance of Women in Anglo-Saxon Times; 
The Cultus of St. Peter and St. Paul, and other 
Addresses. By the Right Rev. G. F. Browne, D.D. 
With two Illustrations. Cloth boards, 7s, 6d. net. 

Essays Liturgical and Historical. By J. WickHAM LEcc, 
itt. ΒΑ, Cloth boards, 5s. net. 

French Catholics in the Nineteenth Century. By the 
Rev. W. J. Sparrow Simpson, D.D,. Cloth, 55. net. 

An Abbot of Vézelay. By Rosr Granam, F.R.Hist.S. 
With eight Illustrations. Cloth boards, 3s, 6d. net. 

13 


Texts for Students 


General Editors: CAROLINE A. J. SKEEL, D.Lit.; H. ]. WHITE, D.D.; 
J. P. WHITNEY, D.D., D.C.L. 


1. Select Passages from Josephus, Tacitus, Suetonius, 
Dio Cassius, illustrative of Christianity in the First 
Century. Arranged by H. J. Wuitr, D.D. 3d. net. 


2, Selections from Matthew Paris. By (Ὁ. A. J. SKEEL, 
D.Lit. 9d. net. 


3. Selections from Giraldus Cambrensis. By C. A. J. 
SKEEL, D.Lit. od. net. 


4. Libri Sancti Patricii. The Latin Writings of St. 
Patrick, etc. By Newport J. D.Wuitr, D.D. 6d. net. 


5. A Translation of the Latin Writings of St. Patrick. 
By Newport J. D. WuiTE, D.D. 6d. net. 


6. Selections from the Vulgate. 9d. net. 


7. The Epistle of St. Clement of Rome. 6d. net. 


ὃ. Select Extracts from Chronicles and Records re- 
lating to English Towns in the Middle Ages. | 
Edited, with Introduction, Notes, and Glossary, by 
F, J. C. HEARNSHAW, M.A., LL.D. 94d. net. 


9. The Inscription on the Stele of Mesa. Commonly 
called the Moabite Stone. The text in Moabite and 
Hebrew, translated by the Rev. H. F. B. Compston, 
M.A. 6d. net. 


10. The Epistles of St. Ignatius. Edited by T. W. 
CraFER, D.D. τς, net. 

11. Christian Inscriptions. By H. P. V. Nunn, M.A. 
With two Illustrations. 15. net. : 


12. Selections from the ‘‘ Historia Rerum Anglicarum 
of William of Newburgh. τς. 3d. net. 


13. The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles. By T. W. 
CraFER, D.D. 4d. net. 


134. An English Translation of the Teaching of the 
Twelve Apostles. 3d. net. 


14. The Epistle of Barnabas. Edited by T,. W. CRAFER 
D.D. 6d. net. 


14 


Le 


16, 


τ): 


18. 


ΤΌ: 


20, 


Zk; 


22. 


22. 


24. 


25. 


26. 


a7 


Αἴ, 


Texts for Students (continued). 


The Code of Hammurabi. By Percy Hanpcock, M.A. 
Is. net. 


Selections from the Tell El-Amarna Letters. By 
Percy Hanpcock, M.A. 4d. net. 


Select Passages Illustrating Commercial and Diplo- 
matic Relations between England and Russia. 
By. A. WEINER, M.A., F.R.Hist.S. 15. 62. net. 


The Early History of the Slavonic Settlements in 
Dalmatia, Croatia and Serbia. By J. B. Bury 
HBA. 2s. net: 


Select Extracts Illustrating Florentine Life in the 
Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries. By E.G. 
Roper, B.A. τὸ net. 


Select Extracts [llustrating Florentine Life in the 


Fifteenth Century. By EstHer 6. Roper, B.A. 
TS. Net. 


Itinerarium Regis Ricardi. By M. Τ᾿ StTeap. 15. 9d, 


The Second Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians. 
Edited by T. W. Crarer, D.D. 6d. net. 


‘Select Extracts Illustrating ἼΡΟΤΕΙ and Pastimes 


in the Middle Ages. By E. L. GuiLrorp, M.A. 
Es, ΟΣ net 


Babylonian Flood Stories. By P. Hanpcock, M.A. 
6d. net. 


Babylonian Penitential Psalms. By P. Hanpcock, 
VAL θ᾽, Net. 


The Hymn of Cleanthes. Greek text translated into 
English, with brief Introduction and Notes by E. H. 
BLAKENEY, M.A. 6d. net. 


The Foundations of Modern Ireland. Part I. The 
Civil Policy of Henry VIII. and the Reformation. By 
CoNSTANTIA MAxwELL, M.A. 1s. 6d. net. 


Sukkah. (A Critical Hebrew Text.) By A. W. 
GREENUP, D.D. 2s. 6d. net. 


15 


Pioneers of Progress 


The Manchester Guardian says: ‘‘Admirable ‘ Pioneers 
of Progress’ series.” 


MEN OF SCIENCE : Edited by 5. CHApMAN, M.A., D.Sc. 
With Portrait. Paper cover, 1s. 6d. ; cloth, 25. 6d. net. 


Galileo. By W. W. Bryant, F.R.A.S. 
Michael Faraday. By J. A. CrowTuer, D.Sc. 


Alfred Russel Wallace. The Story of a Great Dis- 
coverer. By LANcELoT Τὶ Hocpen, B.A., B.Sc. 


Joseph Priestley. By D. H. Peacock, B.A., M.Sc., F.I.C. 


Joseph Dalton Hooker, O.M., G.C.S.I., C.B., F.R.S., 
M.D., etc.” By Professor FO. Bower, Se.) 1k S: 


Herschel. By the Rev. Hecror Macpuerson, M.A., 
Pe AGS... atk .oe is 


Archimedes. By Sir THomas L. HEatu, K.C.B., F.R.S. 


The Copernicus of Antiquity (Aristarchus of Samos). 
By Sw Tuomas L. Hearn, KCB ERS. 


John Dalton. By L. J. NEVILLE-POLLEY, B.Sc. 
Kepler. By WaLTER W., Bryant, F.R.A.S. 





EMPIRE BUILDERS: Edited by A. P. NEwTon, M.A., 
D.Litt., B.Sc., and W. Basi. WorsFoLb, M.A. 
With Portrait. Paper cover, 1s. 6d.; cloth, 2s. 6d. net. 
Sir Francis Drake. By WALTER J. Harte, M.A. 
Sir Robert Sandeman. By A. L. P. Tucker, C,I.E. 





WOMEN: Edited by ETHEL M. BarTon. 
With Illustrations. Paper cover, 25. 6d.; cloth, 3s. 6d. net. 
Florence Nightingale. By E. F. HAtt. 
Dorothea Beale. By Exizanetu H. SHILLITO, B.A. 


Elsie Inglis. By Eva SHaw McLaREN. 


[25.10.21. 





Printed in Great Britain by R. Clay & Sons, Ltd., Bungay, Suffolk. 











ῬΑκκαδιὺυ8 





πάω νιν ἐς το 


Sates το τος τ ττττντ 
SSS 


SSS 


Ss ee Sects : = τ Ξ τεσ τεσ τεν: τε tees =. 


ey 
ας ϑὸν 





