Title: The Roman Missal: Translated into the English Language for
  the Use of the Laity
Creator: The Roman Catholic Church (Right Rev'd Dr. John England, Translator)
Publisher: 1843
Rights: Public Domain
Rights basis: Published 1843; public domain by date. Archive.org
  item metadata carries an explicit `NOT_IN_COPYRIGHT`
  possible-copyright-status, checked directly against the item's own
  metadata, 2026-09-25, this session.
Source: Internet Archive item romanmissaltran00englgoog
  (archive.org/details/romanmissaltran00englgoog), fetched directly
  (curl, raw bytes) from the item's own _djvu.txt full-text file,
  2026-09-25, this session.
Provenance note: Body text unaltered including its own OCR errors.
  Fills the Step0-flagged gap for a Roman Missal PD English lead.
  Vendored 2026-09-25 as part of a post-Step0-Revision-2 PD
  source-acquisition pass.

Google 


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world’s books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that’s often difficult to discover. 


Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book’s long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 


Usage guidelines 
Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 


public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 





We also ask that you: 


+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individual 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 





and we request that you use these files for 


+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 


+ Maintain attribution The Google “watermark” you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 


+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 






About Google Book Search 


Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 
a[nttp: //books . google. con/] 




















3harbarb College Library 


LEA M P ef 








ls ie 


ROMAN MISSAL, 


TRANSLATED INTO THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE 


THE LAITY. 


TO WHICH 18 PREFIXED, AN HISTORICAL EXPLANATION OF THE 
VESTMENTS, CEREMONIES, ETO., APPERTAINING TO 
THE HOLY SACRIFIOR OF 
e 


THE MASS. 


BY THE 


RIGHT REV’D. DOCTOR ENGLAND, 
LATE BISHOP OP CHARLESTON. . 


M 


N 
TOWHIOCN 18 ADDED 


THE VESPERS. 


Woitabelpbia : 


LISHED BY EUGENE CUMMISKEY, 
130 SOUTH SIXTH STREET, 


1843. 





u Faure. 
May 22.19. 1. 





Exrrar» acconding to the Act of Congress, in 
1843, by 
BUGENE CUMMISKEY, 
mm the Clerk's Office of tho District Court for the 
District of Pennsylvania, 


PREFAOS. _. V 
¢f ° . 


PREFACE. 


Tux object of the present publication, is to instruct 
the meinbers of the Roman Catholic Church on the 
nature of the most solemn act of their religion. The 
Saviour who established that religion, charged his 
apostles, saying, That which I speak to you in 
the dark, speak ye in the light; and that which 
you hear in the ear, preach ye upon the house- 
tops.* And the Council of Trent lays a solemn 
injunction upon pastors frequently to explain to the 

people the nature of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. 
To discharge his duty by obeying those distinct di- 
rections of Christ and of his Church, in the best 
manner he could, was the inteution of the editor of 
this work. He was also of opinion that many well 
disposed members of other communions might be 
greatly benefited by its perusal; as he generally 
found them not only uninformed of the Catholic doc- 
trines, but having on their minds the most extraor- 
dinary and erroneous impressions as to the belief of 
Itoman Catholics. 

The work consists, first, of an historical and in- 
structive explanation of the plan and decorations of 
4 Itoman Catholic Church, of the vestments of the 


* Matt. x. 27. 
3 


4 


$7 St 
Ca HO Hus 


‘Sheets Gt. T6 UO. . 

ecm the Children c c 

Mes: Oaznesu Paifre. ~ 
May 22, 19/2. 





Exrrrep according to the Act of Congress, in the 
1843, by 
EUGENE CUMMISKEY, 


m the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the F 
District of Pennsylvania. 





PREFACR. - 
gf ° . 


PREFACE. 


Tue object of the present publication, is to instruct 
the members of the Roman Catholic Church on the 
nature of the most solemn act of their religion. The 
Saviour who established that religion, charged his 
apostles, saying, That which I speak to you in 
the dark, speak ye in the light; and that which 
you hear in the ear, preach ye upon the house- 
tops.* And the Council of Trent lays a solemn 
injunction upon pastors frequently to explain to the 
people the nature of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass. 
To discharge his duty by obeying those distinct di- 
rections of Christ and of his Church, in the best 
manner he could, was the intention of the editor of 
this work. He was also of opinion that many well 
disposed members of other communions might be 
greatly benefited by its perusal; as he generally 
found them notonly uninformed of the Catholic doc- 
trines, but having on their minds the most extraor- 
dinary and erroneous ünpressions as to the belief of 
Roman Catholics. 

The work consists, first, of an historical and in- 
structive exp/azation of the plan and decorations of 

a ftomgn Catholic Church, of the vestments of the 


* Matt. x. 97, 
P 4 





different, Clergy men who may officiate therein, o 
the nature and institutions of the various ceremo 
nies of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, and of thos 
prayers which appeared to need explanation. 

The doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church is 
* 'That in the Mass, there is offered to God, a true 
proper, and propitiatory sacrifice for the living anc 
the dead," and **that the victim offered to God, is 
the body and'blood, together with the soul and di- 
vinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, under the appear- 
ance of bread and wine.” Assuming this doctrine 
to be true in all its parts, the Editor trusts the can- 
did reader will find, upon examination, that the cere- 
monies are not only not ridiculous, but are deeply 
significant, highly instructive, wisely instituted, and 
greatly edifying. Every Roman Catholic necessa- 
rily believes this doctrine in its fullest extent and 
plainest meaning, otherwise he would cease to be a 
member of the Church: as he is also supposed to 
know the grounds upon which this doctrine rests, 
for if he be ignorant of them, his ignorance is the 
consequence of his neglect, it was deemed quife un- 
necessary to enter upon those groumds in the ex- 
planation to the Catholic reader; and to enter upon 
them with sufficient accuracy and expansion, to 
satisfy the mind of any other person, would require 
more space than could be conveniently given, or 
than would, indeed, be compatible with a principal 
object of the compiler—to keep the price of the book 
as low as possible. 

To establish the doctrinal parts of the Liturgy, 








PREFACE. v 


would require the proofs of the ** Real presence," 
of **Transubstantiation," of ‘Communion of 
Saints," of “The intercession of Angels and of 
Saints," of “respecting the relics of Saints,” of “the 
existence of Purgatory,” of “praying for the dead," 
and for the validity of the Sacrifice, of ** the indeli- 
ble character of Holy Orders,” gs well as of “the | 
distinction of Orders,” and ** their divine institution.” 
This range would be far too extensive to comprise 
in such a prefatory explanation, as the Missal re- 
quired; and the subjects were too important to be 
only slightly touched upon, in place of being fully 
examined. Hence the Editor determined to avoid 
them altogether, and to refer those who may be de- 
sirous of information upon such topics, to the works 
written expressly for the elucidation and vindication 
of those doctrines. "T'herefore the explanation does 
not contain a single argument in support of doctrine. 
The next part of the work is the translation of the 
Missal. 'The Editor has not advanced any positions : 
of his own ; his labour has been to compress, to con- 
nect, and to translate what had been diffusely written 
upon the subject by some of the best end earliest 
writers of the Church: indeed he could give nothing 
new; for the glory of the Church in which be has 
the honour to hold so responsible a station, as it is 
also a proof of her integrity, is that she has never 
deviated from *the form of sound words which she has 
heard from the Apostles, but f the things which she 
das heard gf them by many witnesses, the same she 
pe 3 Tim, ii, 2 





Warbard College Library 


FROM 


She ales ef 
Rew. ase rl 


PREFACE. Vii 


originally delivered, nor to depart from their spirit; 
and hence the Apostle St. Paul wrote, * Though we, 
oran angel from Heaven, preach a gospel to you, 
besides that which we have preached to you, let him 
be anathema. For the religion of Christ is essen- 
tially unchangeable, its doctrines are irreformable— 
for truth cannot become falsehood, nor falsehood be- 
cometrutl. Hence the Editor of this work has only 
sought for, and brought forward, what had been 
originally testified by that cloud of witnesses that 
has gone before him in the Church, and entreats, as 
a recompense for his labours, a share of the prayers 
of those who may profit thereby. 


* Galat, i. 8. 





10 ON THE MASS. 


part of the celebrant, nor is his power confined fo the 
using of any particular language; nor is any ceremo 
ny, except those instituted by our Saviour, so essentia! 
as to be indispensably necessary to the validity of the 
sacrifice. 

But it must be evident, that unless some regulations 
were made*upon these points, there would be intermi- 
nable variance, and perpetual changes; therefore, al. 
though our blessed Lord made no specifie rule on this 
head, we find that particular dresses, and particulai 
ceremonies have been adopted and established by va- 
rious portions of the Church. 

The Liturgy in use in this country, and in the 
principal portion of the western division of the 
Church, is that of Rome. Several other portions of 
the Roman Catholic Church follow other Liturgies, 
varying from us in their dress, ceremonies, and ‘Jan- 
guage, though their faith is exactly the same as ours, 
as is also their government, being under the guidance 
of Bishops, who acknowledge the supremacy of the 
Pope and hold his communion; but their Liturgies 
are in many instances equally ancient as ours; others 
are as ancient as the days of St. John Chrysostom, 
others as those of St. Basil, &c. This explanation 
shall be confined to the ceremonies of the Roman 
Missal, and the western portion of the Church, as 
practised in most parts of Europe and Africa, and in 
all America. 

In the explanation we shall look for three meanings 
in every ohject and ceremony. ‘The first, the literal, 
natural, and it may be said, the original meaning; 
the second, the figurative, or emblematie signification; 
and thirdly, the pious, or religious meaning—fre- 
quently the two last will be found the same; some- 
times all three will be found combined. 

We begin with the altar—l'his is either entirely 
of stone, or a consecrated stone is placed on a table, 
or wooden appearance of a tomb; the vicinity of 
which is ornamented with architecture, paintings, 


ON THE MAGB. il 


statues, vases, relics, &c., where they can be pro- 
eured; and our churches are, where it can be conve- 
niently done, so built as that the altars may be at the 
eastern end, and the celebrant may look towards that 
point, and the people pray towards that quarter. 

Formerly the christians celebrated the sacred mys- 
teries upon the tombs of the martyrs, which were of 
atone; but the persecutions having ceased, and large 
churches having been erected, the place where the 
holy sacrifice was to be offered was decorated, the ap- 
pearance of the tomb was still preserved, and the 
relics of the martyrs transported thither, and preserved 
with care and respect, as testimonies of former 
triumphs, and excitements to future good conduct. 
Our religion had its origin in the east, and we turn 
towards that quarter to testify whence we have re- 
ceived our doctrines, and to beseech the assistance of 
that Saviour who, though he camhear us, whitherso- 
ever we may turn, yethas made Judea the great theatre 
of mercy and redemption, and there left the memorials 
of his acta and institutions. 

The altar signifies Christ, who is the great corner 
stone of the spiritual edifice which he has raised up 
to his Father. The rising of the sun in the east, after 
it has sunk in the west, and been hidden during the 
night, may be well considered as an emblem of our 
resurrection, after the night of death; and as this lu» 
minary arises in glory, dispelling darkness, and in- 
vigorating the earth, so has Christ risen from his 
tomb to confound his enemies, spread his doctrine 
throogh the earth, and invigorate man by his grace. 
East is the old English name for rising, and hence 
the name Easter Sunday for that day on which we 
commemorate the resurrection of oar Saviour. 

There is one wooden altar now in St. Peter'e 
church, in Rome, upon which only the Pope cele- 
brates, and this has been preserved from the earliest 
Christian antiquity, as having been that upon which 
the blessed apostle Sr. Peter offered the holy sacrifice. 


12 ON THE MASS. 


The law commanding that the altars should be of 
stone, prevails now in the.church during upwards of 
fifteemhundred years. 

This altar is covered with clean white linen or 
cotton cloths, as well for the decency of appearance 
as for the expression of the purity and sanctity which 
should accompany Christ. Lights are also placed! 
on the altar, from the usage of the most ancient times. 
It is an eastern custom, as St. Jerome testifies, to ex- 
press joy, for even in the blaze of the sun, the torches 
and candles were lighted to manifest this feeling; 
and as our religion has been received from the east, 
most of our ancient customs are of eastern origin. 
These lights also signify the Holy Ghost, who on the 
thy of Pentecost descended in the form of fiery 
teagues upon the apostles, and these tongues are well 
represented by the blaze of candles, which thus show 
that this sacred Spirit still presides in that cburch, in 
whict 31e was to remain all days to the consummation 
of the world: they also signify the virtues of faith 
aad charity which we should exhibit, that men may 
see our good works and glorify our Father who is in 
heaven. 

VThough God prohibited man from making idols 
and adoring them, yet he commanded Moses to 
make images of cherubim, which he was to place for 
the ornament of the Holy of Holies—and Solomon 
in bis temple had many similar decorations, and from 
the earliest days of Christianity statues and pictures 
have been amongst the chief ornaments of Churches, 
and tended much to excite the devotion of the faithful, 
There are cards containing some of the prayers which 
are aaid during the Mass, placed, for the convenience 
of the celebrant upon the altar. 

The place about the altar is sometimes called the 
chancel, because it was.separated from the body of 
the Church by Cancella or rails. It is at other times 
called the sanctuary, from being that part of the 
Church, where the holy offices are performed. The 


ON THE MASS. 13 


body of the Chureh is called the Nave, from its 
similarity to a ship Navts, in which the faithful are 
weit were embarked ander the government of their 
Te use of incense in the Church is so ancient, 
that we cannot find any time of its introduction. It 
has been alleged that we took it from the Pagans. 
The allegation is incorrect; it has been taken from 
the Jews, whom God commanded to offer it. The 
Pagans also took it from them, but we do not find 
the Jews commanded to abandon its use because it 
was abused by the idolaters. It has been also said 
that lights and incense were used by the first Chris- 
tians, In consequence of their being under the ne- 
cessity of assembling in caves, which were dark am 
damp. This is not altogether true; there wer:. 
other causes which have been stated, and if the fire 
Christians could innocently retain what were also 
used by cotemporary Pagans, why may not thdiu.suc- 
cessors as innocently retain what they used without 
crime. 

We next must consider the vestments, or dress of 
the Priest, during the celebration ofthe Mass. Over 
his cassock or gown he first puts on the amict, then 
the alb, which he girds round him with a cincture, 
then the maniple on his left arm, the stole on his neck, 
crossed on his breast, and the chasuble or outer vest- 
ment. Some peculiar dress is usually worn by all 
public functionaries in the discharge of their duties, 
and whether we look round and contemplate the 
present race of human beings, or examine the records 
of history, we shall find this principle a:most univer- 
sal, from the uncultivated Indian, to the most polish- 
ed nation. In the various circumstances of life too, 
upon occasions of joy, or of mourning, the dress ex- 
hibits the feeling. God himself vouchsafed to direct 
the manner in which the vestments of the Jewish 
Priesthood should be made, and thus established and 
sanctified the principle, 


14 ON THE MASS. 


The vesture of the Priest is with some variations, 
the ancient Roman dress of state; which consisted of 
what was called the Toga and Trabea. The mod. 
erns in common life have altogether departed from 
the ancient costume, whilst the Church, anxious to 
preserve as far as possible every thing in its.original 
state, has made very little alteration. The amict 
and the maniple are her only additions. ‘They have 
been added for convenience and retained for piety. 
Previous to the use of neckcloths, which are of com- 
paratively modern introduction, the neck was alto- 
gether uncovered ; this was extremely inconvenient 
to the Clergyman, who had in many instances tosing 
and preach in the Church, and the injurious effects 
which resulted from having no covering for the neck 
in those cases, caused the introduction of the amiot, 
which is a piece of cloth, generally linen, that was 
worn round the neck, and sometimes, besides covering 
the neck, formed a sort of hood for the protection of 
the head, except in those cases where the nature of 
the office demanded the respect of being uncovered; 
and being placed on the head, and tied round the 
shoulders, the wearer could protect his head, or neck, 
or both, as he found convenient. This is therefore 
the literal or natural explanation of the amict. The 
neck-cloth having been introduced by the Croats, and 
generally adopted by the other inhabitants of Europe, 
the great object of the introduction of the amict was 
otherwise obtained by the change in dress; but the 
vesture was retained, for the emblematic and pious 
purposes. The emblematic object of the vestments 
was principally to remind us of the passion of Christ, 
to commemorate which the great sacrifice of the mass 
was instituted. Christians were upon this principle 
told, that upon seeing this vestment placed on the 
head, they should recollect how their Redeemer was 
blindfolded and spit upon for their transgressions. 

The object of piety for which it was retained, is to 

excite in the clergyman and his congregation that eeu 


ON THE MASS. 15 


timent expressed by the prayer which is repeated by 
him at the time he clothes himself therewith. 

Place, O Lord, on my head, an helmet of salvation, 
to repel the assaults of the devil. 

At present. this vestment is altogether covered by 
that which is next put on; that is, the alb, 

The alb is the ancient Roman dress called the foga, 
such as it was worn under the emperors about the 
second century of christianity. Jt has been stated 
that it was the dress of the pagan priests. No doubt 
it was; and it was also the dress of the pagan gen- 
tlemen, and pagan magistrates, for it was the usual 
dress of all genteel persons—and previously to the 
introduction of christianity, they were for the greater 
part, if not all, pagans. On festive days especially, 
their toga was white. This was the colour of the 
dress of almost every public officer, and it would be 
placing christians in a very awkward predicament, if 
they were obliged to cast away every dress the like of 
which had been worn by pagans or infidels, even in 
their religious ceremonies. ‘The writer of this essay 
would, if this principle were admitted, oblige every 
christian, or at least every christian clerzyman to put 
away the usual dress of our days, for he can prove 
that it has been worn within a very short period by 
one of the principal performers in the most solemn 
pagan rites, in use at present. 

his indeed, is what may be properly called super- 
stition, to say that because a dress has been used by 
persons doing what was wrong, a similar dress never 
may be worn by a person doing whatis right. The 
Catholic church teaches that there is nothing of its 
own nature bad in dress, unless it should become 
Indecent. 

Emblematically this vestment reminds us of the 
white garment in which Herod clad the Saviour, 
when mocking him as a fool, he sent him back to 
Pilate. his vestment is called alb, from its colour, 

tha while. 


16 .ON THE MASS. 


It excites to piety, by teaching us the purity of 
heart and body which we should possess in being 
present at the holy mysteries; and this is well ex- 
pressed in the prayer which is said by the clergyman 
when putting on this garment. 

Make me white, O Lord, and cleanse my heart; that 
being rendered white by the blood of the Lamb, I may 
partake of eternal joys. 

The Roman gentleman suffered his robe to flow 
loosely when he was unoccupied, but when he had 
any duty to perform, he was acctnctus or girded, for 
which purpose he had a cineture to gird his toga, and 
as the clergyman is about to perform a duty, he girds 
himself with a cincture, which reminds us that Christ 
was bound for our crimes—and is also calculated to 
impress upon our souls the necessity of girding, (Luke 
xii.v 35,) our loins with the virtue,of purity, that we 
may hold in our hands the burning Jamps of charity 
and faith, to receive our Lord when he shall return 
from the nuptials. The prayer is expressive. 

Gird me, O Lord, with the cincture of purity, and 
destroy in my lotns every seed of lust ; so that the vir- 
tue of continence and chastity may remain tn me. 

The Clergyman next puts the Maniple upon his 
left arm; this was formerly an handkerchief, or cloth 
used for the same purpose as we now use handker- 
chiefs, and had its name from its being an handful, or 
being carried on the hand, manus, or from the word 
mappula, an handkerchief. But having in process 
of time become too much enriched with ornament to 
be used for this purpose, it has been preserved for its 
emblematic and pious significations. 

It is a sort of oppressive weight upon the arm, 
which reminds us of the weight of eur sins havin 
been laid upon the Saviour, thus causing him to suf- 
fer in tears and affliction that he may bring us to 
glory and joy. In allusion to that verse of the Psalm- 
ist, ** Going and weeping they sowed in tears, but re- 
turning they shall come in joy, bearing their maniples 


e 


ON THE MASS, 17 


in gladness.”? The prayer at putting on this veet- 
ment is, 
May [ deserve, O Lord, to bear the maniple of wee 


img and ifs that I may with exultation receive t 
€ 
The Priest then puts the stole on his neck, bring- 


ing it over his shoulders, and crossing it on his breast, 
he makes it fast with the cineture. 

This vestment was appropriate to public speakers, 

and originally used for a similar purpose as that to 
whieh the maniple was subsequently applied; it was 
hot crossed on the breast, but hung loosely down from 
the shoulders to the front of the person, and was ge- 
nerally of linen: hence the stole is at present worn in 
that way by preaehers. It became so much orna- 
mented ag to be unfit for its original destination, and , 
has been retained as an emblematic vestment. Its 
name, Stole, is generally supposed to have been de- 
rived from its resemblance, when hanging loosely 
from the shoulders, to the front of the Persian robe 
called a Stole, which being a sort of pellice havin 
sleeves, and being rounded over the shoulders, and 
meeting pretty tightly to the front of the person, ex- 
hibited, when open, an appearance very similar to 
that of a flowing or loose stole, worn by a preacher, 
which is the mode in which it was worn by the an- 
cient orators. Jn some aneient writers it is ealled 
orartum. It is also at present used as the distinctive 
mark of autiority in the church when a number of 
?lereymen are assembled together, as except on a few 
extraordinary occasions, no person wears the stole, 
bat the presiding or principal clergyman, and the per- 
son who preaches or officiates. _ 

It is a sort of yoke laid on the shoulders, and there- 
fre well ealeulated to bring to our recollection the 
wbedience and humility ofthe Son of God, who, elcth- 
inv himself in the stole of our flesh, took upon him 
the goke of our punishment, that we may be clad in 
the glory of bis immortality. 


18 ON THE MASS, 


When the Priest crosses it before his breast, it is 
that he may be reminded of the necessity of having 
before his heart the protection of the Saviour’s cross. 
‘At putting it on he prays—Resfore unto me O Lord, 
the stole of immortality, which I have lost in the pre- 
varication of my first parent ; and although I approach 
unworthily to thy sacred mystery, may I deserve ever- 
lasting joy. 

The Chasuble, or outer vestment, is the Roman 
Traben, or robe of state, in which some slight 
changes have been made. Those changes are, cut- 
ting open the sides, and altering the mode of em- 
broidery. The 'l'rabea was generally a large silken 

rment, which had a hole in the centre, through 
which the head passed, the garment then rested on 

. the shoulders of the wearer, and hung down on all 
sides, nearly to the ground, and the edge or border, 
as well at the extremity of the robe, as ronnd the hole, 
was trimmed and enriched, and the robe decorated 
throughout, either by painting or embroidery. When 
the wearer wanted to use his hands, the ides of the 
rohe were lifted on his shoulders in plaits, and the ap- 
earance then was exactly that which is now made 
by a Priest in his Chasuble. As this continyation of 
the robe a!l round was found to be greatly inconveni- 
ent, particularly as the clergyman was frequentl 
without other ecclesiastical assistants, when he offici- 
ated, this robe was cut at the sides, so as to enable 
him to use his hands more conveniently, and by de- 
grees it assumed its present form. In the embroidery 
a cross was marked upon the back of the Chasuble, 
and two stripes representing a pillar on the front, to 
designate that the Priest and the people should 
carry their cross after Christ, and lean for support 
upon the Church, which St. Paul calla the pillar of 
truth, 

This chasuble, exhibiting the Cross upon the 
Priest’s back, shows how after the purple garment 
was thrown upon his shoulders; the Redeemer had 


ON THE MASS. 19 


the Cross also laid upon him, bearing which he went 
to Calvary to offer the Sacrifice of our Redemption. 

The prayer said by the Priest when he vests him- 
self therewith, is, Lord, who hast said my yoke is 
sweet,and my burthen light: grant that I may be able 
20 lo bear it, as to oblain thy grace... 

The Priest thus vested, now is the representative of 
Christ, going to offer that sacrifice which he instita- 
ted on the night before he suffered, in order to show 
forth by this commemorative observance his death 
until his second coming. 

The next circumstance to be observed, is the dif- 
ference of colour of the vestments on different days. 
The object of the Church is, thus to inform the faith- 
fal at once of the sort of office which is performed. 
Hence, where the means of the congregation will 
allow of the regulation being carried into effect, she 
commands that the vestments and hangings of the 
Temple shall be of different colours on different occa- 
sions. The colours prescribed are White, Red, Violet, 
Green, and Black. White is used on the great fes- 
tivals of our Redeemer, and on the days when we 
recall to our minds the virtues, and entreat the prayers, 
of the blessed Virgin Mary, of the good Angels, and 
of those Saints who served God with fidelity in the 
practice of virtue, but did not shed their blood by 

martyrdom. Red is worn on the festivals in honour 
of the Holy Ghost, who in the form of fiery tongues 
descended on the apostles; and on the festivals of 
those saints who were martyred, as exhibiting their 
blood. Violet, in times of penance and humiliation; 
principally, therefore, in Lent and Advent. Green, 
on those days when there is no particular festival or 
observance; and Black, in Masses for the dead, and 
on Good Friday, when we commemorate the death of 
the Redeemer. 

There are several orders of Clergymen in the 
Church; Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, and 

persons ia minor orders—which last orders are of 


20 ON THE MASS. 


Ecclesiastical institution. The dresses distinguish 
those geveral persons. We have noticed the vest- 
ments of the Priest when he celebrates Mass. A 
Bishop also offers this holy sacrifice: the other Cler- 
gymen have not authority to make this great oblation ; 
but they attend thereat as subordinate Ministers. 
The under dress of the Priest is a black cassock or 
gown, which he wears to denote his separation from 
the world and its vanities. That of a Bishop is pur- 
ple, to signify the superiority of his order, and his 
authority to rule in the Church of God, (Acts xx.v. 28) 
over which he wears a short white robe called a 
Rochet, to denote the purity with which he should be 
surrounded, and a cross which hangs before his breast, 
The Roman nobility formerly wore a small golden 
ball, which was called Bulla, as designating their 
rank; whence this custom is supposed to have origi- 
nated; but the Christian Bishop has his in the shape 
of a Cross, to teach him to glory in nothing but the 
Cross of his Redeemer. He also sometimes wears a 
short purple cloak with a hood, which is called a 
Mozelte or Cappa, and his mitre, which is of eastern 
origin, differs considerably in its shape from that of 
Aaron, and Jewish Priests. The two pieces which 
hang from it behind, are the lappets or ribbands, 
which formerly were used to bind it under his chin, 
but which are now seldom, if ever, used for that pur- 
pose. He also carries a crosier, which has at its top 
a shepherd's crook, to denote that he is one of those 
Pastors charged by the Saviour with the care of his 
flock—and on some very solemn occasions, such as 
an ordination, he wears the dresses of the inferior or- 
ders with hie own, to show that he contains them in 
himself, and is the source from which their authority 
is derived. An Archbishop’s cross has two trans- 
verse pieces, and the Pope’s has three, to denote their 
gradations of rank or power. And he who wears a 
cross upon his breast, does not bring the stole across 
when he prepares to celebrate the Mass. 


ON THE MASS. 21 


The Deacon wears his stole on the left shoulder, to 
signify the sabordination of his order, and binds it at 
his right side, to prevent its flowing too loosely. In 
place of the chasuble he wears a Dalmatie, which is 
rather shorter than a chasuble, and was always open 
at the sides, but had short sleeves which are now cut 
open, and has no cross on the back, for he only assists 
at the sacrifice, but does not offer it. This was the 
dress of the people of Dalmatia, whence its name. 

The Subdeacon wears no stole, as he has no antho- 
rity to preach the gospelin public, and his outer vest- 
ment is rather narrower than that of the Deacon; it is 
called a 'l'unick, and was the dress of persons in the 
middle class of society in Rome. 

The Clergymen in minor orders wear the black 
Cassock, over which they wear a surplice or white 
robe, to signify purity and innocence. This also is 
the usual dress of Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, 
except on the more solemn occasions. 

Having thus been made acquainted with the vari- 
ous dresses of the different Clergymen who may of- 
ficiate at Mass, we come to ask the meaning of the 
word Mass. ‘he Latin from which it is derived, if 
it be not taken immediately from the Hebrew or Syro- 

Chaldaic, is missa, whieh word is generally supposed 
to*be a perverted mode of pronouncing the word 
missaH, Which is a Hebrew expression for a sacrifi- 
cial offering ; and is found in the 16th chapter of the 
book of Deuteronomy—missah nedaba, which means 
a voluntary offering, to be made on the festival of 
Pentecost, and this word Missah is derived from the 
radical word Mas, which means the tribute paid by 
an inferior to his sovereign. Others, and they by no 
means writers of inferior account, derive the Latin 
word from Missio, or the sending away of the people 
after the offering, or the sending of the sacrifice to 
Gol; but the impression of the compiler of this essay 
is decided)y favourable to the opinion of those who 
dire the word fom the Hebrew. From whatever 


99 ON THE MASS. 


Source it may be derived, it is one of the most ancien 
words in Christianity, being found in the earlies 
writers. . 
The next inquiry is concerning the language ir 
which it is celebrated. In the Western Church, i! 
now is, and always has been Latin. To many per. 
sons who have not been accustomed to reflect apon 
the doctrines of the Catholic Church, this appears 
strange, but their great difficulty arises from an almost 
inevitable error to which they are exposed. "They 
know nothing of religion but praying, preaching, and 
reading; and because they have known nothing eise 
in religion, they imagine that religion has nothing 
else. This is a most erroneous impression. Religion 
has a Sacrifice and Sacraments, which are not any 
of those acts, though much prayer and some instruc- 
tion are found to accompany them. They are acts; 
thus: Baptism, which is more efficacious than either 
prayer or preaching or reading, is neither one nor two 
nor all of those—but it is an act instituted by Christ, 
upon the performance of which, he has bound himself 
to produce a certain effect ; it is true, there are words 
accompanying the act, but as they are for the Lord who 
understands all languages, it is no matter in what 
;language they are spoken. So the Mass is nota 
common prayer, but an act of sacrifice in which by the 
miniatry of the Priest, God does acts beneficial to the 
people. The benefit to the people is derived not 
merely from the words said, but from the acts done. 
The acts are the producing the victim upon the altar, 
and offering him to God for our sins after he has been 
produced; and the producing the holy Sacrament of 
the Eucharist ; that the faithful may receive the body 
and blood of the Saviour in his Sacrament. Now as 
" the object of the Mass is the performance of those 
acts, the questions for consideration are, first—Is any 
particular language essential to their performance: 
and next, are there any sufficient reasons why adead 
language should be continued in use rather than & 





ON THE MASS, 93 


living language be adopted ? With regard to the first, 
it may be unbesitatingly answered—No particular 
language is essential to the validity of the acts. Se- 
condly—There are many sufficient reasons for con- 
tinuing the use of the Latin language in our Liturgy, 
in preference to adopting the modern languages. 

n the first place, thé doctrine of the Church being 
essentially unchangeable, a dead language, which is 
sabject to no change, as-to the meaning of its expres- 
sions, is far better calculated to preserve it unchange- 
ably, than modern Janguages which are perpetually 
varying. The same idea which was conveyed by 
those words one thousand years ago, is now conveyed 
by them; and if the world should so long continue, 
will be conveyed by them, after the lapse of one thou- 

years more: whereas, if the English words 
which, one thousand years ago, were used to convey 
the same idea, were now written for us, they would 
be perfectly unintelligible. Thus an unchangeable 
language is used as the medium for conveying through 
fuctaating times, and changing people, an unalterable 
doctrine. 

Next; this doctrine is not merely that of an isola- 
ted people, who speak the same language, but that of 
many nations who speak different tongues, though 
they have the same faith: they preserve amongst 
them, of necessity, a perpetual communion, for the 
preservation of which a common lanzuage is necessa- 
ry; and they use that which has been originally es- 
tablished, and universally received amongst them 
from the beginning. "Their mode of communion is 
by tbeir sacraments, sacrifices, and public offices; 
hence they are all celebrated in that common lan- 


Again—Their Clergy and Laity are frequently un- 
4er the necessity of travelling from one country to 
another, and this common language enables them to 
effer up and attend at the Holy Sacrifice, in whatever 
place they may bo, with the same benefit as if they 


24 ON THE MASS. 


were in the ‘and of their nativity; and though they 
Should not be acquainted with an individual in the 
place, nor understand one word of the language of the 
country, the Clergyman or the Layman finds himself 
amongst brethren to whom he may administer, or 
from whom he may receive sacraments, and with 
whom he can join in the adoration of his God; and 
whose belief is identically the same as his own, on 
every point of faith. 

By preserving this common language also, the 
Clergy of those various lands, however remote or dis- 
similar in habits and tongues, can communicate with 
each other. Their Bishops hold intercourse between 
themselves and that See which is their common cen- 
tre; and thus be certain of the continuance and ex- 
istence of the true faith, and hold the communion of 
saints. 

These and many other advantages, are the results 
of the Liturgy being in the Latin tongue; and the 

ublication of such a work as the present, and which 
is to be found in every Catholic country, together 
with the frequent explanations of the Pastors, to 
which they are obliged by the Council of Trent, are 
sufficient to remedy the only inconvenience which 
would be apprehended—by making those who do not 
understand the Latin language acquainted with the 
meaning of what is said in that tongue. 

Some of the service is read in a loud voice, and 
more of it in a low inaudible manner, which is a cus- 
tom older than even Christianity, tending to impress 
upon the mind, that some things are clearly known 
and distinctly understood, and that other things are 
now hidden from us for the trial of our obedience and 
faith. The Jewish people did not hear the prayers 
which their Priest used when he offered incense, and 
on various other occasions, they prayed abroad in the 
court, whilst he offered in the Sanetuary, at the altar, 

ain—Let it be remembered, that the Mass is not a 
aaked form of prayer, by using which we merely en. 


ON THE Mags. 25 


treat God’s mercy; itis a sacrifice in which the flesh 
and blood of Ghrist are produced, and offered up on 
oar behalf, and according to the devotion with which 
we attend, we may expect the favour of the Most 
High. All this may be done in a low voice, as well 
as in an audible tone. 

It is customary before Mass to sprinkle the congre- 
gatien with Holy Water, or on entering the Church 
each individual may sprinkle himself from a vessel 
Which contains this water. This ceremony is to re- 
mind us of the necessity of entering with purity of 
heart, having washed away the iniquities and distrac- 
tions of the world. In the court, before the entrance 
of many of the ancient churches, there was a foun- 
tain in which the persons about to attend washed 
their hands or feet, to denote the purity of heart 
they should possess. It is an emblematic ceremony, 
calculated to excite our devotion, and fix our attention. 
The water is blessed, as according to the Apostle St. 

anl—every creature may be sanctified by the Word 
of God and by prayer—(1 Tim. iv. 5.) ‘The manner 
of blessing it is by first blessing salt, which in imita- 
tion of the prophet Eliseus, whén he healed the wa- 
ters of Jericho, is cast into the water in the figure of 
a Cross, in the name of the Father and of the Son and 
of the Holy Ghost. The proper prayer having been 
said over the water, and then the Priest entreats the 
mercy and protection of God upon those who shall 
sprinkle themselves of their houses therewith, that 
they may be guarded against the incursions of the 
evil spirits, and enabled to serve God. If the Clergy- 
man sprinkles it he repeats the Antiphon from the 
50th Psalm—** Thou, O Lord, shalt sprinkle me, and 
I shall be cleansed; thou shalt wash me, and 1 shall be 
made whiter than snow." Then the entire or a few 
verses of the same psalm: Have mercy onme, O Lord, 
&c. After which he repeats the Doxology, i. e. Glory 
be fo the Father, &c., and then the Antiphon again. 

This, ia allusion to the sprinkling of the waters of 


M 


96 ON THE MAGB. 


lustration amongst the Jews, as related in the 19th 
chapter of the book of Numbers, by which their an- 
cleanness was removed. 

The preparations for the Sacrifice having been 
made, we now come to the examination of the ser- 
vice; for the purpose of knowing accurately the cer- 
emonies of which we must look a little to the ancient 
mode of constructing Christian Churches. The 
Sanctuary was an inclosure at the eastern end of the 
Church, which was .an oblong building; and this 
Sanctuary or Chancel was elevated above the rest of 
the Church, so that all the faithful might be able to 
see the Clergyman who officiated therein. ‘The Altar 
was elevated ona Blatform within this Chancel, so 
that the principal Clergyman who officiated thereat 
might be more distinctly observed. On the south 
side of this Chancel was the door of entrance from 
the Sacristy or private room of the Clergyman. On 
the north side was the Bishop’s seat, raised higher 
than the rest, and generally covered with a canopy. 
In front of the chancel was an enclosed and elevated 
place, called the Ambo, from which sometimes the 
Epistle and Gospel wére announced, and the sermon 
or instruction given, and in which the minor clergy 
and singers sat. At other times the Pulpit for the 
Preacher was more elevated, and at the side of the 
church opposite the Bishop’s seat. At the western 
end of the large space, called the Nave, were folding 
doors or a curtain, which separated from the navea 
smaller division, called the Nartha, or Porch, and to 
the front of which was an inclosure or court, surround- 
ed by cloisters, under a piazza or colonade. 

The church was attended by three descriptions of 
persons: those who were admitted to its communion: 
penitent faithfn] under a temporary exclusion, and 
hearers, who came for instraction, but were not yet 
baptized. The court and cloisters were occupied by 
the penitents ; the Vestibule or porch, by the hearers, 
and the first class occupied the nave. 


ON THE MASS, 91 


The Mass was also a service of two parts ; that of 
the Catechumens, and the mysteries of the faithful 
with the intervening instruction The first part ended 
with the Gospel. The second part began after the 
Creed. The Penitents, hearers,and Catechumens, 
or persons under instruction for Baptism, attended at 
the first part, heard the sermon, and then were exclu- 
ded : and the faithful only were allowed to remain for 
the mysteries, with the nature of which they only 
were made acquainted. ) 

After the assembly had met, and the aspersion 
had taken place, the choristers sung an antiphon ta- 
ken from one of the Psalms, and appropriate to the 
festival which was celebrated. This antiphon is 
generally that verse of the Psalm which is most ex- 
pressive of the mystery or fact commemorated on that 
day. Sometimes the antiphon is taken from one of 
the other sacred books, and the psalm was always 
sung, with the doxology, and the antiphon as is al- 
ways done, repeated. "This was done as the bishop 
or principal clergyman entered the door from the 
vestry to the chancel; hence it was called ad tnirot- 
fum, or at the entrance, and is now known by the 
name of ** The introit.? If the psalm was very long, 
only a few verses were sung, and hence at present 
the enstom is to sing only the antiphon, the first 
verse, or two verses of the psalm, then the doxology, 
* Glory be to the Father," &c., and then repeat the 
antiphon. 

For instance, the first mass on Christmas day com- 
mences with the following antiphon from the 9d 
Psalm. ‘The Lord hath said to me; thou art my 
Son. this day have I begotten thee." The first verse 
is then read, and after the doxology the antiphon re- 
peated. But it would be a good practice in the course 
cf the day to read the entire psalm, and reflect upon 
tie manner in which the prophecy therein contained 
haz been fulfilled. This 1s the object of the church 
in ite selection, and were the faithful to practice this 


28 ON THE MASS, 


ious custom as she wishes, they whould be greatly 
improved in the knowledge of religion, for thus in 
the course of the year does the church bring in review 
before them, the great mysteries of redemption in their 
succession, and the great examples of her saints for 
their instruction in virtue. i 
During the repetition or chaunting of the introit, 
the clergyman who presided, came to the foot of the 
altar, and commenced, as usual with the first chris- 
tians, on almost every occasion, by signing himself 
with the figure of the cross, and invoking the blessing 
of the Holy Trinity—and then repeating the 62 
psalm, judica, with its antiphon before and after, to 
express his fervent desire of approaching the altar of 
God. "Then entreating the assistance of the Lord, 
he howed down ina posture of humility, confessing 
to God, to the angels and saints of heaven, and tohis 
fellow-creatures on earth, that he was an unworthy 
sinner, and entreating the prayers of those heavenly 
spirits, and of his fellow-mortals to God, on his be- 
half. The other clergy and people then prayed that 
God may be merciful to him, and then made their ac- 
knowledgement to him, begging his prayers on their 
behalf. After praying for them he expressed 'his con- 
fidence in God, and went up to the altar, the deacon 
and subdeacon lifting up his trabea or chasuble at 
the sides, so as to leave his hands free at present 
though the chasuble be open, they retain the old cus- 
tom, and hold it ateach side. Having arrived at the 
altar he kissed it through respect, repeating in a low 
voice, the prayers which may be found in the Missal, 
and the meaning of which will be seen from what has 
been already stated. He then blessed the incense 
with the sign of the cross, and perfumed the back part 
of the altar, the flat, the sides and front thereof— so 
that by this perfume ascending in clouds of smoke to 
heaven, the faithful might be taught that if they at- 
tended with proper dispositions their prayers and sac- 
rifives would ascend to God with an odour of sweetness 


ON THE MASS. 29 


pleasing in his sight; this was the lesson taught by 
God himself in the institution of incense in the old 
law; as expressed by the royal prophet, who certain- 
ly knew, as well by tradition as by inspiration, the 
objeet of the Most High. Hence to teach us the ne- 
cessity of prayer morning and night, it was burned. 
upon a golden altar in the old law morning and even- 
ing. Let the christian when he beholds it recollect his 
-daty of sending up the odour of prayer discharged by 
the ardent fire of faith and charity, towards heaven, 
that it may be grateful to that God whom he adores. 
After ineensing the altar, the bishop went to his seat, 
and read in a low voice what the choir had sung. If 
it wasa priest officiated, he read it from the book 
which was placed upon the altar at the aide next the 
vestry room, which of course was on his right hand 
side, when he stood with his face to the altar. The 
very ancient. work on the church liturgy, called the 
Micrologue, and the liturgy attributed to St. James 
the apostle, as indeed every ancient document on the 
subject, all mention this confession previous to the 
introit; and the work on the ecclesiastical hierarchy 
attributed to Denis, the Areopagite, the antiquity of 
which is universally admitted, and the liturgy of St. 
Basil mention the repetition of one or more psalms at 
the commencement of Mass. But the regulation of 
the introit, in its present form, is ascribed to Pope 
Celestine I, in 424. The doxology is of the very 
highest antiquity, and generally attributed to the 
apostles.* We learn from Theodorett and Sozoment 
that the Arians changed it to suit their tenets in the 
following way. Glory be to the Father, through the 
Son in the Holy Ghost, &c. Whilst the Catholics 
continued as usual—Glory be to the Father, and to 
the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, &o. The ceremony 
of the sign of the cross with which the celebrant mark- 
ed himself, by putting his right hand to his forehead, 


M Baronius. * Lib. 2. hist. cap. 42. t Lib. 3, cap. 19. 
" 


3b 1N THE MASS. 


then below his breast, then to his left and right shoul- 
dera at the commencement of the Mass, aud at the 
beginning of the introit, is the usual manner in which 
from the very origin of christianity, the true believers 
brought to their recollection the fact of Christ's hav- 
ing died upon a cross, und from which death they 
expected every blessing. Tertullian, in the year 
250, mentions it as their usual practice upon every 
occasion. ; 
The celebrant then leaving the book comes to the 
middle of the altar, and if he be accompanied by the 
deacon and sub-deacon they stand behind him, the 
deacon higher than the snb-deacon, from the superi- 
ority of his order; and between them they alternately 
repeat thrice Kyrie Eleison, or the Lord have inercy 
on us, in Greek, in honour of the eternal Father ; 
thrice Christe Eleison, or- Christ have inercy on us, 
in honour of the eternal Son; and thrice Kyrie Kleison, 
in honour of the Holy Ghost. ‘This ancient custom 
has subsisted at all times in the church. It ia men- 
tioned in the lifürgiea of St. James, of St. Mark, of St. 
Bazil, and of St Chrysostom. St. Gregory the Great 
mentions it as having been always in use; and St. 
Augustine states it to be an ancient and universal 
christian eustom* amongst Greeks, Latins, and bar- 
barians. The same saint remarks the admirable 
disposition of Providence in causing Pilate to proclaim 
Jesus of Nazareth as king of the Jews to the whole 
world, in the three great prevailing languages of the 
universe; for as St. John remarks, the title was 
placed over his head in Flebrew, in Greek, and in Latin, 
so in those three languages in the Mass, is the whole 
world as it were united in proclaiming his praise, and 
exhibiting his power, and entreating his mercy. ‘The 
Greek is here found, and the hosanna and alleluia 
are preserved as well as sabaoth and other phrases o' 


* Epist. 178. Alterc cum Pascent. 


ON THE MARS. 3] 


the Hebrew, uniting all nations in one, by faith, and 

prayer, and sacrifice. 

The angelic hymn, or Gloria in excelsis, is the next 

part of the Mass, except when on occasions of grief, 
penance, supplication for the dead, and other such it 
is omitted, as being a hymn of joy. It is called the 
angelic hymn, as its first words are those sung by the 
angels on the night when Christ was born—** Glory 
be to God on high, and on earth peace to men of good 
will,” the remainder has been added in the earliest 
days of the church, some persons say by Pope St. 
Telesphorus, others by St. Hilary, bishop of Poictiers, 
others by Pope Symmachus. Whoever added the 
latter part was evidently filled with an ardent spirit 
of the most sublime piety. ‘The first expressions are 
found in the liturgy of St. James: St. Clement of 
Rome, in his early works, gives a considerable por- 
Won of it, which he calls ** Morning Prayer:” and 
Pope Damasus informs us that it was his predecessor 
Telesphorus, who in the year 142 ordered it to be 
sung or said at Mass. The choir does not commence 
this hymn as it does the introit and Kyrie Eleison, 
but the celebrant sings the first words, and is then 
joined by the choir. The mystic reason for which is 
found in the second chapter of the gospel of St. Luke, 
Where he relates that an angel announced in joyful 
accents the birth of Christ to the shepherds, and then 
was joined by a multitude of the heavenly host, sing- 
ing Glory, &c. Thus the celebrant, who, from the 
nature of his office, is the herald of glad tidings, com- 
mences the hymn and is then joined by the choir of 
faithful servants. -When this hymn is sung, the cele- 
brant and his attendants having said it privately, sit 
down during the performance by the choir. 

The celebrant then kisses the altar, and turning to- 
wards the people extends his hands, saying, Dominus 
Vobiscum, ** May the Lord be with you," and is an- 
swered, Et cum spiri/u ‘ug “And with thy spirit.” 


32 ON THR MASS. 


A bishop says on this occasion, Pax vobis, ** Peace 
be with you "—and he then goes to the book. 

This mode of salutation is most ancient, and may be 
found in the book of Judges, chap. 6, and in several 
other parts of the old and new Testament. Nor can 
there be a more pious mode of expression devised for 
the occasion, "The Spirit of the Lord is as it wer 
drawn or inhaled from Christ, who, as was originally 
remarked, is represented by the altar, the extension 
of the hands signifies the union of charity which sub- 
sists between the pastor and his flock, and his anxiety 
to embrace them with religious affection; he desires 
_the Spirit of the Lord to rest with them after its hav- 

ing been derived from Christ, and poured out upon 
them ; and they in grateful retarn pray that he too 
may be filled with the same. ‘The bishop, as thesuc- 
cessor of those apostles to whom the Saviour gave 
the injunction related in the 10th chapter of St. Mat- 
thew’s Gospel, wishes them that peace which the 
world cannot give. This salutation is for the pur- 
pose of exciting the attention of the people to the 
prayers or collects which immediately follow, and to 
read which the celebrant goes to where the book has 
reinained. 

The most ancient Liturgies, those of St. Peter, St. 
James, St. Mark, St. Basil, St. Ambrose, St. Chry- 
sostom, and in fact every one extant, all exhibit this 
ceremony. 

It is piously remarked, that it is repeated seven 
times during tne office of the Mass, as it were once 
against each of the capital sins, and to obtain one of 
the gifts of the Holy Ghost. One on each occasion. — 
. "The celebrant having gone to the book again, ex- 
cites the attention of those present by his invitation to 
pray, Oremus, **let us pray."—And then, having his 
hands raised and extended, as Moses held his hands 
in prayer upon the mountain when Israel overeame 
Amalec, he reads the Collects. 

These prayers are called collects for many reasons ; 


fst, They are offered up in the name and on behalf 
« the faithful collected together; next, they colleot 
ui were the wishes and wants of the faithful into a 
few idese, which are expressed in few words. Ve 
tous other reasons are added by several writere, but. 
these two, taken from some of the most ancient doce: 
Weis, appear to be the best founded. The collect: 
vaties ia the Masses of each Sunday, and festival, 
ted also on some few special occasions, as during the 
Leat, tho days of Quarter-tense, &c.; on some occe-. 
tims three, five, and even seven collects, are said. 
iM are amongst the most ancient prayers in use in 
the Chureh ; some of them are attributed to the Apos- 
des and found in the Liturgies which beer. their 
mmes: others of.them have been written by St. Ame 
Pei some by Pope Gelasius I, and some, by! 
ope ory, who inserted those, approve: 

, into his work called The Sacramental--'Ite Connell 
€f Milevi, held at the commencement of the fifth oen» 
twy, forbad the public: reading in Churches of 
prayers written by individuals, unless they were per- 
meu qualified, or that the prayers had been 

of by a Synod. Atthe end of the collect 
the people answer men, to signify their assent and 
desire. 
On occasions of penance and humiliation, the cele- 
brant, before he reads the prayer, says, Fiectamus 
*TLet us bend our knees," and then kneels, 
In which aet of humiliation he is joined by the peo- 
le. The use of this expression was more generally 
to the Deacon, who stood behind the celebrant, 
and the subdeacon, who stood behind the Deacon, 
then ealled upon them to rise to the prayer, by the 
word Levate. 

After the collect follows the Epistle; so called, be- 

cause it is a portion of the holy Scriptures, generally 

selected from the Epistles of St. Paul, or one of the 
ether canonical Epistles of the New Testament; but 
on many ocessions, if is selected from one of the 


34 ON THE MASS. 


Prophets, or from some other part of the Old Testa- 
ment. Justin Martyr mentions this custom, in his 
second Apology, Turtullian, in chap. 39 of his Apo- 
logetic, and Denis the Areopagite, in the 3d chap. of 
the Eccles. Hierar. The custom was generally sup- 
posed to be derived from the Jews, who on every 
Sabbath read the law and the prophets in their syna- 
gogues, (Luke iv. 16. Acts xiii. 15, 27.) and which 
custom they still retain. The Epistle is, as, Pope 
Innocent III. states, taken sometimes from the old 
law, and sometimes from the new law, because it as 
it were brings them to meet, the prophecies of the 
Introit being found fulfilled in the Gospel, which fol- 
lows soon atter the Epistle, and frequently the Epis- 
tle contains the prophecy, the fulfilment of which is 
found in the Gospel, as may be seen in the Mass for 
the feast of the Epiphany: hence, he says, the person 
who reads or sings the Epistle, may he said to repre- 
sent St. John the Baptist, the precursor who closed 
the line of the prophets, and pointed out distinctly 
that Lamb of God who takes away the sins of 
the world. St. Bonaventure says, that the Epistle 
very properly follows the collect, for it is after having 
put up our prayer to the throne of mercy, when we 
may find wrace in seasonable aid, we should receive 
that instruction which the holy Scriptures contain. 
The Church desires that we may prepare oug hearts 
by prayer to receive the seed of the word of God, 
which being sown in good soil, thus prepared, 
will bring forth fruit an hundred fold. But she has 
too often to regret, that it is lost on the way side, or, 
falling upon the stony ground, or amongst thorns, 
becomes altogether unproductive. (Luke viii. 11.) 
At a solemn Mass, the Epistle is chaunted by the 
gub-deacon, standing with his face towards the altar, 
on the lower platforin or floor of the Sanctuary, atthe 
south side, or that on his right hand, which is thence 
called the Epistle side of the Chancel, of the Sancta- 
ary, and of the altar, After he concludes, he makes 


ON THE MASS. jn 95 


his reverence to the altar, which represents Christ, by 
going to the centre of the Chancel-and bending his 

ee; then he goes to the celebrant who has continued 
at the book, reading in a low voice, and kneeling ob- 
tains his blessing ; he then delivers the book which 
he has used to the deacon, who remained standing 
near the celebrant, and removes the book which the 
celebrant has used to the other side of the altar, whilst 
the deacon lays the book which he has received upon 
the altar, 

The tone of this Epistle-chaont is very ancient, it 
Was in this tone the Greeks chaunted their solemn re- 
citations on days of publie meeting—having been 
received from them in many parts of the East, upon 
the establishment of their games and festivals in Asia, 
after the overthrow of Darius, and the Macedonian 
conquests, and having been introduced into the Weat 
When it become fashionable in Rome to import her 
Customs from Greece, it was quite prevalent at the 
üme of the establishment of Christianity: and thus 
Wis at the earliest period, introduced into the solemn 
service of the Church, ‘The Jews had a sort of so- 
lemn chaunt in their religious offices, but it has no 
resemblance to this chaunt of the Epistle, nor to that 
of the Gospel, which those skilled in ancient music, 
unhesitatingly pronounce to be Grecian; and indeed 
most of our Ancient Church hymns are evidently de- 
tived from the same source—such for instance as the 
Hymn for the festival of St. John the Baptist, which 
I$ one of our oldest. 


Ut queant laxis reasonare fibris 

Mira gestorum famuli tuorum, 

Solve polluti labii reatum, 
Sancte Joannes. 


‘ 


This is evidently fine lyrie Poetry, and was the 
foundation of the Gregorian notes, as may be per 
ceived by comparing the sound of the notes, in the 
Gamut, £7 v sss /2, so fa ag found in this vorse and 


abe. 


36 ON THE MASS. 


st, as found in the word promissi in the third verse, 
with that of the syllables in the proper singing of thie 
hymn. 

"The inferiority of his order, and his not being 
authorized to preach the gospel, are the reasons why he 
stands on the lower platform, and does not turn to» 
wards the people, Some authora add the mystie 
reason of showing thatthe prophecies were but indie- 
tinctly understood, as they were but obscurely given 
in the old law: the people indeed hear the voice as 
they did at Sinai, but do not see the face of him who 
speaks. ' 

The seventy whom Christ sent to prepare the way 
for him, returned with joy to him after the discharge 
of their duty, (Luke x. 17.) So the sub-deacon, efter 
having prepared the way for the Gospel, comes to the 
celebrant for his benediction, and having received this, 
he transfers the book to him who is to publish the 
Gospel. 

After the Epistle, the choir performs, and the cele- 
brant reads afew verses, which are called, the Re- 
sponsory, the Gradual, the Alleluia, the tract, the 
sequence or the prose, the verses are differently called 
according to their nature or the occasion on which 
they are sung. | 

hey are called responsory, either because they were 
the answer of the Choir to the Epistle, or because 
one person began, and was answered by the rest of 
the choir. The first verse was called the Gradual, 
because it was sung whilst the deacon was ascending 
the steps (gradus) to where the Gospel was formerly 
sung, which was generally the Ambo. The Gradual 
was sung in a slow solemn manner, as Pope Innocent 
III. informs us, in his work on the mystery of the 
, Mass, book ii. c. 31—** The Gradual follows, which 
| insinuates the lamentation of penance.***'l'hey do 
more correctly who do not express the gradual in fes- 
tive modulated tones, but who rather, merely sing it 
in a grave and rough chaunt of lamentation. 


ON THE MASB. 37 


_ The Alleluia, which signifies, ** Praise the Lord,” 
W sung-or said after the Gradual, except on days of 
penance; as the same author says, c. 32, ‘ After 
grief, consolation follows; therefore, the Alleluia is 
sung after the Gradual.* * * The canticles of joy after 
the lamentation of penance." And Remig of Altis- 
sodor, in the treatise on the celebration of Mass; 
“Alleluia signifies Praise the Lord,* * * as St. John 
says, ind after this I heard as ti were the voice of 
muck people tn heaven, saying Alleluia: (Apoc. xix. 6) 
and as we know that by this word the angels praise 
God in heaven, we believe the Lord is pleased with 
this sound of praise; hence we sing it, to show that on 
earth we adore the same God, whom the angels adore 
inheaven. It is frequently repeated in times of great 
joy; such as Easter, the Paschal time, &c., and the 
is then omitted, as it is adapted for times of 
Penance. The Alleluia is particularly omitted from 
Septuagesima Sunday to Easter, which is a time of 
nce ; and as Pope Innocent IIT. says, represents 
the seventy years of the Jewish captivity, during - 
which the children of Israel would not sing a canticle 
efjoy. By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat, and we 
wept, when we remembered Sion. On the willows in 
the midst thereof, we hanged up our. harps; because 
then they who led us away captives, asked us for the 
trords of our songs, and they who took us away, sing 
for us a hymn of the Canticles of Sion. How shall we 
sing the Canticles of the Lord in a strange land? If Ifor- 
get thee, O Jerusalem, may my right hand be forgot- 
len. (Psalm exxxvi.) In times of penance, the sinner 
calls to mind that he is a stranger, banished from the 
mansion of his father. He longs to return to peace, 
and to forgiveness. He cannot sing the canticles of 
joy in a strange land; but his words flow slowly and 
aolemnly along the lengthened tones of the et, 
which has its name from being drawn out (tractus) 
ina melancholy note. The Jast part is called the 
sequence, because it follows (sequitur) the entire, It 


38 ON THE MASS. 


is also called the prose; and is a sort of hymn, used 
on the most solemn occasions of Easter, Pentecost, 
and Corpus Christi. 

The custom of singing between the Epistle and 
Gospel, is very ancient amongst the Greeks, as ap- 
pears from the Liturgy of St. John Chrysostom; but 
in the Latin church it was not so generally received, 
as we find it prohibited in some places by the 4th . 
council of Toledo, in the 11th canon; nor was the 
time for singing or omitting the Alleluia fixed with 
accuracy, until the 7th or 8th century. The 10th 
canon of the above mentioned council forbids it to be 
sung in lent, and it is thought the canon was made 
In consequence of some persons having introduced the 
forbidden custom. St. Augustine, in the 15th chap. 
of his 119th Epistle, says that it was sung only from 
Easter to Pentecost; and on Sundays, to celebrate 
the resurrection. Pope St. Gregory, having been 
blamed for having ordered it to be sung at Mass, ex- 
cept from Easter to Pentecost, stated that the law 
was only published by him; but that the castom was 
introduced under Pope Damasus, by St. Jerome.* 

The celebrant, bowing down before the altar, re- 
peats the prayer, ** Cleanse my heart,” &c.; which is 
sufficiently plain to shew its object, and to impress 
upon our minds the necessity of having pure hearts 
to receive the truth, and pure lips to announce it. The 
allusion to the cleansing of the prophet’s lips, (Ieaias 
vi. 7,) is beautiful: He then reads the gospel at the 
north side, or that at his left hand side, when he faces 
the altar. 

In a solemn Mass the deacon kneels on the lower 
step of the platform, and prays: ** Cleanse," &c. ;: 
then goes to the celebrant for his blessing, which he 
asks on his knees, at the epistle side; the celebrant 
bestows it, in the following words: ** May the Lord 
be in thy heart and on thy lips, that thou mayest an- 


* Lib. vii, Ep. Ixiii. to John, Bishop of Syracuse. 





40 QN THE MAS8. 


odour of Christ to God, in every place." The lights 
signify how by the means of the doctrines of the Gos- 
pel, they were enlightened, who sat in darkness and 
in the shadow of death. The deacon passes to a dif- 
ferent side from that at which the prophecies and the 
Epistle were read, to show the change from the law 
of Moses, to the Gospel of Christ; and he faces the 
north, as well to proclaim the truth to the people, 
without turning his back to the altar, as to declare to 
him who cometh from the north, (Isaias xiv. 13 and 
31,) that the Lord hath founded Sion, and the poor of 
his people to whom the glad tidings are preached, 
(Luke vii. 23,) shall trust init. He and the people 
mark their foreheads, mouths and breasts, with the 
sign of our redemption, joining with the Apostle in 
his prayer; God forbid that I should glory, save in the 
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. (Galat, vi. 14.) It is 
exhibited on the forehead for profession ; on the mouth 
for declaration, and on the heart for belief: As Pope 
Innocent III. says (Lib. 3, Myst. Misse, c. 43:) “He 
should sign himself upon the forehead, he should sign 
himself upon the mouth, and he should sign himself 
upon the breast, as if to say, l am not ashamed of the 
cross of Christ, but I believe in my heart, what I 
preach with my mouth.” He perfumes the book out 
of respect, and to teach us how the odour of virtue 
proceeds from the Gospel. When the sub-deacon 
gives the book to the celebrant and points out the por- 
tion which has been proclaimed, stating it to be the 
word of Christ, the celebrant kisses it, through respect, 
and makes the declaration mentioned above; for, as 
St. Paul says, With the heart we believe, unto justice ; 
but with the mouth confession ts made unto salvation. 
(2 Rom. x. 10.) The deacon then incenses the cele- 
brant, through respect, as he does on two other occa- 
sions during the Mass. During the deacon’s singing the 
Gospel, if a Bishop be the celebrant, he stands un- 
covered through respect but rests upon his crosier, 
as well for support, as to exhibit the superior pastoral 


ON THE MASS. 41 


curse with which he is invested: the people all 
during the reading or singing of the el. 
This is a very old custom ; we find it commanded in 
à deeretal epistle of Pope Anastatius I. Itis also 
mentioned in the 2d book of the constitutions of 
Clement, who says in the 57th chap. (alias 61) that 
it was so regulated by the apostles, through respect to 
the words of Christ. The ceremony of asking the 
blessing by the deacon, is very old, as are also that 
of announcing the Gospel by the words Sequentia, 
&.; the answer, Gloria tibi Domine, ** Glory be to 
thee, O Lord,’’ being found in the Liturgy of St. John 
Chrysostom, and qaoted as ancient by Amalarias, 
lib. 18 de off. Missz, and Alcuen, 4b. De off. divin. 
All the old Liturgies, and councils, and fathers men- 
ton the Gospel. 

After the Gospel the creed is properly introduced, 
t$ the profession of that faith which the Gospel has 
promulgated. ‘That now recited is the creed of Con- 
stantinople—that originally used was the Apostles’ 
creed ; but after the decision of the Council of Nice, 
and the condemnation of Arius, it was made more ex- 
plicit upon the subject of his errors. In the year 381 
the Council of Constantinople was held, and to op- 
pose new errors, the creed assumed its present form. 
It is begun by the celebrant and taken up by the 
choir, to shew that faith springs from Christ, and 
through him is established amongst the people. We 
find it in the liturgy of St. John Chrysostom, and 
mentioned by the 3d Council of Toledo. It is said or 
sung only on Sundays and great festivals. After the 
celebrant and his attendants repeat it, they sit until 
the choir has concluded. 

This is the end of what is called the Mass of Cate- 
chumens, Formerly the deacon at this period order- 
ed the catechumens and infidels, &c., to retire—the 
sermon had been preached after the Gospel ; they 
had received instruction, but the faithful only, and in 
some instances only the communicants were suffered 

4* 


49 ON THE MASS. 


to attend at the mysteries. Upon the deacon’s pro- 
clamation, the porters excluded those not admitted to 
full communion of the faithful, and closed the doors. 

All hitherto was read openly; now the mysteries 
began, and the chief part was read in an under voice. 

The first part of the Mass of the faithful ie the 
offertory. This is a small portion of the scriptures 
applicable to the mystery or fact which is commemo- 
rated, and of course varies every day. ‘This is called 
the offertory, because it was sung by the choir whilet 
the faithful made their offerings, for in the early ages 
of the church, every peraon made some offering at the 
altar when he or she attended the holy sacrifice.. 
* Whilst the offertory is sung,’ says Innocent III, 
** the priest receives the oblations from the people, or 
the hosts froin the attendants." This custom of si 
ing and music at the offering was very ancient. We 
find itin the days of the good king Ezechias.* And 
when the holocausts were offered, they began to sing 
praises to the Lord, and to blow with trumpels, and to 
perform with different instruments which king David 
had prepared. ‘The same spirit which presided over 
the Jewish church in the days of its purity, presides 
over the Christian church, and will continue 80 to do, 
all days to the end of the world. 


* TI. Paralip. xxix. 27, &c. 

t The objection of some persons to the introduction of 
music, in the solemn service of the Creator is strange— 
Man should consecrato all his powers and acquirements to 
the greater glory of his Lord ; and if this fine science and 
touc ing art is to be excluded, it is impossible to discover 
upon what principles the exclusion will rest, without being 
fatal to every other mode of external worship. Music, it 
is said, is used in theatres, and is used for the excite- 
ment of levity and criminal dispositions; so has speaking, 
therefore we should not speak, there should be no preach- 
ers; so has reading, therefore we should not study the 
sacred volumes. But improper speaking and reading, are 
very different from preuching and reading the Scriptures. 
Undoubtedly they are, and sacred solemn music i8 very 


On THE Maps. 45: 


The offerings were at first indiscriminately made. 
d whatever the people thought proper: to give, either 
fer the sacrifice, or for the support.of the clergy ; but 


dierent from. profane. and lascivious airs. . But the eame 
xt of instruments are used. And so thé same sort of 
tongues, and the same sort of types, and the same sort of 
peper. Perhape the identical cases of type which were. 
weed to print a bad novel, or an indecent [em book, are: 
wed to priat tbe Holy 'Bible-—is the sacred book profaned : 
thereby? Besides the frequent mention of iustrumental. 
tad vocal music, for the service of God, in the dfferént 
putsof the old Testament, we have the distinct statements 


of &. John in the Apocalypse, or Revelations, xiv. 1. &e:! 
And I teheld, and lo -a lamb stood : Mount Sion, and: 
with kim, an kundred und forty-four thousund hie 


kis mage and the number of his’ name, standing on the see 
of glass, having the harps of God; and singing the canticle 
es the servant of God, and the canticle of the Lamb, 

Ep. of St. Jamesv.13. Js any.man cheerful in mind? 

ld him sing. We may therefore well conceive the sublime 

British poet fully justified in attributing to Angels, adora- 

tion by music. . 

How often from the steep 

Of echoing hill or thicket have we heard 

Celestial voices to the midnight air, 

Sole, or responsive to each other's notes, 

Singing their great Creator? Oft his bands 

While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk, 

With heavenly touch of instrumental 

In full harmonic number join'd, their son 

Divide the night and lift our thoughts to Heaven. 

Paradise Lost. Book 4. 


The following extract from Mr. Ketts’ essay on Music 
shall close this note. 


** As the notes used to express any sensations may be 
equally in unison with those of a gimailer nature, Music re- 





44 ON THE MASS. 


the Apostolic canons 4 and 5, regulate that only corn, 
grapes, oil for lights, and incense should be offered 
at the altar; all other offerings were to be taken to 
the Bishop’s house, to be divided by him and the 
priests, with the deaeons and other minor clergy; 
and the first Council of Orleans held in 511, at the 
time of king Clovis, in its 14th canon regulates the 
proportion in which the division was to be made in 
Gaul. The second Council of Mascom, held in the 
year 585, at the time of king Gortran, and of Pope 
Pelagius IL, ordered offerings to be made in the 
Gallic churches by every individual who attended. 
The 4th Council of Carthage, held in the year 398, 
forbad the offerings of those who were atopen enmity, 
of those who oppressed the poor, and of several others 
to be received—canons 93 and 94, ‘The deacon and 
sub-deacon generally received the offerings; during 
which time the choir performed the offertory, but the 
custom of receiving these contributions has long since 
gradually ceased. Where there is no choir the cele- 
brant reads it in a loud voice. 

After the offertory, at a solemn Mass, or indeed 


quires the aid of language, to characterize any individual 
passion. If correspondent words are the associates of 
sound, they become by this alliance specifte indications of 
the manners and passions; and the pleasure conveyed to 
the ear, is attended by the more refined gratification ofthe 
understanding. Mysterious as the mode of operation by 
sound may be, itis clear that nature has connected certain 
emotions with them, and their effect is sufficiently ascer- 
tained, and deeply felt; for they are the keys which un- 
lock all the passions of the soul. Sounds variously modi- 
fied, and judiciously combined with words, can melt with 
pity, sink in sorrow, transport with joy, rouse to courage, 
and elevate with devotion. "They have a peculiar effect in 
cherishing the tender passions, and calling up the long for- 
gotten images of the past, with all their attendant train of 
associated ideas. While the ear is delighted with the strains 
of harmony, the fancy is buried in the contemplation of 
the most attracting images, and the whole soul is exalted 
to the bright regions of joy and happiness." 


ON THE MASS. 45 


daring its performance, the deacen and sub-deacon 
go up to the altar, both at the epistle side; should the 
chalice not be on the altar, but placed on the credence- 
table, below, the sub-deacon carries it up. Ifa bishop 
celebrates in pontificals, he remains in his seat or 
throne during the Mass of the catechumens, and he 
now takes off his gloves and washes his hands to pre- 
pue for the sacrifice, and goes to the altar to offer it. 
Should he be attended by an assistant priest in a 
cope, that priest does what would otherwise be 
done by the deacon during this offering, and the canon, 
and the deacon performs whatever else may be 
necessary. ‘This explanation shall be given on the 
supposition of no assistant priest being in attendance 
— plain Masses the celebrant does every thing * 
The deacon being on the right hand of the cele- 
brant, uncovers the chalive, which has on its mouth « 
à linen cloth called a purificatory, for wiping the cha- 
lice and patten; the patten is a small plate on which 
the bread for consecration is placed, this is laid on 
the chalice. If the deacon have not spread the cor- 
poral upon the altar during the creed, he now takes 
it from the burse or case in which itis kept, and 
spreads it on the altar. "The corporal is a linen cloth 
neatly folded, except when spread upon the altar du- 
ting the sacrifice, and the bread which afterwards ' 
becomes the body (corpus) and the chalice are placed 
uponit, Taking the patten with the bread on it from 
the chalice, the doacon gives it to the celebrant, who 
lifting it up offers it, repeating the prayer. Accept 
&c., as in the ordinary of the Mass. After which, 
having made therewith the sign of the cross, he lays 
It onthe altar. Meantime the deacon cleanses the 
chaiice, and having put wine into it, the sub-deacon 
places the water before the celebrant, which he blesses 
with the sign of the cross, and the prayer, O God, 
wá» in creating, &c. The sub-deacon then puts a 
snall quantity of water into the chalice, and the dea- 


46 ON THE MASS. 


con having wiped it carefully, gives it to the cele 
brant, who being assisted by the deacon, also repeat 
ing the prayer, offers it, saying, We offer unto thee 
é&c.—then having made the sign of the cross there 
with, he lays it on the altar, and the deacon covers i 
with a pall, which is a piece of linen, sometimes or. 
namented, but always made so stiff, by the sewing ii 
on pasteboard or otherwise, as to rest steadily on the 
chalice and preserve its contents from any thing 
which might defile them: formerly the corporal was 
larger and a portion of it was turned over the chalice, 
but this was found very inconvenient. The celebrant 
then bowing down, says the prayer, Accept us, O 
Lord, &c.—after which, rising he says, Come, O .4l- 

* mighty, &c.—and at the word bless, he makes the 
sign of the cross over the host and chalice—then 
blesses the incense by the sign of the cross, and the 
prayer, May the Lord, &c.—and perfumes the bread 
and wine, and the altar, repeating the prayers which 
follow. After which he washes his hands, saying the 
prayer, I will wash, &c.—and then returns to the 
middle of the altar, where bowing down he repeats 
his request of sacrifice, saying, Receive, O Holy Trin 
tty, &c.—then kissing the altar, he turns round, and 
expanding his hands, says, Orate Fratres, &c.—4da- 
ring this and the secret prayer, and the preface, until 
just before the Sanctus, the deacon and sub-deacon 
stand in their proper places behind the celebrant, but 
go up to the altar, the deacon on the right and the 
sub-deacon on the left, to join in the words Holy, Holy, 
Holy, &c.—after which the sub-deacon having made 
his reverence to the altar, descends to his former 
place, and the deacon comes to the left hand side, to 
assist in turning the leaves of the book, during the 
canon which immediately follows. 

In some places, an ancient custom is retained b 
the sub-deacon of having a large veil placed on his 
shoulders when he is about to take the chalice from 
the credence to the altar; and then after the offertory, 


ON THE MASS. 47 


folding the patten in the end of this veil, and so hold- 
ing it in his place, until the celebrant wants the 
patten after the Lord's Prayer. 

Another ancient custom of some places is, that 
When the deacon has incensed the celebrant, after 
the offertory, he proceeds to incense the clergy, accord- 
ing to their rank, and is himself then incensed by 
the incense bearer, who afterwards, bowing to the 
thei portions of the congregation, pays them the 


Should the Bishop be present, in his place, and the 
celebrant be a priest, the water and incense are taken 
to the Bishop to be blessed, and he is incensed before 
the celebrant by the deacon. 

In the sacrifice we are now to look for three distinct 
oblations, all united in the same act of religion. The 
oblation of the bread and wine for the purpose of their 
substance being destroyed, and their appearances cov- 
ering the body and blood of Jesus Christ. The obla- 
tion of the body and blood of Jesus Christ under the 
appearances of bread and wine, and the oblation of 
himself and of the faithful in union with Jesus Christ, 
by the celebrant. The three are performed by the 
one continued act of the sacrifice of the Mass; and 
itis only by keeping the distinction clearly in view, 
we shall be enabied fully to comprehend the meaning 
of the prayers. 

The bread which is offered is unleavened ; such 
was the kind which the Saviour used at the institu- 
tion, for it took place at the time of the unleavened 
bread; (Mark xiv. 12,) and some water is mingled 
with wine in the chalice, because as the councils of 
Trent says, it has been received as an uninterrupted 
apostolical custom, and believed to be founded upon 
the authority of Christ himself, who is stated to have 
done 80 at the institution ; and this assertion is sup- 
ported by the entire host of ancient witnesses. *'Tho 


* Can. xxxi 


48 ON THE MASS. 


council of Constantinople, called that of Voir ie 
the hall in which it was held, in the year 699, qui puo 
the following passage from the Lituigy of St. James 
the Apostle, and first Bishop of Jerusalem: * In like 
manner, taking the chalice after he had supped, and 
mizing water with wine, and blessing,” &e. St. 
Clement, a cotemporary of the apostles, states: in 
chap. 17, book 8. of the Apostolic Constitution, that 
our Lord mixed water with the wine—as does St. 
Treneus, the Bishop of Lyons, in lib. 
Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, in the 
in lib. 2, Ep. 3, that the custom of mixing water with 
wine in the chalice, is a tradition from our Lord. The 
quantity of water is very small; and St. Cyprian also 
ives us the mystic reason for this, in Ep. 63, ad 
ilium, * We see the Ps signified in the water, 
but the wine exhibits the blood lof Christ, When, 
therefore, water is mixed with wine in the chalice, 
Christ is united to his people,” &e.; from this the 


tis nerenr italligibls. 
E ie xd anny etos em b'oopii-Hato om 
substance, and in thechalice many grapes are brought 


into one substance, so in the charel Christ, many 
individuals are brought into the unity of faith, EU 
connected together by the bonds of charity, and i 
thousands should assemble together, in the same edi-. 
fice, or the great offering be made in millions of places. 
throughout the christian world, still the offering is 
but one, the prayers are for all our great father is: 
intreated to look upon us as one fold, under one 
herd. (John x. 16.) They who are present at this obi 
tion, should therefore be filled with the spirit of chari- 
;, and banish from them enmities, contentions, emu= 
pr rrels, dissentions, sects, envy, and. 
+ for, they who do such things, shall not obtain. 
E. fe Oy t sma oli tle. hieh, ric 
.. Inthe at of which, as 
bnt seio eauol hes. has in view the chief enden 
which is to be made under the appearance of bread, 





50 ON THE MASS. 


be acquainted. He is specially invoked here, as his 
intervention is, in the order of Providence, requisite 
to produce the effect sought for; and when he is in- 
voked to bless this sacrifice, the celebrant makes the 
sign of the cross over the oblation, to show his faith, 
in every good gift and divine being obtained thro 

the merits of our divine Saviour, who was crucified for 
us. Short and simple as this prayer is, the mind is overs 
whelmed and lost in the contemplation of its conse- 
quences. First it exhibits to us the bread and wine 
to be consumed, as an holocaust.* For in sacrifices 
of holocaust, or whole burnt offerings, the victim was 
entirely consumed by fire, to the honour of the Deity: 
80 here the substance of the bread and wine is destroy- 
ed, not by material, but mystic fire, by him who on 
the day of Pentecost descended in the form of tongues 
of fire upon the Apostles. This sacred fire consumes 
the substance but preserves the Appearances, in order 
to be the veils which conceal from mortal eyes the di- 
vine victim who, in the beginning, offered himself as 
the substitute for those ancient observances. For ii 
was impossible that with the blood of oxen and goate, 
sins should be taken away. Wherefore, when he cometh 
tnto the world, he satth: Sacrifice and oblation thou 
wouldst not: but a body thou hast to me: Holo- 
causts and for sin did not please thee. Then, said 1, 
behold, I come: In the head of the book tt is writien of 
me, that I should do thy will. (Hebrews x. 4, &c.) 
By the sword of the word, and the [fire of the spirit, 
this mystic oblation takes place; but the destruction 
of this first substance is not the great sacrifice of the 
Mass; for the bread and wine are destroyed only to 
make room for the great victim to be principally 
offered; and the production of which, whether for 
the original sacrifice on Calvary, or ita repetition on 


* See Opuscules de Bossuet, T.i. p. 130. t See the 
secret prayer for Easter Friday, in Whiteunweek. 


ON THE MASS. 51 


e altars, has always been attributed to this sacred 
pirit. 

Thus in the Gospel of St. Luke, we read *The Holy 
Ghost shall come upon thee and the power of the most 
high shall overshadow thee. And therefore also the 
Holy One which shall be born of thee, shall be called the 
Son of God. (i. 35) And in the Apostles’ creed. And 
in Jesus Christ His only Son, our Lord, who was con- 
ceived by the Holy Ghost. And in the Liturgy of St. 
Basil, which is that principally in use in the East 
aprayer is used that the bread may become the real 
body, and the wine the real blood of Jesus Christ, by the 
fly Ghost who changes this bread and this wine. 

St. Isidore of Pelusiom a disciple of St. John 
Chrysostom, who also compiled a Liturgy in very 
general use in the East, says, That the Holy Ghost 
ts truly God, and after other reasons adds, and because 
atthe mystic table, it is he who makes common bread 
the real body in which the Son of God made himself 
incarnate ; (Lib. 1. Ep. 10.9,) and he afterwards* 
Says the same of the wine changed into the blood. 
The same is found in almost every ancient Liturgg, 
as testified by St. Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, who 
lived in the middle of the preceding century, and 
after having given his testimony in these few words, 
{ "Thos that which the Holy Ghost touches is 
changed, and sanctified. In the ancient Gothic Mis- 
sal which was used in many parts of Africa and 
other portions of the Western Church, the following 
prayer is found. + ** O Lord may the Holy Ghost thy 
co-eternal co-operator descend upon this sacrifice, to 
the end that the fruits of the earth which we present 
unto thee may be changed into thy body, and what 
this chalice contains into thy blood.” 

Wherefore we may now clearly perceive the great 
object of this assembly of Christians from the days 


* Ep. 2.13. + Cat. Myst. v. f Miss. Got. xii. 


5s ON THE MASS. 


of the Apostles to the present, to be, for the praise of 
the Lord ; for the instructions to be derived from the 
lessons of the old law, and of the new, as delivered 
by thoee persons whose commission therefore is de- 
ved from Jesus Christ through the Apostles. For 
the profession of their belief in the doctrines of the 
Church} for the oblation of themselves, that dying to 
the world, they may. live with Christ, and for the of- 
foring of and wine to be changed by the power 
of the Holy Ghost, and the institation of the Redeem- 
er, and the Ministry of the Clergyman into the body 
and blood of Jesas Christ, that they may thus (1 Cor, 
xi. 26,) make a commemoration of him shewing forth 
the death of the Lord until his second coming, and. 
receiving b the oblation of this victim, the applica- 
tion of the fraite of redemption to their souls. Whilst 
in addition to this, they who prove and try themselves, 
may by eating Christ, alto live by him. (John vi. 58.) 
In the contemplation of such a scene the soul breaks 
from her prison, and flies, not over an imaginary land 
of vision, but traversing the regions of the East, col- 
ips the facts of ages, and brings into one point, the 
rice of Abel and that of Me jede 
tion by the ro} 'salmist, that lamb of t, 
institution of the Eucharistic oblation, and the suffer- 
ings of Calvary, exhibiting thus to the intellect the 
best subjects for reflection and to the affections, the 
most powerfal excitements to piety and devotion, 4 
‘At such a moment as this the soul is prepared for | 
prayer, and the incense which is its emblem is finally 
introduced, as well to ‘spread its perfumes round | 
the holy place as to waft its odour to the heavens; 
It is blessed under the intercession of the 
Michael standing at the right hand side of the Alter 
of incense, and of all the elect, &c.* Some ancient 
Missals have it Gabriel, instead of Michael, and this 
would appear to be more critically correct, for clearly 





* Sacram. S. Greg. Miss. du Tillet and de Sees. 


54 ON THE MASS. 


cleansed from even the least distractions of the soul.” 
This is a fine allusion to that act of humility and in- 
struction of the Saviour, on the night when he estab-. 
lished the Eucharistic institution, as read in the 13th 
chapter of the Gospel according to St. John, ** He that 
is washed needeth not but to wash his feet, but $s clean 
wholly." St. Cyril of Jerusalem in the 5th chapter of 
his mystic catechism, says, ** You have seen thata 
deacon washes the hands of the celebrant and of the 
other Priests about the altar. Think you it was to 
cleanse the body? By no means, for when we enter 
the church, we are not in such a state as to need 
washing for cleanliness. But this washing of the 
hands teaches us that we should be cledn from all sin, 
for the hands signify our acts; to wash the hands 
then is nothing morethan to purify our works." And 
the Apostolic constitutions remark, Lib. 8, chapter 
11, *'That the water which is in this place given to 
the priests to wash their hands, is a sign of the purit 
which becomes souls consecrated to God." Bo 
celebrant and attendants should therefore on this oc- 
casion be penetrated with the most heartfelt sorrow 
for sins, and sincerely intreat pardon for their of- 
fences, and beg that the Lord may wash away their 
iniquities, not only from their hands but from their feet 
and their heads, (John xiii. 9,) and should any per- 
sons addicted to gross crimes be present, they should 
seriously enter into themselves and reflect, that if they 
live according to the works of the flesh, they cannot 
enter the kingdom of God. These works are mani- 
fest, fornication, uncleanliness, immodesty, pev ^ 
drunkenness, revellings, and such like. (Galat. v) f 
then they have yielded their members to serve unciean- 
liness and iniquity, unto iniquity, let them now yteld 
their members lo serve justice unto sanctification. (Kcm. 
vi.19.) Let them wash away their crimes with the 
tears of contrition, and the blood of that lamb, who 
is about to be offered. Unless they attend with 
such dispositions, at the holy Sacrifice, they but make 


ON THE MASS. 55 


a mockery of Christ, and God is not mocked With 
impanity. 

This ablution was performed at the epistle side— 
which, as before remarked, was, in a regularly built 
chareh, the south side, and therefore next to the 
sacristy, where the necessaries of the altar were kept 
—the psalm was concluded by the doxology, “Glory 
be to the Father," &o.—except in Masses for the 
dead, when the usual conclusion of the psalms on 
that occasion, was substituted. ‘ Eternal rest grant 
unto them, O Lord. And let perpetual light shine 
untothem. Amen." And in times of most solemn 
penance, it was omitted, as being an expression of 
joyful praise. 

The celebrant then comes to the middle part of the 
altar, and bowing down, says the next prayer, Receive, 
O Holy Trinity, &c. This prayer in its present form 
is probably a cause of difficulty to some persons who 

0 mt examine with sufficient care, nor reflect upon 
what they too hastily condemn. They object that by 
this prayer, the church professes to offer the sacrifice 
equally to the blessed trinity and co the saints. This is 
not the fact, nor is such the meaning of the prayer. It 
consists of three distinct parts. The first requesting 
the oblation to be received in memory of the Passion, 

urrection and Ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
This is distinct, and the plain meaning of the request 
la evidently conformable to the institution, Do this 
for a commemoration of me. (Luke xxii.v. 19) The 
second part, requesting the oblation to be received in 
honour of the blessed Virgin, and other saints—that 
it may be available fo theer honour and to our salva- 
tion. This latter clause, **our salvation," creates 
no difficulty. ‘The question is now what is meant by 
offering the sacrifice in honour of the saints? — First, 
then, the word honour in the first part of the prayer, 
is clearly not an exact, though it be a literal transla- 
tion of the original prayer—for it should be rather 
translated on the /2s/zez/ of the blessed Virgin, &c. 


56 ON THE MASS. 


Le Brun reinarks* that the words found in the oldest 
‘copies are in honore, and not in honorem, and states 
also, that the words ad honorem, found immediately 
after strengthens the proof of this reading being cor- 
rect, for the persons who framed the prayer would 
otherwise have fallen into a glaring and inexplicable 
tautology. Jn honore evidently ought to be transla- 
ted on the festival or at the time we honour. Thus it 
would appear as well from the critica] examination, as 
from various facts which that author adduces, that 
this is the true meaning of this first phrase. Bat ad 
honorem, that it may be available to their honour, 
i. e. the saints, is distinct, we must then see its 
meaning. 

St. Augustine writes,t **So that although we raise 
altars to the memory of the martyrs, we do not build 
any to them. For which of our prelates at any time 
celebrating at the altar in any of the places of the 
Saints, has said, * We offer unto thee, Peter, or Paul, 
or Cyprian? Butthat which is offered, is offered to 
God who has crowned the martyrs, at those places 
where is celebrated their memory whom he has 
crowned." And again, in another place, ** + Nor do 
we give to those martyrs temples, priests and sacrifices: 
because, not they, but their God is our God." Thus 
no sacrifice was offered to the saints, though places 
were consecrated to their memory, where their virtues 
were honoured, and altars raised at which this honoar 
was paid. Not by sacrifice to them, but by sacrifice 
to God; to their God and ours, to him who enabled 
them by his grace to triumph over sin, and to obtain 
glory—the honour we pay to them redounds to him, 
who in them has crowned his own graces; and when 
we pray that this sacrifice may be received by the 
Godhead, it is to the holy Trinity it is offered, not to 
saints; it is offered in commemoration of Christ, on 


* Explic. lit. hist. and dog. part iii. art. ix. t Lib. 20, 
contra Faust. c. 21. 1 Lib. 8 de civ. c. 27. 





58 ON THE MASS. 


This prayer was originally said, only on the festi- 
vals of saints, and special mention then was made of 
that saint whose festival was celebrated, but during 
the latter 700 or 800 years the special name has been 
omitted, and the general form used as now. Many 
of the ancient Missals style it the prayer of St Am- 
brose, we however, have no better evidence to attti- 
bute its formation to him. 

The celebrant then having kissed the altar through 
Tespect, turns round to reqaest the faithful to pray 
with him, saying Orote fratres, &c. ‘ Brethren pray, 
&c.—the answer to which is given in the name ofthe 
people by the attendant praying Susctpiat, &c. ** May 
the Lord receive," &c. ‘The celebrant pronounces 
only the first words in an audible voice; and ts 
the remainder in a perfectly under tone, to teach the 
faithful that silent or internal prayer, together with 
meditation on the divine mysteries is what best befits 
the solemn occasion which now presents itself; and 
this invitation is given to rouse them from any dis- 
tractiong which might have occupied their thoughts, 
as well as to excite them to greater attention to the 
solemn mysteries: and in order to cut off all occasion 
of distraction from the celebrant, no person is allowed 
to come $0 near as to be under his observation, except 
when it is necessary to attend him. Nor does he tarn 
round towards the people from this moment until after 
the conclusion of the Sacrifice; but as Moses held 
his hands lifted and apart in prayer upon the moun- 
tain, in order that Israel might overcome Amalec. 
(Exod. xvii.) He now holds them in the same 
manner whilst the faithful endeavour to overcomethat 
enemy who impedes their progress to the true land of 
our inheritance: nor does he change them from this 
position except when any special act is to be done, 
which requires their use and on a few other occasions 
which shall be noticed. 

The mode of invitation to prayet at this place, and 

its answer have varied very consideredly, but se 


ON THE MASS. 59 


substance has always been the same. In many of 
the ancient Missals, the words which the priest says 
now in a loud voice, viz. Orate fratres, is all that was 
marked, whilst others entered more fully into the ex- 
planation of the object of the prayer. In the litur 
of St. Chrysostom, the celebrant and deacon mutual y 
sid: *May the Holy Ghost descend upon you," 
and in the liturgy of St. James, the celebrant continu- 
ed his prayer at the altar, and just before the preface 
the assistants prayed as in the liturgy of St. Crysos- 
tom. In others the celebrant gave the invitation, and 
the people prayed without giving a special answer; 
but the present order has been generally established 
in the Latin church during 800 or 900 years. 

The prayer exhibits the progress of charity and 
the communion of the faithful: after seeking the 

ise and glory of the Lord, we then desire our own 

t, and then that of the whole church ; showing 

tht we must first love God above all things, even 
above ourselves, then loving ourselves, and our 
brethren as ourselves for the love of God. 

The celebrant then reads the prayer or prayers 
Called the secret or secrets, the number of which cor- 
Tesponds to the number of Collects. This prayer 
às been differently called, sometimes Super oblata 

" over the oblations."" This needs no explanation, for 
Row the oblations were on the altar. ‘This is found 
In the Sacramentary of St. Gregory, and in that of 
ope St. Gelasius. They are more generally called 
creta or Secrets. Some authors say that this name 
Was given because they were said ina low voice; 
Owever, we have seen all the prayers since the offer- 
toyxy, and find that with the exception of the preface, 
Amd the Lord's Prayer, alf the other prayers to the 
Prd of the Canon are said in a low voice. The com- 
Piler of this essay is therefore more inclined to the 
Opinion of the great Bishop of Meaux* that this 


* Bossvet Explicat Do la Messo, parag. ii. 


60 ON THE MASS. 


prayer was called Secre/a, because it was said ove 
the part of the offerings of the people, which was t 
be consecrated after the Secretto or separation had 
been made. This explanation appears the more 
natural as being at the same time founded upon a 
fact, and having the very same meaning as super ob- 
lata the other title of the prayer. 

During the repetition of the secret prayers the cele- 
brant is supposed to have so thoroughly imbibed the 
spirit of devotion, that he no longer can contain it 
within, and he therefore concludes them by repeating 
or singing the latter words per omnia Secula 
rum, ** World without end " aloud; the choir answers 
* Amen." The next salutation is that of Dominus 
vobiscum which has been already explained. Then 
Sursum Corda, ** Lift up your hearts, " to which he is 
answered Habemus ad Dominum, * We have lifted 
them up to the Lord. Then the celebrant says or 
sings, Gratias agamus Domino Deo nostro, ** Let us 
give thanks to the Lord our God." And is answered, 
Dignum et Justum est, “It is meet and just," after 
which he says or sings the preface, which is so called, 
because itimmediately precedes the canon of the Mass. 

Formerly, in some churches, immediately after the 
Orate fralres the sanctuary was enclosed in curtains, 
and the celebrant was not seen, hence it was useless 
for him to turn towards the faithful in saluting them 
during the canon, or immediately preceding it: but 
even where there were no curtains, as at present we 
have none, the solemn occupation of the celebrant 
prevents his turning round. ‘I'he most ancient litar- 
gies contain this invitation to lift up our hearts to the 
Lord, and it is so general through all the first writere 
and early documents, as to be evidently of Apostolic 
introduction, It is found in the constitutions by 
Clement Lib. 8. c. 17. St. Cyprian. fer. 6. de orat. 
Dom. Cyril of Jerusalem. Cat, Myst. 5. divers 
places in St. John Chrysostom and St. Augustine, 
&c. The invitation to give thanks to the Lord our 


ON THE MASS, 61 


God is equally ancient, and the preface is found in 
every litargy which has been discovered. 

The Greeks have only one preface, but the Latins 
have had a vast number, almost every principal festi- 
val of the great mysteries or of any distinguished saint, 
having a proper preface: but about the year 1050, 
they were reduced to ten, and all the others abolished. 
Those retained, are the same that were enumerated 
2s fully sanctioned by the church, about the year 580, 
by Pope Pelagius II, in his answer to the Bishops of 
Germany and France. They are the common pre- 
face, and those of Christmas, Epiphany, Lent, Easter, 
Ascension, Pentecost, the Trinity, the Apostles, and 
the Cross. Pope Urban II, in the year 1095, approv- 
ed of that of the blessed Virgin in the councils of 
Plaisance and Clermont. Though the decree be not 
found in the acts of the councils, it is quoted by Gra- 
tian fifty yearsafter. Those form at present the body 
of prefaces of the Roman Missal. 

othing can be more appropriate than for man who 
aspires to a heavenly country, to lift up his heart and 
seek for it. His thoughts and his desires should be 
in heaven, for where his treasure is,there also should his 
heart be; he desires to join with the angels in glory, then 
should he also join with them here below in praising 
their great Creator. And nothing can surely be more 
just, nor more necessary than that we who have re- 
ceived all things from his bounty, and who have so 
often experienced his mercy, should give him thanks 
therefor; but at no moment should our gratitude be 
more strong, nor our feelings more lively, than when 
we contemplate the. Son of God slain for our trans- 
gressions, and now expect him upon the altar to be 
under the sacramental veils, at once our victim, and 
our sustenance. 

Our praises are given to God, through our Lord 
Jesus Christ; and in giving them, we behold him, 
surrounded as it were by the whole heavenly court, 
from the most humble angel, the most ardent seraph, 


62 ON THE MASS, 


who rapt in the fire of love, burns in extacy ea 
blazesin glory near the throne. dnd they resi @ 
day and night, saying HOLY, HOLY, HOLY, and givéat 
and honour and benediction to him that sttteth 4 
the throne. (Apoc. iv. 8.) In the fervour of the momem 
the celebrant invites his flock to join with them in $d 
sacred canticle, and the choir and people unite j 
their jubilee of exultation. . 
In saying those words, Holy, &c., the celebrat 
joins his hands, and bows down his head, in humbi 
adoration, whilst he repeats to the ** Lord God & 
Sabaoth, the heavens and the earth are full of hi 
glory: Hosarfna in the highest; blessed is he wh 
cometh in the name of the ord ; and he makes chi 
sign of the cross, to exhibit the so 0 essing 2 
fallen man, and repeats ** Hosanna in the bighest.^ . 
This hymn is found in all the most ancient lites 
ies.* St. Gregory of Nyssa, in his address to th 
Jatechumens, urging them to accelerate their p 
ration for baptism, **Why do you not hasten to 
baptism, that you may be able to sing with the faith 
ful the eanticle of the Seraphim 1$? And St. Jou 
Chrysostom asks the faithful how they can sing ip 
decent songs with those mouths which have chaunte 
Holy, Holy, Holy to the Lord. It was formetk 
omitted on fast days, and in Masses for the dead ; bu 
the second council of Vaison, in 529, at which & 
Cesarius was present, ordered it to be said at al 
Masses, ** even in Lent and for the dead." This cut 
tom soon became general, . 
The hymnis found in the first placein the sixth chag 
ter of the prophet Isaias, where we read the very words 
as sung by the seraphim, Holy, Holy, Holy Lor 
God of Sabaoth, or of armies, or hosts; the heaven 
and the earth are full of his glory. For the reaso 
which has been previously given, the church retain 
the original Hebrew word Sabaoth, instead of takin 


* See Le Brun, part iv. pexeg. 4. 





64 ON THE MASS. 


his apostles and ascension; the descent of the Holy 
Ghost at whitsuntide, and the effects ofthis de 
scent; the favour conferred on the blessed Virgin 
Mary, and the power of the apostles, together with 
the unity of the church, and the source of spiritual 
jurisdiction. All those are separately and specially 
brought in review before our minds through the 
year, on various occasions, by the special or proper 
prefaces. 

The assistant rings the bell at the sanctus, to rouse 
the attention of the congregation, and to excite them 
to join in thehymn. 

The next part is the canon. This has its name 
from being a part which has always been an unm 
changing rule, by which the celebrant was to be 
directed ; and which was not subject to the discre- 
tion of the priest or bishop, even in those early days 
when much was left to their prudence. The mean- 
ing of the word canon, is **a rule." It consists of 
that part of the Liturgy which commences with the 
words Ze igilur clemen tissime pater, &c.; ‘+ we 
therefore humbly pray,” &c., down to the words per 
omnia Secula Sxculorum, Amen. ‘For ever and 
ever, Amen,” just before the Lord’s prayer. Bat 
latterly the canon is considered to comprise the 
Lord's prayer, and to extend to the prayers at tak- 
ing the chalice and the ablutions inclusive. 

his is one of the most ancient parts of the Litur- 
gy; we find itin very nearly the same words as are 
now in the Roman Missal, in the ancient Ordo Ho- 
manus, Which quotes it as of the oldest date. 1t ig 
on all hands agreed that the last person who amend- 
ed and reduced it to its present form, was Pope St. 
Gregory the great, in the year 595.  Kemnitz and 
most others who have written against the Catholic 
doetrine on this point, say that in the year 590 it 
assumed its present form. In his 63d epistle, St. 
Gregory states that before his time, but he does not 
State exactly when, it had been compiled by an em- 





66 ON THE MASS. 


is the name by which he calls it * * in the .per- 
formance of the holy mystery." ‘The second coun- 
cil of Carthage in the year 390, calls it Ordo 2gend:. 
* the order of doing’’—that is of producing the Sa- 
craments or offering the Sacrifice—doing an act. 
'l'hose who are at all conversant with the history of : 
the early ages of the church, will not be astonished 
at not finding earlier written documents upon the 
subject, for they are well aware of the custom which 
prevailed during the first three centuries ard a half, 
of not committing the forms of the sacraments or 
the prayers of the mysteries to writing, they were 
taught to the Clergy, and not written: hence we 
could have no earlier documents. It must be then 
quite plain that no better evidence could be expected 
of the antiquity of our canon. )] 
But in addition to these we may add some consi- 
derations which have very great weight, First it is 
usual in the dyptics of the churches to insert the 
names of the saints, to be repeated in the canon; now 
in this canon there is not the nameof any bat ofa martyr 
ofa very early date—therefore all thedyptics which have 
been introduced, must have been of a correspondi 
period, and not later than the third century. Second- 
ly, we have the most accurate statements of all the 
changes that have been made in the canon by any of 
the Pontiffs, and they are very few ; we have also the 
various additions to that part of the office, which was 
left more to discretion than the canon, hence we con- 
clude that if the canon was not of apostolic origin, we 
would have had some account of its author; or if any 
serious change had been made, we would have learned 
it equally as well as we did that made by Pope Leo, 
and that other by Pope Gregory, when in his revision 
thereof he added the words Diesque nostros in tua pace 
disponas. ** And dispose our days in thy peace, ’ as at 
the end of the prayers said by the celebrant with his 


* S, Polag. in Ep. Agobard. ad. Ludov. imp. , 


ON THE MASS. 67 


hands spread over the offering—and again in the 
enumeration of the apostles, the order is very different 
from any other which we find; and can be best 
weounted for, as also can the introduction of their 
names and of those of saints who lived nearly two 
centuries after the apostles, in a work attributed to the 
apostolico: age, by the account of what the dyptics 
Were—as shall be given. 

We shall now examine the prayers of the canon, 
and find that as the council of Trent declares,* it 
contains. nothing but what is calculated to lift the 
soul to God, and that it consists of the compositions 
of our Lord himself, of the apostles, and the most 
holy and earliest Pontiffs. 

The celebrant begins by lifting his hands and eyes 
to heaven, in imitation of our divine Lord, when in- 
voking his eternal Father, then he respectfuHy kisses 
the altar, and at the words **these gifts, these pre- 
sents, these holy and unspotted sacrifices,” he thrice 
makes the sign of the cross over the offering to conse- 
crate it to God through the merits of Christ, and then 
continues the prayer with his hands lifted and extend- 
ed, until that part where he invokes the Lord for his 
living friends, **Be mindful, O Lord"—here he 
closes his hands, and rests for a short time in mental 
prayer for them, and also to give the congregation an 
opportunity of enumerating their friends in their 
prayers. After which he extends his hands and con- 
tinues, to the end of that prayer, **'l'hrough the same 
Christ, our Lord —A men." 

The object of this prayer is evident; it is to obtain 
from the eternal Father, the author of al! good, through 
the merita of his beloved Son, the blessings which we 
ask for. The first of those is, that he would ** vonchsafe 
to accept" the offering which we make; it is as yet but 
bread and wine, but we offer it for the purpose of its 
being made the body and blood of Jesus Christ—for 


"Sess, xxii. c. 4, 


68 ON THE MASS. 


which end the blessing of the eternal Father is neces- 
sary thereon; hence he is prayed **to bless these 
gifts." We call that which is given by a superior to 
an inferior, a gift, and as we have received those from 
God, who is our superior, we make the acknow- 
ledgement of his bounty even in our making the offer- 
ing; but what an inferior presents with a request that 
it may be received well, expresses what we do in . 
giving ‘these presents" to our superior, with a 
request that he may accept them as our “sacrifice” 
which is already ** holy," as having been consecrated 
to him, and **unspotted," for it is the purest which 
we can bestow, and we anticipate that under those 
mystic veils will soon be placed the **unspotted" 
lamb figured by him who in Egypt was chosen with- 
out blemish. 

The object of onr.oblation is in the first place for 
the Holy Catholic Church—because we are brethren 
throughout the whole world, having but one Lord, 
one faith, one baptism, one God and father of all, to 
whom Christ our Lord, ascending on high, led captivi- 
ty captive, and gave gifts to men. (Ephes. iv. 5, &o.) 
We then request of the Lord **to grant peace" to the 
church by saving it from the persecution of enemies, 
** to preserve it"! in that peace by taking away enmity, 
ill will and malice, **to unite it" by removing the 
spirit of schism which too often exhibits itself, and 
*to govern the church throughout the world," by 
preserving the spirit of unity in the bond of peace. 

And as we have but one fold under ofe 
(John x. 16,) the next petition is for him who as the 
vicegerent of Christ, is our visible head here below, 
we therefore pray specially for our holy father the 
Pope—according to the injunction of St. Paul to the 
Hebrews, Remember your prelates who have spoken the 
word of God to you, (xiii. 7.) and the bishop of Rome 
being the centre of Catholic communion, we should 
necessarily first offer up our prayers for him after 
asking for the unity of the Catholic Church; such 





70 ON THE MASS. 


papers or parchment folded twice, so that they were 
called dyptics, from this double fold; hence then 
were found upon the dyptics, the names of the Pope, 
of the Bishop, of the King or Emperor, where he 
was a Catholic, and in another part of the saints of 
whom commemoration was made, or whose festivals 
were celebrated ; and again, of the dead to be pryed 
for, as we shall see in their proper places. Thasa 
name being on the dyptics meant its being written on 
the scrip of the altar for some one of those purposes. 

The prayer continues to advert to the sacrifice 
being offercd not only for those, but also for our 
other living friends of whom we choose to make s 
cial mention; and to allow an opportunity for this 
the celebrant rests to make his own memento in the 
proper place, and to allow the assistants to make 
theirs, but the prayer first reminds them of the neces- 
sity of faith without which it ts tmpossible to please 
God ; (Heb. xi. 6.) and hence the prayer continues 
* as also for all orthodox believers and professors of 
the Catholic and apostolic faith"—that faith which 
. is the belief of all nations, and which has been de- 
rived from the apostles, and is not the offspring of 
human vanity nor of human ingenuity, but of apos- 
tolic tradition, and which was originally received 
from Christ himself, and is not the little produce of 
any single nation and its colonies, and the descen- 
dants of the colonists, but that body of doctrine spread 
through every nation by the messengers of Christ, 
und exhibited in every age by their successors. 

After this special application to individuals tho 
celebrant next reflects upon the numbers that surround 
him—and says **and of all here present, whose faith 
and devotion are known unto thee, for whom we of- 

fer, or who offer up to thee this sacrifice of praise ;°’ 
because, although the sacrificeis in itself excellent, 
its application to individuals will be generally bene- 
ficial, only in proportion to their faith and devotion, 
of which the seateher of hearts alone can judge; 





72 ON THE MASS. 


the church triumphant, we are members of the same 
body, holding the same faith as they did on earth. 
Whilst others say, that it only means holding com- 
munion with each other, as members of the true 
Church here below, and adduce in support of their 
opinion other parts of the Liturgy, which on some oc- 
casions are introduced immediately after the word 
* Communicating,' and altogether disjoining it from 
the subsequent part of the prayer; as on Easter Sun- 
day, where the meaning is evident, **Being uniled in 
communion, and celebrating this sacred day of the 
resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, according to 
the flesh : moreover honouring the memory of the ever 
glorious, fc.” 

This portion of the Canon teaches us to honour the 
memory of the saints, to seek their intereession, and 
enumerates some of the principal and earliest of 
those holy personages. Different churches had dif- 
ferent names in this place, and many of them al 
er enumeration. In the first ages of the church, 
there was placed upon the altar a paper or parch- 
ment folded double, whence it was called a Dyptic; 
it was the register of that church; this had three co- 
lumns, onein which the names of the Pope, the 
Bishop, sometimes the King or Emperor, and of the 
benefactors of the church, were inscribed, and this 
was frequently read aloud at the beginning of the 
Canon. In the second column were the names of 
the saints who were principally honoured and in- 
voked in that church, and lastly the names of deceas- 
ed persons belonging to the church for the repose of 
whose souls the prayers of the living were implored. 
Thus the Dyptics exhibited at once the three states 
of the faithful, militant, triumphant and suffering, 
but still united in the communion of Saints. The 
difference of those registers in different churches will 
now be no cause of surprise, nor will it exhibit any 
difference of faith, for though the names may be, and 
must generally be different, the principles of their 


ON THE MASS. 73 


introduction must evidently be the same. At a very 
early period, the names of the Saints whose memory 
was to be principally honoured, were transferred 
from the Dyptics to the Canon, and as the enume- 
ration would be almost interminable if all who were 
honoured and invoked should be named, only a few 
Were inserted, and the general phrase added, ** and of 
all thy Saints." Without entering into any proof to 
support the doctrine, one remark may be allowed, 
that whatever merits we attribute to them, or what- 
ever aid we expect from them, must all be from that 
great source of good to us ** Christ our Lord." And 
In the invocation we only follow what has been trans- 
mitted to us from the days of the apostles, by whose 
immediate disciples their names were placed upon 
the Registera, and to which were afterwards added 
the names of those who like them had lived in the 
ractice of virtue, and died in the odour of sanctity, 
Mention was made of them at thealtar, as St. Augus- 
tine says, * ** At the very table, we commemorate 
them, not that we should pray for them, but rather, 
that they might pray for us," and in another place T 
"It is an injury to pray for a martyr, to whose 
prayers we should be commended.” And thus a 
earned expounder of the Canon writes T ** We honour 
the head in his members, God in his Saints.” 

Being thus fortified by the intercession of those 
Saints, the celebrant now spreads his hands over the 
offerings: as the high priest of Judea formerly laid 
his hands upon the goat to load that victim with the 
sins of the people, and as the priests of the old law 
always laid. their hands upon the heads of those 
victims which were offered for sin. By laying his 
hands thus over the oblation, he too identifies himself 
therewith, and thus makes the complete sacrifice of 
himself, the people, and the bread and wine to the 


* Tract 54 ia Joan. f Serm. 17 de verbis Apost. tOde 
Camerac. ia apos. Sac. Can. dis. 9. 


74 ON THE MASS. 


Lord, for the purposes recited in the prayer, where he 
entreats the Almighty ‘ graciously to accept this ob- 
lation of his servitude" in the ministry, “as also of 
his whole family,” that congregation of which he is 
the head. The special objects now enumerated are 
first * the disposition of our days in peace.” That 
peace which is the result of a good conscience,, that 
peace which the world cannot give, (John xiv. 27,) 
—because the world frequently lulls the conscience 
into a deceitful repose, saying peace, peace, and there 
is no peace; the second object is to ** preserve us 
from eternal damnation," by keeping us in this life 
from sin, which alone can prodnce damnation; and 
the third object is, to ** rank us in the numberof the 
elect;" because in his mercy he can choose us, and 
select us, and give us extraordinary aid, whereby 
favouringeus in his good will, more than others, to 
whom he gives a sufficiency of grace to enable them 
to be saved, if they will correspond therewith ; he 
can pour forth his assistance more abundantly upon 
us, and thus insure our salvation by his extraordinary 
mercy. All this we implore **through Christ our 
Lord," (John xvi. 24,) who exhorts us to ask in his 
name. 

The expression of the three great objects of our 
offering in this prayer was added to the Canon by 
St. Gregory the great, as we read in his life by John 
the Deacon, L. 9. n. 17, in Walfridus lib. de rebus. 
Eccl. c. 22, in the sixth lesson of his festival in the 
Breviary, March 129, and from the venerable Bede, 
Hist. Eccl. 19 c. 1l. ‘And also in the celebration 
of the Mass, he superadded these phrases full of the 
greatest perfection di nosiros, &c. However 
Amalarius in prefat 2, in lib. de Off. states that the 
objects were substantially contained in the Canon in 
the times of St. Ambrose, which was two hundred 
years earlier. 

We now come to the prayer which immediately 

precedes the consecration, and which we find in 


ON THE MASS. "5 


every Latin formula that is extant, and which has al- 
ways been looked upon as having been altogether 
derived from the Apostles. And as regards the sub- 
stance of the prayers, the only difference between 
the Latin and Eastern liturgies on this point, is, 
that the Greeks repeat the prayer which they have 
correspondent to this, after the form instituted by our 
Saviour, and the Latins place it immediately before 
the words of his institution. 

We are now arrived at that part which is the most 
solemn, important, and interesting of the entire; 
every thing hitherto had reference remotely or prox: 
imately to the awful moment which approaches. 
For now the true victim is about to be produced. In 
a well regulated Cathedral, this indeed is a moment of 
splendid, improving, and edifying exhibition to the 
well instructed Christian. The joyful hosannas of 
the organ have died away in deep and solemn notes 
which seemed to be gradually lost as they ascended 
to the throne of God, and solemn silence pervades 
the church: the celebrant stands bareheaded about 
to perform the most awful duty in which man could 
possibly be engaged. His assistants in profound ex- 
pectation await the performance of that duty ; taper- 
bearers line the sides of the Santuary, and with their 
lighted lamps await the arrival of their Lord. In- 
cense-bearers kneel, ready to envelope the altar ina 
eloud of perfumes which represents the prayers of 
the Saints ; and at the moment of the consecration 
when the celebrant elevates the host, and the tink- 
ling of a small bell gives notice of the arrival of the 
lamb, every knee is bent, every head is bowed, gratu- 
lating music bursts upon the ear, and the lights 
which surround the throne of him who comes to save 
aworld, are seen dimly blazing through the clouds 
of perfumed smoke, which envolopes this mystic 
place. Yet even on the most humble altar which re- 
igion rears, and at which poverty attends, though 

stripped of all external pomp and circumstance of 


76 ON THE MASS. 


show ; the same victim is found, the same graces 
may be obtained, and purer piety may kneel with 
more sensible devotion, and form a closer alliance 
with the Saviour of the world, especially if by eating 
his flesh and drinking his blood, the union of abode 
in Christ should take place, for his flesh 1s meat indeed, 
and his blood is drink tndeed. (John vi. 56.) 

We have in the Gospels a short record of the acts 
of the Saviour, at the institution. Jesus took bread, 
and blessed, and brake; and he gave to his disciples 
and said: take ye and eat : this ts my body, and tak- 
ing the chalice, he gave thanks and gave to them, 
saying : Drink yeall of this. For this is my blood 
of the new testament, which shall be shed for many, 
unto remission of sins. (Matt. xxvi. 26,27.) Here 
we find the acts to be taking bread, blessing it, 
breaking it, giving to his disciples what he held, ac- 
companied by a declaration that it was his body. 
This is no place to enter upon an examination of the 
word brake, as this is not a controversial disquisition ; 
bat itmay be observed that many eminent linguists, 
and deep antiquarians, and learned divines, state the 
meaning to be breaking tn sacrifice, because the word 
has been frequently used in that sense; and this 
they state to be the key tothe explanation of the 
words in St. Mark xiv. 22, where the whole is de- 
scribed as one act, blessing broke; that is, by his 
blessing offered the sacrifice; and to that of St. Luke 
xxii. 19. Thisismy body which is given FOR you, 
not only given to you, for they say, if it were only a 
sacrament it would have been then only given fothem, 
but not for them; as there was no other person to 
whom it could be given for them, because it was 
given £o no other, and the verb is in the present tense, 
and must refer to some act then in performance ; and 
the distinction of tenses is made by each of the 
three Evangelists, where speaking of the blood in the 
subsequent verse, each says, shall be shed, that is fu- 

ture, referring to the nextday. But ii by his Wee, 


ON THE MASS. T! 


he did offer it in sacrifice, then indeed we can clearly 
see the acts to be taking bread, by blessing it for 
them, and afterwards giving the Sacrament £o them. 

Our only object at present is to trace as well as 
we can the origin, and to find the exact meaning of 
the prayer which immediately precedes the words of 
consecration in the Roman Missal. Christ used 
prayer, gave thanks, and he blessed the bread which 

took, and then declared what substance was 
there; and he commanded the Apostles, and through 
them their successors, to do what he did, Do this. 

It has been before remarked, and no fact is better 
established than it is, that in the early ages of the 
Chureh, the forms or words for the Sacraments were 
not committed to writing: thus St. Basil says * 
“whoisit that has left us in writing the words which 
are used for the consecration of the Eucharist."— 
And just after he continnes, * we are not content 
with using only those words which are reported by 
the Apostle, and the Gospel; but we add to them 
others before and after, as of great efficacy for the 
mysteries, and which we have learned only from this 
unwritten doctrine.” Justin Martyr in his apolo 
tsays, that our ordinary food “is changed into the 
Eucharist by the word of God and by prayer." Ori- 
gent says, that ** we eat of this bread sanctified by 
the word of God and by consecration.” Tertullian§ 
says that Christ ** made the bread his body by the 
words this is my body." St. Ambrose says|| ** The 
change of the bread and wine into the body and blood 
takes place the moment the words of Clirist are pro- 
nounced : ** before the consecration, it is bread, but 
When the words of Christ are added, it is no longer 
bread, but the body of Christ." The same writer 
says f * Blessing is of more efficacy than nature, 


* Li de Spiritu S. c. 27. t Apolog.2 ad Antonin. t Hom. 
15. in Matt. $ Tert. adver. Marc J. 4. c. 40. |lDe Sacram 
«4.60.4. TDe us qui. init, c. 9, 


78 ON THE MASS. 


for the blessing changes nature itself and the exam- 

le he adduces is the consecration of the Eucharist 

y the blessing. St. Augustine says,* ‘But our 
bread and chalice become mystical to us by consecra- 
tion ;" and in another place,T ‘It is consecrated by 
the mystic prayer." "Thus we find, prayer, blessing 
and the words of Christ all through used for the con- 
secration. 

The prayer which next follows has been looked 
upon at all times as that which has come down from 
the Apostles, in the way mentioned by St. Basil. In 
repeating it the celebrant thrice makes the sign of the 
Cross over the offerings, then once over the bread, and 
once over the wine, and lifting his eyes to heaven to 
invoke the power of the eternal God, and in imita- 
tion of the Saviour, he again holding the bread in his 
hand, makes the sign of the Cross over it at the word. 
blessed, and pronouncing the words of Consecration 
bending over the altar, and holding the host in his 
hands, he kneels to adore his Lord and Saviour then 
concealed under the appearance of bread, and rising, 
elevates it to be seen and adored by the people; and 
having again made his adoration, he repeats the same 
ceremony with regard to the Chalice. 

In the prayer the celebrant entreats of the Lord 
** that he would vouchsafe in all respects to bless the 
oblation" now made, by separating it from common 
use to be a holy oblation, **to approve” it by ranking 
it amongst those, which having been sanctified, are 
looked upon with peculiar favour ‘‘to ratify,” the 
same, by so fully confirming his benediction, as that 
these gifts may never more be taken from the Lord, 
* To 1nake it rational" as well by enabling us to ap- 
pear in a rational and becoming manner before our 
God, according to that of the Apostle. Jbeseech you 
brethren, by the mercy of God, that you present your 
bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, pleasing unto God your 


* Lib. 20. Contra Faust. t Lib. 3 de Sacerd. 


ON THE MASS. 79 


reasonable service, (Rom. xii. 1,) as by making it the 
body and blood of Christ, who taking away the Sacri- 
fices of irrational animals offered himself with his 
rational soul, &c., and ** acceptable,” so that in every 
respect it may be faultless, not only on the part of the 
vietim, but on the part of the celebrant and the assist- 
ants. The great object of all is thus expressed ** that 
it may be made fur us, the body and blood of the 
most beloved son Jesus Christ our Lord.” There is 
m doubt but the institution of the Saviour will pro- 
dace its effect; and the body and hlood of Christ 
will be produced; but the object of the prayer is 
more, it is to have the benefit of his death applied to 
us by making it available for us. 

The other part which is the consecration, is taken 
chiefly from the Gospels, in the repetition of which 
the celebrant lifts his eyes to heaven, and blesses the 
bread and the chalice as the Saviour did, and hav- 
ing pronounced the words of consecration paye the 
tribute of his adoration to tlie true vietim which has 
now been produced by the operation of the Holy 
Ghost, in place of the substances of bread and wine 
Which have been destroyed. 

We may here well exclaim with St. John Chry- 
sostom,* ** O miracle! O the benignity of God, who 
whilst he is seated with the Father above, is in the 
same mornent of time in the hands of all, and gives 
himselt to those who desire to receive and to embrace 
him" And againt ** Elias left his cloak to his dis- 
ciple, but the Son of God ascending on high left his 
flesh behind. Elias was indeed stripped, but Christ 
at the same time left it to us, and ascended with it in 
his possession." [n another place he sayst{ ** At that 
time the Angels assist with the Priest and the whole 
orders of heavenly powers lifts its shout; and the 
place near the altar is full of Angels in honour of him 


* Hom. 2. ad. pop. Antioc. +Lib.6deSacerdot. 1 Lib 
3 de Trin. c. 4. 


80 ON THE MASS. 


who is immolated." He then relates a vision of an. 


old man, who had often been favoured by the Lord: 
with special manifestations, and who stated that, as. 
far as human weakness could bear the sight, he was 
enabled on one occasion to behold a multitute of the: 
heavenly host, such as appeared to the Shepherds on.- 
the night of the nativity, as related by the Evangeliata,.. 
clad in shining garments, surrounding the altar at the, 


time of consecration, and with their heads bowed- 


down as soldiers, were accustomed to bow down be... 


fore their kings and emperors, and in his 21st Homily- 


on the Acts, the same writer has this passage, ** What , 
say you? The host is in his hands, the Angels are . 


present, so are the Archangels, the Son of God is 
there, all attend with the greatest awe." 

The mode of paying the tribute of adoration to the 
Saviour who then was present, was different accord» 
ing to the customs of the times and of the people. 
In the liturgy of St. James, the mode was for the 
deacon to proclaim immediately after the consecra- 


tion, that it had taken place, and to call upon the con» 


regation for their praise and preparation. The 
ollowing is the enumeration of epithets used by him, 
** For those oblated gifts, sanctified, precious, supé 
heavenly, ineffable, unspotted, glorious, redoubtable, 
terrific, divine.” In the mass of the pre-sanctified, 
* Now the virtues of the heavens join invisibly -in 
adoration with us, for behold the Lord of glory 
enters," was the expression by which proclamation 
was made of the bringing in of the Sacrament which 
had been consecrated on the preceding Sunday; and 
in the liturgy of St. John Chrysostom, just before 
communion was the time fixed for it, then approach- 
fng—the person said, *I believe, O Lord, that thou 
art Christ, the son of the living God." ‘I will not 
give you a traitor's kiss, as Judas did." 
In the Latin church, the principal time was at the 
old elevation; that is, just before the Lord's prayer, 
when the celebrant lifting the host and the chalice to- 


ON THE MASS. 81 


gether, said the words **all honour and glory." The 
eustom was so general, so well known, and so little 
notion of its being contradicted or called in question 
in the early days of the church, that we have scarcely 
anything written upon the subject. Thus although 
there are some few persons who do not take off their 
hats at present in their religious assemblies, yet the 
castom is so general and so well known, that the ne- 
cessity of our stating the practice of our being un- 
covered in order to give the testimony to posteri 
would never strike any person. But if aserious devi- 
ation from an old doctrine were attempted, the persons 
who held that doctrine, would mark their adherence 
more strongly in order to its confirmation, thus it was 
only upon the attempt at innovating upon her doctrines 
that the Catholic Church more particularly marked 
by some striking exhibition, her adherence to truth 
and her opposition to innovation. ‘The doctrine of 
the real presence was not seriously opposed until the 
üme of Berengarius, in 1050; it is true he quoted 
John Scotus Erigena, and Bertram, about two centu- 
ries preceding ; but their innovations were so little 
known, if indeed it were true that they compiled what 
was attributed to them, that they and their errors were 
then forgotten. 

But centuries before their days, Theodoret* had 
stated that christians adored the sacred symbols, as 
being what they were believed to bc; this expression, 
“what they were believed to be,” is found in Tertul- 
lian, treating of the Eucharist, and in other early 
Writers upon the same subject, as they did not wish 
to speak too openly of their doctrines before the Pa- 

os. But St. Cyril of Jerusalem,t informs us, as 

omany of the other writers before and at that time, 
what they believed it to be, when he tells the Chris- 
tians of the profound respect he should feel in reaching 
out the hand upon which he was to receive his king, 


* Dial. 2, f Cat. v. Myst, 


82 ON THE MASS. 


and how he should at the same time bow down $ 
adoration before the sacred chalice. St Ambrope' 
treating of that passage of the 98th Psalm, above th 
footstool of his feet, says that it is the earth, which ut 
that footstool; from that earth the flesh of Chris 
originally came, ‘ this” he says “we adore in tht 
mysteries, and it was this which the apostles adored 
in the Lord Jesus, as we said above.” St, irn 
tine mentions it in his explanation of that verse of the 
21st Psalm,T and all the rich ones of the people Feavt 
eaten and adored, where he speaks of their comingg © 
the Eucharist and eating that which they have adox ed; 
and again in his commentary on the 98th Psalna be 
explains the passage as St. Ambrose did, but mush 
more fully, and amongst other expressions he has 
following—'* No person eats that flesh unless he have 
first adored it.” In the ancient work on the Ecclesi- 
astical Hierarchy attributed to Denis the Areo 
we findt a prayer of adoration addressed to Christ i8 
the sacrament. Origen $ in an address to the faith 
about to communicate, tells them to humble the™ 
selves before their Lord as the centurion did. St. J ob 
Chrysostom in his 61st Homily to the people of = 
tioch, calls upon then to adore the Sacrament, and ©° 
receive it. In his liturgy the Rubric states after. $599 
consecration, the priest adores, then the deacon ador& ^ 
and then the people adore, the deacon calling ug? € 
them to give their attention, the priest then makes t 
holy elevation. || "am 
ut this elevation, in the Greek church, was gex* e 
rally made just before the communion, and not, ag — 
have it now, atthe instant of consecration. 'K" " 
ceremony, as described by the ancient books &&' 55. 
rituals, was very striking. It has been before «—* 
served, that at the be inning of the Canon, the sa sx 
tuary was closed, and curtains drawn round it; n<&” 


*Lib 3 deSpir. Sanc. t*Ep.120ad. Honor c. 27. 1 Cap. E 
par,3. $Hom 5 in divers. \\DelaHogue Tractde Euch. p. 1 d 


ON THE MASS. 83 


the curtains were drawn aside, the gates flew open, 
and the celebrant presented the holy sacrament to the 
adoration of the faithful, before the communicants ap- 
proached. In some places they knelt, in others they 
only bowed the head ; and in some places a custom, 
even to this day, prevails, that soldiers only present 
theirarms. St. John Chrysostom, in his 3d Homil 
to the ‘people of Ephesus, says, that they should loo 
upon the opening of the gates of the sanctuary as the 
opening of the gates of heaven; and with the eyes of 
faith to behold present Christ and his angels. And 
in his 61st, to the people of Antioch, ** Behold the ta- 
ble of the King; angels are his attendants. The 
King is there; if your garments be clean, adore him, 
and receive the communion.” St. Germanus, of 
Constantinople, in the middle of the 8th century, 
states,* that the elevation of the adorable body repre- 
sents the elevation on the cross, and also the resur- 
rection from the dead; and that when with this holy 
sacrament the sign of the cross is thrice made over 
the patten, it is in honour of the ‘Trinity. 

It was the custom for the deacon then to call out 
immediately after the elevation,t ** Holy things for 
holy persons;" and the people answered, ** There is 
but one holy, one Jesus Christ, who is in the glory 
of his Father.’ **'T'his," says Simon of "Thessalonica, 
commenting on it, **is the fulfilment of that prophecy 
of St. Paul, that every knee shall bend at the name 
of Jesus, and every tongue confess, that the Lord 
Jesus is in the glory of the Father.” 

Amalarius{ mentions their remaining on their 
knees in adoration in the Latin church until the Lord's 
Prayer; just before which, formerly the only eleva- 
tion of the host which was made took place. But 
after the errors of Berengarius, the piety of the faith- 
ful introduced stronger evidence of their faith, and 


uL 1 For. Eect. 7? Euchol, Graec. p. 81. i Lib. 3. 


84 ON THE MASS. 


the first person who introduced the elevation, as it is 
now practised in the Latin church, immediately aftes 
the consecration, is thought to be Hildebert, Dishop 
of Mans, and subsequently, about the year 1139, 
Archbishop of Tours in France. Many religious o3. 
ders, which existed early in the twelfth century, had 
the custom then; and that also of ringing the bell e£ 
the elevation. Yvo of Chartres, who died in: 1118, 
complimented Maud, queen of England, for the present 
which she made to the church of our lady of Chartres, 
of bells to ring at the consecration; but the custom 
was not yet general, for it was only in 1215 that & 
general statute was made, by order of Citeaux, to 
have the bell rung during the consecration; in 1188, 
Eudes, Bishop of Paris, ordered the host to be eleve- 
ted at the consecration; and soon after, William,’ 
Bishop of Paris, made a statute to ring the bells. 
The custom was introduced into Germany in 1908, 
by Guy, the cardinal legate, and about the same pe- 
riod we have a statute of the Bishop of Coventry, in 
England, upon the subject. Thus the custom was 
caused by the error of Berengarius, in order to evince 
by more precise external observances, the belief 
which was always held. 

The true victim being now upon the altar, wehave 
no longer bread and wine to contemplate, but the 
body and blood of Christ under their appearances 
and we must keep this in mind in considering the 
prayers which follow. In the first prayer the cele- 

rant makes the sign of the cross over the victim, 
when he calls it **a pure host, an holy host, an une 
spotted host, the holy bread of eternal life, and 
chalice of everlasting salvation." But it is no longer 
to bless them, for the Author of every blessing is there. 
The sign is made to remind us, first, that we hate 
present the victim who immolated himself for us upon 
the cross: next that every blessing must be derived 
from that immolation, and then to commemorate his 
death, and obtain its application to our souls. We 


ON THE MASS. 85 


here * his servants ”’ at the altar, and “his holy peo- 
ple,” who attend with devotion, thus fulfil the in 
junction of Christ, to do this in commemoration of 

im; for we commemorate the passion, resurrection, 
and ascension of our blessed Lord Jesus Christ, and 
“offer to his most excellent majesty this host, pure, 
boly, and unspotted, which has been now produced 
from those gifts and bounties which he has bestowed 

us.’ 

The celebrant proceeds to entreat that the Lord 
woald ** vouchsafe to look with a propitious and se- 
Tene countenance” upon our oblation, which now con- 
sets of the body and blood of Christ, and which 
must of its own nature be acceptable, and needs not 
our entreaty to gain favour in heaven; and ourselves 
and our prayers, which are not so perfect, and may 
therefore be objects of displeasure in his sight, in 
consequence of our crimes, and the imperfection of 
our acts, even when we undertake to do the work of 
the Holy Ghost. In the fear, therefore, which ac- 
companies this doubt, we make the request, and to 
animate our hope, we call to mind some of our fellow- 
mortals, whose dispositions did render them objects 
of celestial favour. We hence are emboldened to ask 
that he would ‘*accept” us and our offering, **as he 
was graciously pleased to accept the gifts of his just 
servant Abel," who by faite offered to God a sacrifice 
ereeeding that of Cain, by which he obtained a testimo- 

that he was just. (Heb. xi. 4.) ** And the sacrifice 

our Patriarch Abraham," who by faith, when he 
was tried, offered Isaac; and he that received the pro- 
mises, offered up his only begotten son. (Heb. xi. 17.) 
(To whom it was said, fo Isaac shall thy seed be call- 
td.) Accounting that God is able to raise up even from 
lle dead. Whereupon also he received him for a para- 
be. And that which his high priest Melchisedech 
offered to him a holy sacrifice and unspotted victim.” 

Here now the Christian beholds himself united in 


htith and ssarífco with the venerable sages of antiqui- 


86 ON THE MASS. 


ty, for Abel knew that the redemption should be ef- 
fected in blood, and without the shedding of blood there 
$$ no remission; (Heb. ix. 32,) therefore he took not 
of the fruits of the earth, but of the firstlings of his 
flock, and offered his sacrifice in the hope of future 
atonement, and only through the merits of Christ, the 
shedding of whose blood was figured therein, was it 
acceptable. Abraham who had learned mysteries in 
the land of vision, darted his eye through the shadowy 
vista of ages, Rejoicing that he might see the day of 
the Saviour : he sau it and was glad. (John viii. 56.) 
His paternal heart yearned within him, when after the 
holocaust, he embraced the living Isaac upon the 
mountain; Isaac, his dearly beloved, who carried 
upon his back, the wood upon which he was to be 
immolated, and yet lived after the oblation; and 
whilst the tear of gratitude and devotion swelled in 
the eye, or moistened the furrow of his aged cheek, 
the venerable father of the faithful could scarcely rer 
press his feelings at beholding the figure of C 

immolated and living, sacrificed and not consumed. 
Melchisedech was king of Salem, priest of the moat high 
God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter 
of the kings, and blessed him, king of justice, and king 
of peace, without father, without mother, without 

nealogy ; having netther beginning of days nor end of 
life ; but likened unto the Son of God continueth a priest 
forever, greater than Abraham. (Heb. vii. passim.): 
Of Melchisedech St. Paul had much to say, and hard 
to be intelligibly uttered, because they to whom he 
wrote had become weak to hear. (Heb. v. 4.) This 
Melchisedech offered sacrifice in bread and wine. 
Here then we have the atonement by blood, in Abel, 
the victim immolated and living in Isaac; and under 
the appearance of bread and wine in Melchisedech, 
all figures now fulfilled, under our eyes: this is the 
reason of having those three great patriarchs selected 
from the host of true adorers, who by faith have offered 
their oblations, and made their vows in spirit and in 

truth, . 


ON THE MASS. 87 


Then bowing down before the altar, in the posture 
of humility, the celebrant prays that the ** Almighty 
God would command these things to be carried by the 
hands of his holy angel to his altar on high, in the 
uet of his divine majesty." 

are two explanations given of this prayer ; 
one by Le Brun and a number of authors whom he 
cites, in which it is stated that the angel here men- 
tioned is ** the angel of the New Testament," * the 
messenger of glad tidings," Jesus Christ himself, and 
that the object of the prayer is by showing theear- 
nestness of our desire we intreat of God in the phrase 
* ceommand," to cause this angel to present not only 
his flesh and blood, but also our supplications before 
our eternal Father, that being now presented by him, 
they may become acceptable even upon the altar of 
heaven; for, as St. Augustine says, ** The good and 
the wicked approach the altar which is on earth, 
but there is a sublime invisible altar whither the un- 
just man cannot come." (Psal. 25 and 42.) 

The other explanation may be found in Bellarmine, 
Bossuet, &e. They state that we only seek the in- 
tercession of the angels, and that our prayers may be 
carried by them as those of Tobias were by the angel 
Raphael, to be presented before the Lord. ‘This also 
appears to bethe opinion of Innocent IIT., in his expla- 
Dation of the Mass, and some of the old liturgies have 
the word angels in the plural; so that the meaning 
would appear to be, that as Bossuet remarks, it was 
anold and constant tradition of the church, as may 
be seen in Tertullian, and many of the fathers, that 
one or more angels presided in the meetings of the 
faithful ; we now having the victim produced, which 
must be pleasing, beg also that the presiding angol 
or angels of the assembly, may, at the command of 
the most powerful God, bear our prayers to that invisi- 
ble altar on high, to lay them in union with this vic- 
tim before the throne of mercy, that we may find grae 

48 seasonable Gti, . 


88 ON THE MASS. 


This prayer is especially made for those who are 
to receive the holy sacrament of the eucharist, as 
must appear from its conclusion, ‘*‘That as many as 
shall partake of the most sacred body and blood of 
thy Son at this altar, may be filled with every 
heavenly grace and blessing, through the same Christ 
our Lord. Amen." 

In repeating this part the celebrant kisses the altar, 
and not to bless, but to show the source of blessing, 
he makes the sign of the cross, once over the body, 
and once over the blood; and lastly to become a 

artaker of the merits of the death upon the cross, on 
imself. 

Then closing his hands as when he prayed for the 
living, he now prays for the faithful departed, «Who 
are gone before us with the sign of faith," baptism, 
** and rest in the sleep of peace;"" having received the 
sacraments of the church, and being in the full enjoy- 
ment of her communion, which is her peace—they 
but rest from their labours, sleeping for a time in the 
arms of death, to be roused from their slumber by the 
archangel’s trumpet, to enter, as the church hopes, 
into the enjoyment of glory. 

They who have separated themselves from the 
church, by rejecting her doctrines, disclaiming her 
authority,ridiculing her observances, trans ing her 
precepts, breaking her unity, exciting strife, creating 
obstacles to the discharge of her ministerial duties, 
abstaining from her sacraments, sneering at her solici- 
tude for their welfare and conversion, and scandaliz- 
ing her children by the turpitude of their condact, 
frequently desire to be consoled by her in death, and 
to be ranked amongst those pious children whose pride 
has been their adherence to the spouse of Christ. 
But they should reflect that if they have estranged 
themselves from her through life, it would be only 
justice that she should treat them as strangers in 
death. Butno! She still extends to them the arms 
of charity, and if they desire sacraments, and declare 


ON THE MASS. 89 


their dispositions to be those of repentant though 
prodigal children, she not only gives them the banquet 
of reconciliation, and flings over them the robe of 

bat moreover in the hope of serving them even 
afler death, follows them with her prayers into the 
regions of eternity. 

knows that the unrepenting criminal is lost 
forever; for him she has no hope—for him prayer, 
oblation, commemoration, are useless. His doom is 
imevocable. She knows that they who die in the 
perfection of virtue, having been made partakers of 
the fulness of atonement, are happy in the Lord, 
they need not our prayer. But contemplating the 
conduct of the Lord towards repenting sinners, as 
manifested in various instances in the sacred volumes, 
she knows that a temporal punishment frequently re- 
mains due to the sinner, after the guilt of his crime 
has been remitted ; thus Adam was sentenced to earn 
his bread in the sweat of his brow; Moses was ex- 
cluded from the land of promise; David Jost his child, 
and was afflicted in his family. She knows that fre- 
quently her children are summoned from life with 
part of this penalty unpaid, and that they endure a 
porgation therefor in the other world, until being no 
onger debtors to justice, they shall be made partakers 
of mercy, and having paid the last farthing, they shall 
enter into the joy of the Lord. 

She knows the frailty and the imperfection of man, 
and that we are all transgressors, in many things. 
She knows the mercy of God to be equal to his jus- 
tice, and therefore she knows, as she has learned from 
the apostles, that when taken unawares, with many 
of our minor transgressions unrepented for, we will 
not be condemned to eternal torments, but having 
suffered a temporary purgation, we shall be admitted 
by mercy to heaven, after justice shall have been 
satisfied . A " 

ey who are ín this state of purgration, are sti\\ 
embers of the charch, and may hee fore "be aided 


90 ON THE MASS. 


by our prayers and sacrifices, and hence from the days 
of the apostles, commemoration was made for them 
inthe Mass. The memento for the living was made 
before the consecration, that grace may be obtained 
by them to assist worthily thereat, but that for the 
dead was made after the production of the victim, 
which we offer on their behalf. "The names of those 
to be specially prayed for, were found on the dyptics 
of the various churches. All the old liturgies men- 
tion the custom; especially those of St. Peter, St. 
James, and St. Mark, as does St, Clement, in his 
apostolic constitutions. ‘This tradition " of praying 
for the departed, ** has come to us from our divine 
chiefs," Dion. lib. Eccles. Hierar. cap. 7, St. John 
Chrysostom says,* ‘ It is not in vain that it has been 
regulated by the apostles, that in celebrating the 
venerable mysteries, mention should be made of the 
dead; they knew well that it would be highly ser- 
viceable to them." ‘Tertullian says, f ** we make the 
oblations for the dead on their anniversary day." St. 
Cyprian, in his 66th epistle, mentions that a man in 
his diocese, named Victor having died, leaving à 
priest named Faustinus the executor of his-will, he 
having aconsiderable property, prevented Mass being 
offered for his soul, or the commemoration being made 
for him at the memento, stating as his justification a 
statute of a provincial synod in Africa, which forbad 
any person at his death to impose upon any clergy- 
man such a duty as would draw off his attention from 
the discharge of his clerical office; and this under the 
penalty of not having prayers or oblations offered for 
the repose of his soul. St. Gregory of Nyssa informs 
ust that he offered the body and blood of Jesus Christ 
for the soul of his sister, St. Ambrosell offered Mass 
for the soul of his brother, and for that of the Empe- 
ror, Valentinian; he also consoles Faustinus$ upon 


* Homily 3 in Ep. ad Philip. * De corona. MAX. SQ vw. 
in Macria ux. || Deobitu fratris Satyr. $SCowes. No. 9. O18, 


ON THE MASS. 91 


the death of his sister, and exhorts him not to grieve 
in tears, but to have her soul commended to God, in 
the oblations, and in his liturgy we have the com- 
memoration, as well as in that of St. John Crysos- 
tom. St. Augustine mentions* the request of his 
mother, St. Monica, at the time of her death, to be re- 
membered at the holy altar. In fact the documents 
are to be every where found, in support of the anti- 
quity, universality, and apostolicity of the custom; 
whether we examine the reeords of councils, study 
the works of the fathers, look into the liturgies of the 
east or the west, of Egypt or of Thrace. 

Formerly the names on the dyptics were read 
aloud ; now the celebrant and the congregation only 
mentally recommend the individuals for whom they 
desire to pray, and then the request continues, ** to 
these, O bord, and to all that sleep in Christ,”’ that 
is, who through his merits are to awake to glory, 
"grant we beseech thee, a place of refreshment,” 

the labours of their endurance under the inflic- 
tion of justice, “light” instead of the darkness and 
uncertainty of even their temporary exclusion from 
heaven, and especially that light which from the 
throne of God, shines upon and envelopes the just, 
“and peace ” in the speedy admittance to eternal joy 
“through the same Christ, our Lord. Amen.” 
Having now paid the tribute of charity to our de- 
brethren, it is but just that we should come 
k to a recollection of ourselves, and to recal us to 
this, the celebrant raises his voice at the nobis ue 
peccatoribus, ** Also, to us sinners,’ and with the u- 
mility of a true penitent, feeling the necessity of an 
amendment of heart, and sorrow for its aberrations, 
and imitating the publican, and those converted at 
the crucifixion, he strikes his breast, and proceeds to 
intreat ** confiding in the multitude of God's mercies, 
some part and fellowship with " the saints whom he 


* Ep. ad. Faustin. de obit. gor, 


99 ON THE MASS. 


names, and they are selected from all classes of pet 


sons, to teach us that salvation is within the reach . 
of all. John the Baptist, the precursor of Christ, the. 


last of the prophets, Stephen, a deacon, the fires 
Christian martyr, Matthias, an apostle, Barnabas, ane 
of the disciples, Ignatius, a bishop, Alexander, a po 
Marcellinus, a priest, Peter, an exorcist, Felicitas, 
Perpetua, matrons, Agatha, Lucy, Agnes, Cecelia, 
and Anastatia, virgins. This is the blessed ** com. 
pany into which he beseeches admittance” for h 
and for his people, ‘not of their own merit," for th 
are sinners, **but of God's own gratuitous pardon,” 
and this still besought and expected, ** through Christ 
our Lord," *by whom, O Lord, thou dost always 


create, sanctify, quicken, bless and give us all these . 


good things. By him, and with him, and in him, is 


to thee, God the Father Almighty, in the unity of the . 


Holy Ghost, all honour and glory, for ever and ever. 
Amen." 

This prayer is the concluding part of the canon 
properly so called, and preceded and accompanied 
what was called the small elevation, now the second 
elevation, and at one time indeed the only elevation 
of the sacrament. The celebrant looking upon the 
altar, and contemplating Jesus Christ hidden under 
the sacramental appearances, and reflecting also upon 


what had been originally placed upon that altar, bread 


and wine, those gifts which the Lord bestows upon 


us for our sustenance, is desirous of thanking the - 


Giver of every good, for “all those good things,” 
nted for the nourishment of our bodiés and the 
ood of our souls. He considers that all things were 
“created” by the * word of God" for **4ll things 
were made by him : and without him was made nothing 
that was made." (Johni. 3.) ‘By him" then was 
our bread and wine * created, " by the eternal father: 
but after this creation, they were placed upon the altar 
and there **sanctified" by the word of God, and by 
prayer **quickened " by the change that took place 


ON THE MASS. 93 


when the body and blood of the living Christ, who 
having risen from the dead, dieth now no more, (Rom. 
vi. 9.) was placed where they had been, and under 
their appearance “blessed ’’ by the efficacy of that 
divine sacrament to communicate grace to our souls, 

and now **given"" to those who prepare to receive the 

ame. ] 

We are then desirous of paying the homage of our 
praise and thanks to the great Author of our benefit, 
sad we give to him “all honour and glory by” that 
beloved Son who is our great mediator, and who 

i ual God **with him;" and being ‘in 
him,” by his consubstantiality, forms but one nature 
with him and, the other divine person of the blessed 
Trinity, **in the unity of the Holy Ghost for ever and 
ever, amen." 

At the words **sanetify," «« quicken," and **bless,* 
the celebrant makes the sign of the cross over the 
Victim, to signify from what source all these effects 
tre derived : and uncovering the chalice, after having 
paid hia adoration, he signs the cross with the host 
within the circumference of the chalice, at the words 
"by him and with him and in him," to eignify the 

ect union of the body and blood of Christ, though 

tpparently separated: and at the words ** Father Al- 
mighty," and ** Holy Ghost," outside the chalice, 
to signify the separation of persons, but the unity of 
their act of blessing through the efficacy of the sacri- 
fiee of the cross: and then holding the host and.cha- 
lice together he elevates them a little, at the words 
“ali honour and glory," to signify that it is through 
Christ our victim we are able to pay our debt of grati- 
tude and praise. Hence by many this is called the 
oblation of the victim which had been produced, and 
the small elevation. In many places it is customary 
to ring the bell on this occasion. "The celebrant 
having paid his adoration after having covered the 
chalice rises, and concludes this prayer in a loud voice 
^ notify its close to the congregation; and he then 


94 ON THE MASS. 


enters upon the next part, which is the preparatiog 
for and receiving the communion. ^ 
Optatus of Milevi informs us,* that in his time in tle 
African churches it was usual after the canon and be 
fore the preparation for communion, for the Bishop.o 
a priest to impose hands for the remission of sins 
those who sought reconciliation, and then turn to the 
altar to say the Lord's prayer. But this custom, 
whether it was that of administering the sacrament of 
penance, or of absolving publicly, before communion, 
those who had been guilty of public sins, was net 
general, and even in those places where it prevailed, 
seems not to have continued long, except on Ma 
Thursday, when the publie penitents wete publi 
reconciled. But the Lord's prayer was from the be 
ginning said at this part of the office, as every liturgy 
shows; and St. Jerom statesT that it was our blessed 
Lord himself who taught his apostles that the faithful 
should daily at the sacrifice of his body, presume to 
say Our Father. Hence the church shows the foun- 
dation on which she rests her authority for bringing 
her children thus familiarly to address their Creator: 
* Letus pray." * Being instructed by thy saving 
precepts, and following thy divine directions, we 
presume to say : Our Father," &c. (Matt. vi. 9.) 
To enter into an explanation of this divine pra 
in this place would for most of the readers of this 
sertation be unnecessary, and would be straying from 
the great object of the compiler, which was m 
to explain what could not otherwise be so easily dis- 
covered, and in doing which he has already gone far 
beyond the limits which he originally prescribed for 
himself: he shall only say with Tertullian, + “ That 
it isg, compendium of the whole gospel; and with 
Pope Innocent III.$ * For a variety of reasons this 
prayer excels all others, from the authority of him 
who taught it, for it came from the very mouth of the 


* Lib. 2, Contra. Parmen. tLib. 3, Contra. Pelag. {De 
Orat, $Myst. Miss. iii. 17. 


TE  -— ge see - 
. 


ON THE MASS. 95 


Saviour; from the brevity of its expressions, for it is 
easily learned, and spoken; from the sufficiency of 
its petition, for it contains all that is necessary for this 
world and the next; from the richness of its myste- 
ries, for it contains wonderful hidden treasures." 
_ The celebrant says it in a loud voice or sings it, to 
Impress the meaning and object of the petition upon 
his hearers, and at the end they answer him by re- 
peating the last petition, * But deliver us from evil." 
e deacon goes up to the right hand side of the 
telebrant, before the conclusion of this prayer, during 
Which he has stood behind ; and the sub-deacon now 
tlso carries up the Patten which he gives to the dea- 
eon, and then returns to his place below; the deacon 
having wiped the Patten, places it in the right hand 
« the celebrant, who continues in a low voice the 
text prayer, after having answered **amen" to the 
*g prayer. 

He desires to be delivered from all evils, entering 
fally into the spirit of the divine prayer which has 
been just concluded, “ past’? evils, which are the 

uence of the sins we have committed, bad 
habits, disturbed imaginations, and evil propensities, 
^ present? evils, temporal calamities and tempta- 
tions under which we labour; and **future" evils, 
which we trust may be averted by the power of the 
mosthigh. We are taught to seek farther protection, 
and to specify more particularly what we most desire; 
and we implore those blessings through the interces- 
sion of the blessed and ever-glorious virgin, ** Mary 
mother of God.” This phrase, ** Mother of God,” 
shows clearly that either the entire of this prayer 
must have been formed subsequently to the year 432, 
or at least this expression added after that year. We 
find the prayer in many old liturgies, but in none so 
far back as the year 500; and not being in the canon, 
it was not 80 brought into review and under observa- 
tien as that portion was until about the year 600. It 


wus only after the condemnation of Nestorius at the 


96 ON THE MASS. 


council of Ephesus in 431, that the faithful were in 
the habit of styling the blessed virgin ** Mother of 
God ;’? but Nestorius having denied her being the - 
* Mother of God,” thou e acknowledged her to 
be the mother of Jesus Christ, in consequence of his . 
heresy in asserting the double personality of the’ 
Saviour; to evince their adherence to the ancient doe- 
trine, and the condemnation of his error, thenceforth 
they addressed the blessed virgin, saying “Holy 

; Mother of God, pray for us," &. e prayer 
continues, and through the intercesssion “ of the 
apostles, Peter and Paul, and of Andrew, and of all: - 
the Saints." The special mention of those three: 
apoetles is almost distinct evidence of this 
having been originally drawn up in the city of 
for we have St. Peter who founded the church in that 
city, St. Paul who aided him during many years in. 
its administration, and who there suffered ma om | 
with St. Peter; and St. Andrew, the brother-of Peter, | 
who on that account was specially honoured in tnat. 
city, so much so, that his festival was kept with al- 
most equal solemnity, and on the festival of St. An. 
drew,it was marked in one of the most ancient copies: 
of the Ordo, that the Pope should commence the offies ' 
at the church of St. Andrew, and concludeit at that of - 
his brother Peter. However some very old copies of 
this prayer have been found with the names of other 
Saints after that of Andrew. 

The great object of the prayer was, ** peace, that 
we may always be free from sin and secure from - all 
disturbance," which are both concomitants of war 
The celebrant in repeating this prayer signed himeelf 
with the Patten which he held in his hand, and kiss- 
ed it as the emblem of peace and charity; for upon 
it that oblation had been made, which exhibited the | 
union and peace of the congregation; and now it 
was to be placed under the holy sacrament, whenee 
we expect that peace which the world cannot give, 

The prayer concluded in the usvel wey y “"Torouga 


ON THE MASS. ; 97 
Christ our Lord, who with thee in the unity of the 
Holy Ghost, liveth and reigneth God, world without 

In repeating the last words of this prayer, the cel- 
ebrant performs a ceremony which has subsisted from 
tha time of the institution by our Saviour. He breaks 
the sacrament over the chalice; formerly it was over 
the Patten, but it was about 1100 years ago regu- 
lated to break it over the chalice, that any Particles 
separating therefrom might be received into that 
sacred vessel; and in putting a small particle into 
the chalice the celebrant as usual concludes the 
prayer in a loud voice, **for ever and ever—Amen.” 

then as he puts the particle into the chalice, he 
thrice makes the sign ofthe cross therewith, wishin 
the congregation—'* May the peace of the Lord al- 
ways be with you :”’ to which the usual answer was 
iven, *and with thy spirit." Formerly upon this 
ing said the kiss of peace was given through the 
congregation, in token of unity and charity, by the 
mento the men, and by the women to the women, 
who for this purpose sat at different sides of the 
church. Mention is made of this by Tertullian and 
other very ancient writers. - 

The mixing of the host with the contents of the 
chalice, is very ancient, indeed so much so, that we 
can find no trace of its introduction; but we find it 
always customary—and on many occasions. First, 
bishops living at a distance, frequently sent each to 
the other, in token of communion, a consecrated host, 
by a priest or deacon, and the person to whom it was 
sent put it into his chalice, and took it therefrom at 
the next Mass that he celebrated. Secondly, it was 
customary in many churches, to keep a portion of 
what had been consecrated at one mass to be con- 
sumed in the chalice at the next, to shew that the 
sacrifice though continued on differnnt days, was the 
tame. Thirdly, what had been reserved for the sick 
was generally consumed in this manner. Fourthly, it 


was the custom in many churches whese communion 
was given, under both kinds, to mix them in the chs- 
lice, and to give the communion therefrom; and fifthly, 
there was from the commencement a powerful 

reason for the practice. The death of Christ had bee: 
shewn by the mystic tion of the body snd 
blood, his reanimation resurreetion were to be 
shewn by their mystic union, which took place in . 
this manner. “Thus,” writes Pope Innocent IIL 
** the chalice represents the monument, whence the 
deacon, who is the angel of the church removes te 
pall, as the heavenly messenger removed the stone 
from the mouth of the sepulchre"—and here Christ 
having died for our sins, and offered himself for our 
iniquities, is now re-animated, and gives us that ee 
lestial food where the flesh which was dead, now vi- 
vified by the spirit, is profitable to those who prow 
and try themselves. 

It was on the day of his resurrection that Christ 
first addressed his apostles, in those memorable 
words, ** Peace be to you," and celebrating that rw 
sarrection, the celebrant prays that this rasy 
remain always with them, being derived from the 
blessed trinity through the cross of the Saviour. - 

He now prepares for communion, and first bowing, 
he thrice in a penitent manner, strikes his breast, 
calling upon * the Lamb of God who takes away 
the sins of the world, to have mercy on him," —bat - 
on the third occasion to “ grant him peace’—tkst — 

eace which the world cannot give—and then bow- 
ing down before the altar, he prays for peace and 
unity forthe whole church. 

In masses for the dead, we offer for those in pur 
gatory, and hence instead of saying **have merey on | 
us" —*« grant us peace," — the celebrant says ** P 
them rest"——* grant them eternal rest ;” and the 
prayer for the peace of the church is omitted, but the 
celebrant proceeds to read the two other prayers be- 

fore communion, and then receives the holy wesrexnasd.. 


"o9 sc 43 VOL av B" 


ON THE MASS. 99 


In high Masses, after this prayer for peace, the 
deecon, who during its repetition has been on his 
knees at the celebrant's right hand, rises, and they 
beth kiss the altar, the celebrant, as it were to re- 
ceive the spirit of peace from Jesus Christ, the dea- 
con through respect, and after embracing each other 
tbe celebrant kisses the deacon, saying, **Peace be 
with thee." The deacon answers, “and with thy 
spirit; and having made his reverence to the altar, 
ves the peace in like manner to the sub-deacon in 

place below, and they then come up to assist at 
the altar, the celebrant continuing his prayers for 
communion, which are so plain as to need no ex- 
position. 

In patting the particle into the chalice the cele- 
brant says ** May this mixture and consecration of 
the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, be to 
us that receive it, eternal life." The meaning of 
the word “consecration,” in this place has always 
been understood to be the putting of two holy things 
together; nota blessing or separation for religious 
purposes—consecrare, quasi simul sacrare. 

e Agnus Dei, dc., ** Lamb of God, &c.," was 
ordered to be sung at the Mass, by Pope Sergius I., 
who came to the chair in 687. But the custom of 
saying it must have prevailed in many places pre- 
viously to this, because we find very clear allusions 

in works and liturgies of a much earlier 
date, St. John Chrysostom who lived 300 years be- 
fore Sergius has this passage: “It is not in vain that 
we make commemoration for the dead at the sacred 
mysteries, or that we approach the divine Lamb, who 
is there, and who takes away the sins of the world, 
to beseech his mercy for them." And the first gene- 
ral council of Nice in the year 325, calls upon us 
* hy faith to conceive and to know that on that holy 
table is placed that Lamb of God who takes away the 
sins of the world, and whois immolated inan unbloody 
manner by the priests.” In the Mass of St. Severus, 


100 ON THE MASS. 


Patriarch of Alexandria, the words prescribed for the 
priest when he breaks the Sacrament, are, ** Thou am 
the Lamb of God who takest away or blottest ow 
the sins of the world." In fact, the number of figures 
was so great, and the expressions upon which its im 
troduction must have been founded, are so strong, this 
it is next to impossible that the prayer should né& 
have been one of the first formed in the Church, and 
it appears in oneof the ancient liturgies of St. Peter, 

It was probably a lamb that Abel sacrificed ; is 
was a male lamb that Abraham substituted for Isaacs, 
it was a lamb that was sacrificed in pt, and it 
was instead of the Paschal lamb that the Eucharist 
was established: a lamb was the morning and 
evening sacrifice of the Jews; and these were all 
figures of that Lamb, for whose arrival Isaias pre 
ed. Send forth, O Lord, the Lamb, the ruler of the 
earth, from Petra of the desert, to the mount of tha 

daughter of Sion, (Isaias xvi. 1,) and of whom Johs 
' the Baptist said Behold the Lamb of God—behold him 
who taketh away the sins of the world, (John i. 99) 
and frequent mention is made of the Lamb in the 
Apocalypse. . 

The prayer for peace is found in some very old 
copies of the Sacramentaries, &c. The prayers for 
communion were various, and in a great measure 
left to the discretion of the celebrant, but those two 
now inserted and ordered, are two of the most am 
cient forms that areknown. After those prayers the 
celebrant pays again the tribute of his adoration, and 
rising, takes the host and says, ‘I will take the 
heavenly bread and call upon the name of the Lard,” 
then striking his breast, he says thrice, ** Lord I 
not worthy that thou shouldst enter under my roof, 
say but the word, and my soul shall be healed.” 
This is a most ancient custom which is mentioned by 
'T'ertullian, by Origen, and many other early writers, 
and is founded upon the expressions of the centurion 
in the Gospel. 


ON THE MASA. 101 


aft celebrant then communicates himself saying 
appropriate prayers which are found in the or- 
der, and afterwards has wine poured into the chalice, 
with which he thoroughly clears it of any particles 
of the Sacrament which might remain therein, and 
afterwards has wine and water poured upon those 
rs with which he has touched the Sacrament, 
after cleansing them perfectly, he drinks this 
alution also from the Chalice, which is then wiped, 
and dried. 

If communion were to be given, it was usually 
done after the celebrant had communicated himself, 
and then the choir sung some Psalms, as it is re- 
corded inthe Gospel that after they had sung an 
hymn when the Apostles were first fed with this di- 
vine banquet, they went out, and such was the custom 
of the Jews after partaking of the Paschal Lamb, 
they sang the 113th Psalm, when Israel went out from 
Egypt. The Psalm usually performed on this occa- 
sion in the early days of Christianity was the 33d. 
I will bless the Lord at all times, the 9th verse. O, 
taste and see that the Lord is sweet, &c., was some- 
times chosen as the Antiphon. Other Psalms were 
sometimes taken, and then only part of a Psalm, and 
at present but one or two verses, which is called 
the communion, though at present the communion is 
frequently given after Mass, and not at this time. 

he book was removed tothe side where it origi- 
nally was, as being its usual place ; or for the mystic 
reason, to shew that the Jewish Church would in 
the latter days come over to Christ after the fulness 
of the Gentiles should have been received. (Rom. xi. 
19.) The celebrant reads the communion at the 
book, and then going to the middle of the altar, gives 
the people the usual salutation, and then at the book 
invites them to join in prayer. Oremus. ** Let us 
pray," and reads or sings the Post-communion, which 
prayer corresponds with the collect, and secret, and 
Is generally a hanksgi ving for communion, and has 


102 ON THE MASS. 


its name from having been read affer the communion, 
Besides the Post-communion, there is sometimes reat 
at the same place, a prayer headed Su lum, 
** over the bople," and before which-a notice was 
given by the deacon, Humiliate capita vestra Det, 
* Bow down your heads to God." Upon which they - 
bowed towards the East, and the prayer was thew 
said; this was only on days of penance or humilis» 
tion, particularly when no person but the celebrant 
communicated, and when therefore they who did nob 
receive the holy communion could not so well join 
in the Post-communion. The celebrant again ese 
luted the people, and except on days of penance or 
in Masses for the dead, the deacon turned round and 
gave notice of departure by saying or singing Tie Mis- 
sa est, ** Go, the Mass is over." In Easter week he 
added two alleluias, and the choir answered, Deo 
aiias. ** Thanks be to God." The people, however, 
id not generally depart before they received the 
blessing, previously to giving which, the celebrant 
bowing down before the altar repeated the prayer. 
Placeat. ‘ Let the performance of my homage,"* &e. 
After which he gave his blessing, praying that the 
* Almighty God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, 
bless them." On days of penance, instead of 
Missa est, the deacon turns to the altar, not to the 
people, and says or sings Benedicamus Domino, **Let 
us bless the Lord," as an invitation to them to con- 
tinue in prayer; and in Masses for the Dead, Reguses- 
cant in pace, * May they rest in peace." In those 
latter Masses, no blessing is given, because the prin- 
cipal object of the Mass is the relief of the faithful 
departed, and not so much the advantages of the as- 
sistants, for whose benefit this last blessing was in- 
troduced, in the very earliest ages in the Greek 
Church, and subsequently in the Latin Church. 
The celebrant then repeats the Gospel of St. John, 
Which contains the most sublime testimony of the 


A  — <2 eee ee " 


ON THE MASS. 103 


Divinity and Incarnation of our blessed Lord, and at 
the passage, find the word was made flesh, and dwelt 
mongst us, he and thecongregation bend their knees 
to honour the divine mystery. This has been intro- 
duced at the request of pious persons who have in 
Various places at different times besought it, and is in 
feneral practice, now upwards of 800 or 900 years. 

D place of this Gospel sometimes another is said. 
This occurs when a festival is celebrated on a Sun- 
&y, orona day in Lent, or Quarter-tense, which 
has a proper Gospel of its own, and which Gospel is 
then read instead of that of St. John. 

In some places it is usual for the celebrant after re- 
iting the last Gospel to repeat together with the as- 
tistants the 129th Psalm. From the depths, drc., for 
the faithful departed. 

In the foregoing explanation, the origin and mean- 
ing of the various ceremonies and observances, and 
vestments and prayers of the liturgy of the Mass 
are laid before the reader in such a manner as it is 
hoped exhibits the action to be a pious and rational and 
edifying observance, derived from the earliest anti- 
qaity, and founded upon divine authority. When 
therefore the Chistian attends thereat, he should en- 
deavour to go back in spirit to Jerusalem and Calva- 
ry, and contemplating the institutions of Christ, and 
his sufferings, so to conduct himself as to obtain 
abundant benedictions, which must always be de- 
rived from the merits of that victim who offers himself 
in this sacrifice on our behalf. 

The compiler has laboured under many disad- 
vantages, from the situation in which he has been 
laced, occupied in visiting his diocess, and without 
ooks to which he might refer, during a considerable 

rtion of the time in which this dissertation has 

n hastily thrown together. Ithas not been com- 
piled at one time but with many interruptions. For 
its literary faults he mustbe excused. He is under 
the impression that its doctrine is pertectly correct, 


104 ON THE MASS. 


butif in any thing he have deviated from the form 
of sound words held by the holy Roman Catholie 
and Apostolic Church, he is anxious immediately te 
correct it. 


INTRODUCTION, 


CONTAINING A SUMMARY OF THE BUBRICS. 





I. The Mass consists of several portions, some of which 
are always the same, and some of which vary on several 
occasions. . 

II. That part which does not vary is called ** the ordi- 
nary of the mass,’’ and may be found in its proper plare, 
after the office of holy Saturday, that is the Saturday next 
before Easter Sunday. . 

III. That part which varies, consiste ofthe Introit, Col- 
lects, Epistle, with its accompaniments, Gospel, Offer- 
tory, Secrets, Preface, Communion and Post Comma- 
nion, and they may be found, jn their proper place as de- 
Bcribed below. 

l. The prefaces are all found together between that 
part of the Ordinary of the Mass which immediately pre- 
cedes the Secrets, and the Canon, and each preface has 
its proper title, by which it may be easily known. 

1V. The Church celebrates her offices either according 
to the time of the year, or for the festival of some Saint; 
or for some particular occasion. 

V. The year begins with the first Sunday of Advent, af- 
ter Advent is the festival of Christmas, on the eighth day 
after which is the Circumcision, next is the Epiphany, 
after which the Sundays are numbered, first, second, &c., 
to Septuagesima Sunday ; then the Sundays of Sexagesi- 
ma, and Quinquagesima, the Wednesday next after which 
is Ash Wednesday the first day in Lent, in which there 
are proper masses for every day; the fifth Sunday of 

Lent, is called Passion Sunday, the next Pelm Suadey, 


MENTA "UE 


* RUBRICS. 105 


the week of which is called the greater week ; this is fol- 
lowed by Easter Sunday and the Easter week ; the next 
Sunday is called Low Sunday, which is the first after 
er. Between Easter and the Ascension are five Sun- 
days, which after Low Sunday are numbered the second, 
thd, &c., after Easter. Monday, 'l'uesday and Wednes- 
ther the fifth of these are called Rogation days. "Thurs- 
ty isthe feast of the Ascension; ten days after which is 
entecost or Whit Sunday, with its week; the next 
day is Trinity Sunday, which is of course the first 
vier Pentecost ; the Thursday following, which is the fes- 
tval of the most holy Euchanst, commonly called Corpus 
Christi. From this the Sundays are numbered, Second, 
lid, &c., after Pentecost to advent, which commences 
next year. 

VI. The festivals of the saints begin with the vigil or 
eve of St. Andrew the Apostle, which is the 29th of No- 
"ber, and proceed regularly through the days of the 
Month, until the round of the entire year is made, unto the 
%h of the same month. 

VII. The offices for particular occasions are celebrated, 

the dedication of a church, for choosing a Pope, on the 
tniversary of the bishop’s consecration, for the dead, &c. 

VIII. On every day in the year, except Good Friday, 

can be celebrated. 

. The particular portions of the liturgy are to be 
pend by knowing what office is celebrated on that parti- 
(uar day. 

X, Sometimes the festival of a saint occurs on the same 
dy when some office according to the time of the year 
thould be celebrated. 

XI. To regulate this, the offices of the time and of the 

krivals have been classified. 
AIL The classes are doubles of the Ist and of the 2d 
Cass: greater doubles, plain doubles, semi-doubles, and 
Rmplea; and their precedence when they concur, is regu- 
ated by the class to which each belongs. 

XIII. The Mass is generally celebrated of that which 
bolds the highest rank. 

XIV. The Missal is regulated according to the order of 
Paragraphs, V. VI. and VII. II. and III. . 

The variable parts of the Masses according to the time 
ofthe year, from Advent to Easter are found placed first ; 
then the ordinary of the Mass, with the prefaces, as mark- 
ed in clause I.; then the variable parts of the Mass, 
low Easter to Advent. Afier this the variable parts of 


106 RUBRICS. 


the Mass on the several festivals of the saints, which have 
proper variable parts, in their order from the vigil of St. 
Andrew, uninterruptedly throughout the year, with the 
exception of those days from the 25th of December to the 
Ist of January, which variable parts for festivals are. 
found in their proper places between Christmas and Epi 
phany, in the part of the Mass of the time; then t 
proper Masses for particular occasions, are p 

the common of saints. 

XV. The variable parts of the Mass for the festivals of 
the saints, are either proper or common. 

XVI. The proper for saints, is that variable part which 
has been specially compiled, and appointed for the parti- 
cular Masses, on the festivals of those individuals, and w 
said only on their special festivals, and is always found 
under the day of the month when that feast is celebrated. 

XVII. The common of saints, is that variable part which 
is said on the different festivals of various saints of the 
game description, or class. 

XVIII. The saints whose festivals are celebrated, are 
divided into classes, according to their various situations, 
or works or sufferings. Apostles, martyrs, confessors: 
who were bishops, confessors who were not biehopa, vir- 
gins, holy women, &c. . 

XIX. After the proper Masses of the saints, and before 
the Masses for particular occasions are placed the variable 

s of Masses for the common of saints, under the fol-, 

owing several heads for their proper classes, viz.: 1. For 

the vigil of an apostle. 2. Of a martyr bishop, another of 
the same. 3. Of a martyr not bishop, another of the same. 
4. Of martyrs within the Paschal time. 5. Of many mar- 
tyrs in the Paschal time. 6. Of many martyre without the 
aschal time, two others of the same. 7. Of a con 
bishop, another of the same. 8. Of doctors. 9. Of a con- 
fessor not bishop, another of the same. 10. Of abbots. 11. 
Of virgins martyrs, another of the same. 12. Of many 
virgins martyrs. 13. Of a virgin only, another of the same. 
14. Of holy women, not virgins but martyrs. 15. Of a 
holy woman, neither martyr nor virgin. — 

X. After the Masses for particular occasions are seve 
ral Collects, Secrets and Post-communions, for special pur- 
poses, which will be known by looking to their titles. - 

2. When the office is known, if it be of the time, look 
for it in its proper place, according to the time of the year 
as in paragraph V. and you will find its variable parts,— 


RUBRICS. 107 


these, together with the Ordinary of the Mass, will give 
you the entire liturgy of the Mass of the day. 
. X.Ifthe Mass be of a saint, look for the day of the month 
m its place, according to paragraph VI.; if there be a pro- 
Mass, you will find there its variable parts; if there 
be nt a proper Mass, you will find a reference to the Mass 
m the Common of saints, as in paragra h XIX. where 
those variable parts will be had.—Look for that common 
Mass, and by combining its variable parts with the ordi- 
tary. the liturgy will be found. 

4. Sometimes part of the variable portion is taken from 
the proper, as in the day of the month, and from the com- 
mon as described in paragraph XAX.; then the three parts 
must be combined by reading all that is found in the proper 
under the day of the month, and the remainder of the 
variable part from the common Mass, and combining 
them with the ordinary of the Mass. 

5. Sometimes a Commemoration is made; that is, the 
Collect, Secret and Post-communion of one festival, of 
8 lesser denomination, are said after those of the Mass 
of the day,—they are to be found as you would look for 
the variable part of the Mass of the festival to which 
they belong, under the day of the month if they be pro- 
per, or, if not, in the common Mass to which that p 
refers. If the Commemoration be of a Sunday, or any 
other day, the Mass of which is found in that part regu- 
lated according to the time, the Collect, Secret or Post- 
communion, will be found in the proper place according 
to time. 

6. When a final Mass is to be celebrated, which hap- 

ns on a day which has no proper Mass assigned there- 
ore, either by the day of the month or by the proper of 
ume. the Mass of the preceding Sunday is said, without 
the Gloria in excelsis or the Creed. 

XXI. The moveable feasts are all those comprehend- 
ed in the enumeration of paragraph V. with the exception 
of Christmas, the Circumcision and Epiphany. They are 
called moveable, because they are not on fixed days of 
the month, but move from day to day, as does the feati- 
val of Easter, on which they depend, and which is regula- 
ted hy the phases of the moon; being celebrated on the 
first Sunday which follows the fourteenth day after the 

t new moon immediately after the vernal equinox. 

7. A Table of those moveable feasts, for a number of 

years, is given to assist the person using this Missal, 


106 RUBRICS. 


XXII. There are six Sundays marked after Epiphany 
fore Septuagesima Sunday, sometimes Easter happem 
very early, only three or four of those Sundays i 
tervene,—the others are then omitted, and the of; 
Septuagesima taken up on its proper day. 
liI. There are twenty-four Sundays marked be- 
tween Pentecost and Advent; when Easter is early 
Pentecost is early of course, and a greater number of 
Sundays than twenty-four intervene before Advent. The 
office is regulated by taking up the Masses, &c. of the Sum 
days omitted after Epiphany that year, after the 23d Sun- 
day following Pentecost, and celebrating them in 
succession, leaving however the Massof the 24th Sundsy . 
after Pentecost to be invariably celebrated on the Sum 
day next before the first Sunday of Advent. 
XXIV. The first Sunday of Advont is always thet 
which is nearest to the feast of St. Andrew the apostle, 
viz.: that which happens on or between the 27th of No 
vember and the 3d of December,—which is the reason foe 
commencing the festivals of the saints, with the V. of 
St. Andrew, that as the Missal begins with the first 
day of Advent, which commences the ecclesiastical year 
both ite parts, of the Time, and of the Saints, might cof 


respon 
@ But in the Calendar the enumeration of festivals be- 
gins with the Ist of January, for the convenience of the 
r. 


INTRODUCTION. 


y to 
tls received and a Version of the Holy Serip- 
tres, as revised and edited by the Right Reo. and Ven. 
Dr. Rickard Challoner, of learned and pious memory. 


Tuz Prayers and portions of Holy Scripture, of which 
te Mass, or Liturgy of the Catholic Church, is com- 
,are in part unalterably the same, and partly dif- 
tevery day: those that are fixed and invariable, are 
contained in what is called the ORDixARY OF THE Mass, 
from peges xv. to xlvii. inclusively ; and the change- 
able or proper parts, (viz. the Inrroits, CorLxcrs, 
Eeuries and Lessons, Grapvats and Tracts, Gos- 
exis, OÓrrzRrORIES, Secrets, Communsons and Post- 
commusions) form the subsequent contents of the book. 
as the Paxyacxs are not so frequently subject to 
they follow each other in regular succession in 


The Ecclesiastical Year, with fespect to the Sundays 
and Moveable Feasts, commences with the rirst Sox- 
Dar of Apvent, and closes on the Last Sunpay after 
Psstecost; and with re to the Festivals of the 
Saints, from the Feast of St. Anprew, the 30th of No- 
vember, to the Eve of the same Festival the year follow- 
ing: inclusively. 

order therefore to find out the proper Mass of the 
day, look for that day of the month in the Calendar, op- 
posite to which may be seen a reference to the page 
wherein it is contained ; and if a Double should fall on 
a Sunday, then the Mass of the Double is said instead 
of the Mass of the Sunday, except it be a Sunday of 


il INTRODUCTION. 


Gospels for Sundays thus superseded by Doubles an 
never omitted, but always recited (instead of St. Josr' 
GosPrL) at the xxn or Mass; and also thata Commen 
oration of the Sunday, by its proper Corrzor, Szcazr, 
and Postcommunion, is always made immediately after 
the Collect, &c. of the Festival. 

But as it sometimes happens that a Double is trans 
ferred to a future vacant day, on account of the Osfsve 
of some festival of higher rank intervening, then the dif- 
ficulty of finding out such transferred festival, may be 
easily removed by consulting the Laity's Directory, pab- 
lished as a guide to the morning, as well as the evenmig 
service of the church. 

As references are frequently made to the Commen ef 
Saints, commencing at p. 459, to the Proper of Saalt, 
beginning with p. 521, and continuing in regula? pto 
gression to the end of the Egclesiastical Year; the read 
er will find the Masees thus referred to, 
numerical letters, from No. I. to XXI. inclusively: ; 
it therefore observed, that on whatever day of the nibath 
these numerical references appear in the Calender, ot 
General Index, it denotes that the Mass thereof (having 
no proper parts assigned to it) is taken entirely from the 
Common Mass referred to: but should any exeepBoms 
occur, they are stated in a parenthesis. 

Commemorations are made by the addition of a Ootr 
LECT, Secret and Postcommunion, to those that T9 
pro r to the feast ofthe day. When thereforo the watt 


LECT, with an &c. annexed thereto, bs 
the Rubrics, the &c. denotes that its proper Becret SN 
Postcommunion are also comprehended. : 


ABBREVIATIONS EXPLAINED. ^4 


. Apostle, m. Martyr, mm. Martyrs, p. Pope; 2899 
Archbis op, bp. Bishop. pr. Priest, c. nfessor, ^ 
Doetor, ab. Abbot, v. Virgin, w. Widow, B. Blows! 
Double, sd. Semidouble, d. J. cl. Double of the $85" 
class, d. II. d. Double of the second class. av 
. Greater Double. The Holy-days of obligation are» 
CAPITALS, and the days of particular devotion 


( ni ) 


IDAR, or GENERAL INDEX to the 
Immoveable Feasts. 


ANUARY, XXXI Days. 


CISION of our Lord, d. II. d. 
y of St. Stephen, d. 
y of St. John, d. as on his Feest. 
y of Holy Innocents, d. as on ibid. 
ror St. Thomas, d. 
of our Lord, d. I. cl. 
. of pA Hygine, by the Collect, in- 


tem, 
re-day of the Epiphany, d. 
after Epiphany, Feast of the most 
ame of Jesus, d. II. cl. 

bp. conf. sd. 
he first Hermit, d. 
llus, p. m. sd. 
ny, ab. Mass XV.* p. 491. (Gospel 
ig X1V.) 
3 Chair at Rome, gr. d. 
an, bp. of Worcester, c. d. 
in and Sebastian, mm. d. 
4, v. m. first Feast, d. 
ant, &c. mim. sd. ib. 
und of Pennafort, c. sd. 
thy, bp. m. sd. ib. 
rersion of St. Paul, ap. gr. d. 544 
arp, bp. m. sd. 546 
Chrysostom, bp. c. sd. 547 
5, a second time ib. 
is de Sales, bp. c. d. 548 
na, v. m. sd. Mass XVI. 493 
Nolascus, c. d. 548 
RY, XXVIII or XXIX Days. 
ius, bp. m m. sd. 548 
on of B. V. Mary, d. IE el. 549 

2 


a 


25 sPueBa 


BPEEEBS SER 


iv MARCH and APRIL. 


3 St. Blase, bp. m. Mass TI. 

4 St. Andrew Corsini, bp. c. d. 

5 St. Agatha, v. m. d. 

6 St. Dorothy, v. m. Mass XVII. 

7 St. Romuald, ab. d. Mass XV.* 

8 St. John of Matha, c. d. 

9 St. Appollonia, v. m. Mass XVI. 
10 St. Scholastica, v. d. 

14 St. Valentine, pr. m. 

15 SS. Faustinus and Jovita, mm. Mass IX. 
18 St. Simeon, bp. m. Mass I. 

22 St. Peter's Chair at Antioch, gr. d. 
24 or 25 St. Matthias. ap. d. II. cl. 


MARCH, XXXI Days. 

1 St. David, bp. c. d. Mass X.* 

2 St. Chad, "by. of Lichfield, c. d. 

4 St. Casimir, c. ad. 

7 St. Thomas of Aquin, c. D, d. 

8 St, Felix, bp. c. d. Mass X.* 

9 St. Frances, w. d. 

10 'The forty Martyrs, sd. 
11 St. John of God, c. d. 
12 St. Gregory, p. c. and D d. 

17 St. Patrick, ap. Patron of Ireland, bp. c. ed. 
19 St. Joseph, c. d. II. cl. 
23 St. Cuthbert bp. of Lindisfarne, c. d. .. 
24 St. Benedict, ab. d. Mass XV.* " :,—— 
-25 ANNUNCIAT. of B. V. Mary, d. II. dl. 


APRIL, XXX Days. 

2 St. Francis of Paula, c. d. 

3 St. Richard, bishop « of Chichester, c. d. 

4 St. Isidore, bp. c. d. Mass XI 

St. Vincent Ferrerius, c. d. 

AL St. Leo, p. c. d. 

13 St. Hermenegild, m. sd. 

14 SS. Tiburtius, &c. mm. 

17 St. Anicete, p. m. 

21 St. Anselm, abp. c. d. Mass XII. 


MAY and JUNE. 
. Soter and Caius, bps. mm. 


(DH. 
2 Ee as 18 
dd 
ORE 


ark, evangelist, d. II. el. 
c. bps. m. 


as os bape 
PRERE 
i 

8 

m 

2 

E 


" d 
ki 


ir of St. George, d. 


2 

4 

9 St, Catherine of Sienna, v. d. 

6 St. John before the Latin Gate, gr. d, 
; 8t. Stanislaus, bp. m. d. 

9 
0 
] 


Apparition of St. Michael, see September 2. 


St. Gregory Nazianzen, bp. D. d. 
St. Antoninus, bp c. od. 

St. Pius V. p. c. sd. 

8S, Nereus, &c. mm. sd. 


16 St. Ubaldus, bp. c. sd. 
17 St. Paschal Baylon, c. d. 
18 St. Venantius, m. d. 
10 St. Dunstan, apb. of Canterbury, d. 
20 St. Bernerdine, c. ad. 
21 St. Peter Celestine, , €. d. 
25 Bt. Aldhelm, bp. of alisbury, c. d. 
35 8t Augustin, ap. of Eng. bp. c. d. II. dl. 
27 ip Nerius, c. d. 
30 St. Felix, p. m. Mass I. 
81 St. Petronilla, v. Mass XX. 
JUNE, XXX Days. 
2 Octave-day of St. August d. , 
agdalen | of Pazzi, v. sd. 
6 8 N Noter, E 


St, William, ro abr of of York, c. d. 


eee 


vi JULY. 


9 SS. Primus, &c. mm. 
10 St. Margaret, Q. of Scots, w. sd. 
11 St. Barnabas, ap. 
]2 St. John a Facun o, c. d. 
13 St. Anthony of Padua, c. d. 
14 St. Basil the Great, bp. c. and D. d. 
. 15 SS. Vitus, Modestus, &c. mm. 
18 SS. Mark and Marcellian, mm. 
19 St. Juliana, de Falconeris, v. d. 
20 St. Silverius, p. m. 
22 St. Alban, proto-m. of England, gr. d. 
23 Vigil of St. John the Ba ptist » 
94 Nativity of St. John Ba ist d.Ld.* TR 
25 St. William, Abbot of Cork 
26 SS. John and Foul, mm. 
27 St. Leo, p. c 
.28 Vigil of SS. Peter and Paul 
29 SS. PETER and PAUL. aps. d. IJ. cl. 
30 Commem. of St. Paul ap. 
JULY, XXXI Days. 
1 Octave-day of St. J. Baptist, d. same as in. B00 
2 The Visitation of the B. V. Mary, gr.d.: = 0ll 
Within the Octave of SS. Peter and Paul . un 
614 


BENE 


6 Octave-day of SS. Peter and Paul, d. 
7 Translation of St. Thomas, m. gr. d. 
8 St. Elizabeth, Q. w. sd. 
10 The 7 Brethren and SS. Rufinz, &c. mm. sg. ib. 
]1 St. Pius, p. m. Moss I. Statuit. 461 
12 St. John Gaulbert, ab. d. 616 
13 St. Anaclete,.Mass II. p.d 464, b ( Gospel, Luke) EL 
14 St. Bonaventure, bp. 
15 Translation of St. atin, by 
16 B. V. Mary of Mount Carme gr. d. 
17 St. Osmund, bp. of Salisbury. c. d. 
18 St. Camillus de Lellis, c. 
J9 St. Vincent a Paulo, c. i^ 
20 St. Jerome Emilian, c. d. 
21 St. Henry, emp. c. sd. 


BpPBEPBSR 





g 


vii 
4 St. Mary Magdalen. d. 623 
99 St. Apollinaris, bp. m. d. 694 

94 St. Alexius, c. sd. G26 2 
$$ St. James, ap. d. H. cl. 627 

4% S. Anne, Mother of the B. V. Mary,gr.d. 6928 
27 8t. Pantaleon, m. Mass IV. 468 
% SS. Nazarius, Celsus, &c. mm, ad. 623 

| 9 8t Martha, v. ed. 63, 

8 SS. Abdon and Sennen, mm 631 

4l 8. c. d. 632 

| AUGUST, XXXI Days. 

" 31 & Peter's Chains, gr. d. ib. 
A St. Stephen, p. 633 
3 The finding of St Stephen, Mass, as his Feast 78 
4 8t. Dominic, c. 633 
5 B. V. M. ad Nives, gr. d. Votive Mass, 507 

?6 The Transfigurati ord, gr. d. 634 
7 Rt. Cajetan, c. d. "y 636 
8 8S. Cyriacus, Largus, &c. mm. sd. ib 
9 Vigil of St. Lawrence 635 

10 St. Lawrence, m. d. II. cl. ib 

11 SS, Tiburtius and Susanna, mm. 64€ 

I2 St. Clare, v. d. Mass XIX. 498 

13 SS. Hippolite and Cassian, mm. , 640 

M Vigil ofthe Assumption  .. 641. 

15 ASSUMPTION of B. V. M. d. I. cl. 612 


Sund. within the Oct. St. JOACHIM, c. gr. d. 644 
16 St. Hyacinth, c. d. Mass XIII. 488 
17 Octave-day of St. Lawrence, d. 645 


18 Commem. of St. Agapete, m 646 
30 St. Bernard, ab. Mass XV. * * p. 491, (except 
Lesson, as on St Greg. Mey 9. 581 
21 St. Jane Frances, 646 
22 Octave-day of the the “Assumption, d. 647 
23 St. Philip Benitius, c. d. 648 
94 St. Bartholomew, ap. d. II. cl. ib. 
25 St. Lewis, king, c. sd. 649 
36 Bt. Zephyrin, p. m. 651 


SEPTEMBER and OCTOBER, 


viii 
27 St. Joseph Calasanctius, c. d. 
28 St Augustin, bp. c. D. d. 

9 29 Decollation of 5. John Baptist, d. 

30 St. Rose of Lima, v. d. 

91 St. Aidan, bp. of Lindisf. d. Mass X.* Sa 

SEPTEMBER, XXX Days. 
1 St. Raymund Nonnatus, c. d. 

X 2 St. Stephen, king, c. sd. 

9 St. Laur. Justinian, bp. c. Mass X.* 

8 Nativity of B. V. Mary. See her Concept 
On Sunday within the Octave is kept th: 
Feast of the HOLY NAME of B. V. M.g 

9 Commenm. of St. Gorgonius, m. 

10 St. Nic. of Tolentine, c. Mass XIV. 

11 Comm. of SS. Protus and Hyacinth, mm 

n ane Exaltation of the Hol Cross r. T 
ctave-day of the 8 INativ. d. 

16 Cornelius vad e IN rf 

17 The Stigmas of St. Francis, d. 

18 St. Joseph a Cupertino, c. d. 

19 SS. Januarius, &c. mm. Mass IX. 

20 SS. Eustachius, &c. mm. d. 

21 St. Matthew, ap. and evang. d. IT. cl. 

22 St. Thomas of 


OCTOBER, XXXI Days. 
On the first Sunday is kept the 
Feast of the Rosary of B. v. M. gr. d. 
1 St. Remigius, bp. c. Mass X.* 
2 The Holy Angels Guardians, d. 
3 St. Thomas bp. of Hereford, c. d. 
5 St. Francis of Assisium, c. d. 


ix. 
icidus, &zc. mm 671 v 
e c. d. ib. 

P. c. 672 . 8 
dget, w. d. ib. * 
onysius; Rusticus, &c. mm. 673 
linus, abp. of York, Mass X. * 482 
icis Borgia, c. sd. 674 
Ifrid, abp. of York, d. 675 
ward, king and c. d. II d. ib. 
istus, p. m. ib. 
esa, v. d 676 

i w. sd. ib. 
ke, evang. d. II, cl. 677 
er of Alcantara, c 678 


. d. 
-day of St. Edward, d. as on the Fons 678 


sula, &c. vv. mm. gr.d. 
n Cantius, c. d. 


679 
n of Beverley, abp. of York, c. mx 680 


wistus, p. m. Mass I. 

f SS. Simon and Jude, aps. 
non and Jude, ape, d. II. el. 
ble Bede, c. 

f All Saints. 


NOVEMDER, XXX Days. 
'AINTTS, d. II. cl. Ju 


em. of all the Foithful departed, a. a. 


nefrid, v. m. d. 
wles Borromeus, bp. c. d. 
ctave-day of All-Saints, d. 


tion of our Saviour’s Church, d. 


lrew Avelline, c. sd. 
rtin, bp. c. d. 

rtin, p. 1n. sd. 

acus, c. sd. 


ition of St. Erconwald, bp. c. d. 


trude, v. and abbess, d. 
mund, abp. of Canterbury, c. d. 
gh, bp. of Lincoln, c. 4. 


681 


ib. 


x DECEMBER. 


X 18 Dedic. of the churches of SS. Peter, &c 
. 19 St. Elizabeth, w. d. -  ,- m 
^ 420 St. Edmund king, m. gr. d. 

21 Presentation of the B.V. M. gr. d. 
22 St. Cecily, v. m. d. 
23 St. Clement, p. m. sd. 
. 94 St. John of the Cross, c. d. 
25 St. Catharine, v. m. d. 
x Bt Felix Valois, c. d. bp. e. d. 
t. Gregory 1 haumaturgus, Dp. c. 
29 Vigil of St. Andrew, m. 
30 St. Andrew, ap. d. II. cl. 
DECEMBER, XXXI Days. 
2 St. Bibiana, v. m. sd. 
: St Prancis Nik c. d. 1 
t. Peter sologos, bp. c. d. 
5 Bt. Berinus, bp. c. d. Mass X.* 
6 St. Nicholas, bp. c. d. 
7 Bt. Ambrose, bp. c. D. d. 
8 Conception of the B. V. Mary, d. II. cl. 
10 St. Melchiades, p. m. Mass I. 
11 St. Damasus, p. c. sd. 
13 St. Lucy, v. m. d. 
15 Octave-day of the conception, d. 
16 St. Eusebius, bp. m. sd. Mass II. 
21 St. Thomas, ap. d. I. el. 
25 The NATIVITY of our Lord, d. L. el. 
26 St. Stephen, Ist m. d. II. cl. 
27 St. John, ap. evang. d. IJ. cl. 
28 Holy Innocents, d. IT. cl. 
29 St. Thomas of Canterbury, bp. m. d. IT. ¢ 
30 Sunday within the Octave of the Nativit 
. 31 St. Silvester, p. c. d. 


mew nk 


( xi ) 
INDEX. 
To such Masses, Hymns, &c. as could no: oe included 


en the Calendar or General Index. 
Votive Masses. 
Mam ofthe Blessed Trinity p. 700 
— of the Holy Ghost: 701 


— of the B. V. M. from Advent to Christmas 509 
— of the B. V. M. from Xmas to.Candlemas 510 
—— of the B. V. M. from Candlemas to Advent 7 


— for the Bridegroom and Bride 
—— for the Sick 709 
— in the time of War . 712 
JMasses for the Dead. 

On the day of a person's death or burial 510 
On the 3d, 7th, and 30th day after decease 516 
Anniv Mass of the Dead 517 
Common Mass of the Dead | 518 

Occasional Collects, Secrets, and Postcommu- 
nions, for days that are not doubles 714 

Te Deum, to be sung in time of public thanks- 
giving 703 
Paraphrase or translation of 7'e Deum 704 
Palm xix. Exraudiat, for the King 719 
The penitential Psalm Miserere 279 
Panes ry of the Mass EM 

a 
The Magnificat | 279 
V. O faithful Cross, with the Hymn following it 295 
Vexilla Regis 297 
Victimes Paschali 330 
Litanies and Prayers following ditto 359 
Adeste fideles 719 
eni Sancte Spiritus 

Sion 396 
dimittis 9052 


( xi.) 








E 
: 
FA 
: 
& 















3 |March 1 
Feb. 14jAprl 1!May 90| 














ENS 
NONEBNEPNEENDSEENSEDSUSERSRENEEEEREE uem. 











| 


( xiii. ) 


ANTHEMS AT SPRINKLING THE 
HOLY WATER. - 


Before Sonemn Mass on the Sundays, from Trinity 
le Palm-Sunday, inclusively, the following Anthem 


is sung: 


ink. THOU shalt 


"EE IS 
wi , 

and I hall. b. cleansed : 
thou shalt wagh me, and 
I shall be made whiter 
than snow. 

Ps. Have mercy on me, 
O God, according to thy 
great mercy. 

V. Glory be to the 
Father, &c. 

rth. Thou wilt sprin- 
kle me, &c. 


The Priest, being returned to the Foot of the Altar, 
says, 


V. Ostende nobis, 
Domine, misericordiam 
tuam. 

R. Et salutare tuum 
da nobis. 

V. Domine, exaudi 


Gratioiem meam. 

R. Et clamor meus ad 
te veniat. 

V. Dominus vobis- 
eum, 


R. Et cum spiritu.tuo. 


V. Show us, O Lord, 
thy mercy. 


R. And grant us thy 
salvation. 
V. O Lord, hear my 


prayer. 
And let my éry 
come unto thee. 
V. The Lord be with 
you. . 
R. And with thy spirit. 


For the Prayer, Exaudi, see the next Page. 


( xiv ) 


From rd to wins, the Vallone? inch 
instead o oregoing ollowing AN’ 
is sung, and eluias are added to the V. O 
nobis, and tfs R. Et salutare, &c. 


ANTHEM. 

I aquam egredi- Saw water 

entem de templo a from the ri 
latere dextro, Alleluia: of the temple, 4 
et omnes ad quos perve- and all to whon 
nit aqua ista, salvi facti water came, were ' 
sunt et dicent, Allel. and they shall say, 
Ps. Geonfitemini Do- Pa. ise the 
mino, quoniam bonus: begause he is goo 
quoniam in seculum mi- cause his mercy em 
sericordia ejus, Gloria. forever. Glory, 4 


The Prayer, Exaudi. 
HEAR us, O holy Lord, Almighty Father, 
| nal God! and yond: chon send tl 
an m heaven, to guard, cherish, protec! 
and defend all that are assembled in this 
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Al Preparatory Prayer before Mass. 


PROSTRATE in spirit at the foot of 
altar, I adore thee, O Almighty 
firmly believe that the Mass, at which I ari 
to assist, is the sacrifice of the body and blo 
thy Son, Christ Jesus. O! grant that I may 
thereat with the attention, and awe ¢ 
such august mysteries: and that by the mer 
the Victim there offered for me, I myself m 
come an agreeable sacrifice to thee, who liver 
reignest with the same Son-and Holy Ghos 
God, world without end. Amen.. 


( xv ) 


THE ORDINARY 
OF THE MASS. 


, The Priest at the Foot of the Altar, beginning, saith, 


Nomine Patris, »J«et 
: Filii, et Spiritus Sanc- 
ü Amen. 
ore Introibo ad altare 
R. Ad Deum, qui leeti- 
fcat juventutem meam. 


N the Name of the 
Father, and of the 

Son, and of the Holy. 
Ghost. Amen. 

Anth. I will go unto 
the Altar of God. 

R. To God, who re- 
joiceth my youth. 


Psalm xlii. 


JUDicA me Deus, et 
discerne causam me- 
am de gente non sancta: 
thhomine iniquo et do- 
leo erue me. 


R. Quia tu es Deus, 
frtitudo mea, quare me 
Mpulisti? et quare tristis 
medo, dum affligit me 
Rimicus ? 


P. Emitte lucem tuam, 
& veritatem tuam: ipsa 
me deduxerunt, et ad- 

t in Montem 
mactum tuum, et in Ta- 
bernacula tua. 

R. Et introibo ad al- 


ure Dei: ad Deum qui 


JUDGE me O God, 
and distinguish my 
cause from the nation 
that is not holy: deliver 
me from the unjust and 
deceitful man. 

R. For thou art God 
my strength, why hast 
thou cast me off? and 
why do I go sorrow- 
ful whilst the enemy af- 
flicteth me? 

P. Send forth thy 
light and thy truth: they 
have conducted me, and 
brought me unto the holy 
Hill, and into thy Ta- 
bernacles. 

R. And I will go unto 


^ Altar of God: to 


xvi 
leetificat juventutem me- 


am. 

P. Confitebor tibi in ci- 
thara Deus Deus meus: 
quare tristis es, anima 
mea, et quare conturbas 
me? 


R. Spera in Deo, quo- 
niam adhuc confitebor 
illi: salutare vultus mei, 
et Deus meus. 

P. Gloria Patri, et Fi- 
lio, et Spiritui Sancto. 

Sicut erat in prin- 
cipio, et nunc, et semper, 
et in ssecula sgeculorum. 


men. 
P. Introibo ad altare 


ei, 

R. Ad Deum qui leti- 
ficat juventutem meam. 

P. Adjutorium nostrum 
in nomine Domini. 

R. Qui fecit ccelum et 
terram. 

P. Confiteor Deo om- 
nipotenti, &c. 

Misereatur tui om- 

nipotens Deus, et dimis- 
Sis peccatis tuis, perducat 
te ad vitam sternam. 

P. Amen. 


R. Confiteor Deo om- 
nipotenti, beate Marise 
semper Virgini, beato 
Michaeli — Archangelo, 
beato, Joanni Baptiste, 
sanctis Apostolis Petro 


THE ORDINARY 


God who giveth joy to 
my you 

P. To thee, O God, my 
God I will give preme 
upon the harp: why art 
thou sad, O my soul; and 
why dost thou disqui 
me ? 


him, the 
countenance and my 

P. Glory be to the Fa- 
ther, and to, &c. 

R. As it was in the be- 
ginning, is now, and ever 


shall be, world 


R. To God who rejoie- 
eth my youth. 

P. Our help is in the 
name of the Lord. 

R. Who made heaven 
an Iconf Almigh- 

. I confessto 
t; PN 

a 
be merci ul to thes and 
forgiving thee thy sins, 
bring thee to everlasting 
life. P. Amen. 
ever a Vir 


Kk I confess to Al 
mi 
ed Mi 

gel, to blessed 


God, to bless- 
John Baptist, to the holy 


2? 


OF THE MASS. 


ot Paulo, omnibus sanc- 
ts, et übi Pater, quia 
peccavi nimis  cogita- 
bone, verbo et opere, 
se mea culpa, 
ma marima culpa. Ideo 
pecor beatam Mariam 
emper Virginem, bea- 
um Michselem Arch- 
weetum, beatum Joan-. 
nem Baptistam, sanctos 
Apostolos Petrum et 
Paulum, omnes sanctos, 
et te Pater, orare pro 
me ad Dominum Deum 
hostrum. 


P. Misereatur vestri 
amnipotens Deus, et di- 
Miesis is vestris, 


perducat vos ad vitam 
wtemam. R. Amen. 

P. Indulgentiam, abso- 

jonem, et remissionem 
peccatorum . nostrorum, 
tribuat nobis onmipotens 
et mieericors Dominus. 
R. Amen. 


P Deus tu conversus 


Yivificabis nos. 

R. Et plebs tua leeta- 
bitur in te. 

P. Ostende nobis, 


ine, misericordiam 


R. Et salutare tuum 
da nobis, 


xvii 


Apostles Peter and Paul, 
to all the saints, and to 
you, Father, that I have 
sinned exceedingly in 
thought, word and deed, 
ough my fault, through 
my fault, rough my 
most grievous fa 
Therefore I beseech the 
Blessed Mary, ever a vir- 
gin, Blessed Michael the 
Archangel, Blessed John 
Baptist, the holy Apos- 
tles Peter and Poul, and 
all the saints, and you, 
O Father, to pray to the 
Lord our God for me. 

P. May Almighty God 
be merciful unto you, 
and, forgiving you your 
sins, bring you to life 
everlasting. men. 

P. May the Almighty 
and mereiful Lord grant 
us pardon, absolution, 
and remission of our 
sins. Amen. 


P. Thou, O God, being 
turned towards us, wilt 
enliven us. 

R. And thy people 
will rejoice in thee. 

P. Show us, O Lord, 
thy mercy. 


e 
R. And grant us thy 
salvation. 


B3 


xviii 

P. Domine, exaudi 
orationem meam. 

R. Et clamor meus ad 
te veniat. 

P. Dominus vobis- 
cum. 

R. Et cum spiritu tuo. 


THE ORDINABY 


P. O Lord heer my 
prayer. 

. And let my cry 
come unto thee. 

P. The Lord be with 


you. 
R. And with thy spirit. 


The Priest going up to the Altar, says, - 


Aufer a nobis queesu- 
mus Domine, iniquitates 
nostras: ut ad Sancta 
Sanctorum, puris merea- 
mur mentibus introire. 
Per Christum Dominum 
nostrum. Amen. 


Take away from us 
our iniquities we be- 
seech thee, O Lord, thet 
we may be worthy to en- 


ter with pure minds into 
the Holy of holies. Thro’, - 
Amen. . 


When come up to the Jlltar, bowing down, he says, 


Oramus te Domine 
per merita sanctorum 
tuorum, quorum reli- 
quie hic sunt, et omni- 
um sanctorum : ut indul- 
gere digneris omnia pec- 
cata mea. Amen. 


We beseech thee O 
Lord by the merits of: 
thy saints whose relics 
are here, and of all the 
saints: that thou wouldst 
vouchsafe to forgive me 
all my sins. Amen. 


Here, at solemn Masses, ihe Priest, (afler having 
blessed the incense with the following words: May- 
est thou be bleseJesed by Him, in whose honour 
thou shalt be burnt, and fumed the altar in the 
form of a Cross), turns to the book, and reads the 
Introit ; which, being every day different, must 


be sought for in iis proper place. 


which, 


Afier 
Kyrie eleison and Christe eleison are alternately 


sung in the chotr. 


P. Kyrie eleison, R. Kyrie eleison, P. Kyrie 
eleison. Lord, have mercy upon us. 

R. Christe eleison, P. Christe eleison, R. Christe 
eleison. Christ, have mercy upon us. 


« e 
V o.c Yew € o 


OF THE MASS. 


* EY 


V e 
xix 


P. Kyrie eleison, R. Kyrie eleison, P. Kyrie elei- 
son. have mercy upon us. 


GLORIA IN 
LORIA in excelsis 
Deo, et in terra 
hominibus bons vo- 
i Laudamus te; 


benedicimus te; ad 


ora- 


tet omnipotens, Domine 
Fili unigenite Jesu Chris- 
t. Domine Deus, Agnus 
Dei, Filius Patri; qui 
tollis ta mundi, mi- 
sere nobis. Qui tollis 
peccata mundi, suscipe 

jonem nostram. 
Qui sedes ad dexteram 
i& miserere nobis. 
Quoniam tu solus sanc- 
tus. Tu solus Dominus. 
Tu solus altissimus, Jesu 
Christe, cum Sancto Spi- 
ntu m gloria Dei Patris. 


; 


EXCELSIS. 


LORY be to God 
on high, and on 
earth, peace to men of 
d wil. We praise 
ee; we bless thee ; we 
adore thee; we glorify 
thee. i 


glory, O Lord 
eavenly King, God the 
Almighty, O 
Lord Jesus Christ, the 
only begotten Son. O 
Lord d, Lamb of 
God, Son of the Father, 
who takest away the sins 
of the world have mercy 
onus. Who takest away 
the sins of the world re- 
ceive our prayers. Who 
sittest at the right hand 
of the Father, have mer- 
cyonus. For thou only 
art holy. ‘Thou only art 
the Lord. Thou only, O 
Jesus Christ, together 
with the H. Ghost, art 
most high in the glory of 
God the Father. Amen. 


Turning towards the people, the Priest salutes them, 
*U ‘haying, 


P. Dominus vobiscym. 


KR. Et cum spiritu tuo. - 


. P. The Lord be with 


you. . 
'" R. And with thy spirit. 


- A Se 
y Pinge 5% €o vr ae pal 

xx THE ORDINARY 

(> After the Coxrecr (which may be found in s 
proper place) the following is the second Collect 
from Candlemas day to Passion Sunday, and frem 
the III. Sunday after Pentecost tll. Advent, 
on Doubles or within Octaves; the third 1s at 
choice of the Priest, and may be found amongst the 
Occasional Prayers, page 


II. COLLECT. 4 cunctis. Preserve us, O Lord, 
we beseech thee, from all dangers of body and soul: 
and by the intercession of glorious and blessed 
Mary, the ever Virgin Mother of God, of the blessed 
apostles Peter and Paul, of blessed N. and of all 
the saints, grant us, in thy mercy, health, and peace; 
that all adversities and errors being removed, 
Church may serve thee with a pure and undi 
devotion. Through. 


From Low Sunday inclusively tl the i 
instead of the foregoing, 1$ said the CO 
Concede; with i$ corresponding Secret and 
P. Coni as in the Votive Mass, Satve, of the 
B. V. M. page 507. 


After the Collect or Collects, the E»PrsTLE is read. 
At the end whereof the Assistants answer Deo 
gratias; then follows the GRADUAL or the Tract, 
either of which may be seen in thetr proper places. 


The Prayer, Munda cor meum, before the Gospel. 


CLEANSE my heart and my lips, O Almighty 
God, who didst cleanse the lips of the pro- 

phet Isaiah with a burning coal: and vouchsafe, 

through thy gracious mercy, so to purify me, 

I may worthily attend to thy holy Gospel. Through 

Christ our Lord. Amen. 


Mey the Lord be in my heart, and on my lips, 
that I may worthily, and in a becoming manner 
attend to his holy Gospel. Amen. 


* 


OF THE MASS. 


P. Dominus  vobis- 


eum, 
R. Et cum spiritu tuo. 
P. Sequentia (vel ini- 
‘tum) sancti Evangelii 


weundum, &c. 


R. Gloria tibi Domi- 
be. 


xxi 

P. The Lord be with 
you. 

R. And with thy spirit. 


P. The continuation (or 
the beginning) of the holy 
Gospel according to, &c. 

R. Glory be to thee, 
O Lord. 


The Gospel may be seen in tts proper place. 
fit the end of the Gospel, the Assistants answer, 


B. Laus tibi, Christe. 


R. Praise be to thee, 
O Christ. 


Then they say with the Priest, w a low voice, 
May our sins be blotted out by the words of the 


The NICENE CREED. 


REDO im unum 

Deum Patrem omni- 
petentem, factorem cceli 
¢ terre, visibilium om- 
Bim et invisibilium. 

Et in unum Domi- 
mum Jesum Christum, 
Filium Dei unigenitum, 
«& ex Patre natum ante 
omnis secula. Deum 
deDeo: Lumen de Lu- 
mine; Deum verum de 

vero; genitum non 
fetum;  consubstantia- 
lem Patri, per quem 
omnia facta sunt. Qui 
propter nos homines, et 
propter nostram salutem 
descendit de colis. Et 
mcarnatus est de Spiri- 
tu Sancto, ex Maria Vir- 


Believe in one God, 
the Father Almighty, 
Maker of heaven and 
earth, and of all things 
visible and invisible. 
And in one Lord Jesus 
Christ, the only begot- 
ten Son of God, and 
born of the Father be- 
fore all ages. God of 
God; Light of Light; 
true God of true God; 
begotten not made ; con- 
substantial to the Fa- 
ther, by whom all thin 
were made. Who for 
us men, and for our sal- 
vation, came down from 
heaven, and became in- 
carnate by the Holy 
Ghost of the Virgin 


oe 


ine: ET HOMO FAC- 

US EST*. Crucifixus 
etiam Pe nobis sub 
Pontio Pilato, possus et 
sepultus est. Et resur- 
rexit tertia die secundum 
Scripturas Et ascendit 
in ccelum, sedet ad dex- 
teram Patris. Et iterum 
venturus est cum gloria 
judicare vivos et mor- 
tuos; cujus regni non 
erit finis, 


Et in Spiritum Sanc- 
tum, Dominum et vivi- 
ficantem, qui ex Patre 
Filioque procedit: qui 
cum Patre et Filio simul 
adoratur, et conglorifica- 
tur; qui locutus est per 
prophetas. Et unam 
Sanctam Catholicam et 
Apostolicam Ecclesiam. 
Confiteor unum Baptis- 
ma in remissionem pec- 
catorum. Et expecto 
resurrectionem  mortuo- 
rum, et vitam venturi 
seculi. Amen. 


vobis- 


R. Et cum spiritu tuo. 


THE ORDINARY 


Mery: AND WAS 
MADE MAN.* He was 
crucified also for us, suf- 
fered under Pontius Pi- 

late, was ied. ' 
And the third day he rose 
again according to the 
Scriptures. And ascend- 
ed into heaven, sitteth 
at the right hand of the 
Father. And he is to 
come in with glory 
to judge both the living 
and the dead, of whose 
kingdom there shall be 


no end. 


And in the Holy 
Ghost, the Lord 
Giver of life, who pro- 
ceedeth from the Father 
and the Son; who, to- 
gether with the Father 
and the Son, is adored 
and lorified ; who 
spoke e prophets. 
And one holy Catholic 
and apostolic Church. 
1 confess one baptism for - 
the remission of sina 
And 1 the resur 
rection of the dead, and 
the life of the world to 


come. men. 

P. The Lord be with 
you. 

R. And with thy spirit. 


* At these words the assistants kneel down to adore 
God for the ineffable mystery of the incarnation. 


, OF THE MASS. xxiii 
Oremus. Let us pray. 

Hore follows the OFFERTORY, which may be seen ~ 

tn iis proper place. 

Oxsxation of the Host. 
Suscipe, sancte Pater, Accept, O holy Fa- 

emnipotens esterne Deus, ther almighty an onspotied 
bane immaculatam Host- nal | 


lam, quam ego indignus 
famulus tuus offero tibi 
Deo meo vivo et vero, 
pro innumerabilibus pec- 
cats, offensionibus et 

igentiis meis, et pro 
m be "Pro omnibus 

; sed et pro omnibus 
fidelibus Christianis, vi- 
vis atque defunctis; ut 
mihi et illis proficiat ad 
slutem in vitam eter- 


Deus qui human: sub- 
stantise itatem mira- 
biliter condidisti, et mi- 
rabilius reformasti ; ; da 
mbi per hujus Aque 
« Vini Mysterium, ejus 
divinitatis esee consortes, 

i dignata , 

S est parti- 
ceps, Jesus Christus Fi- 
lius tuus Dominus nos- 
ter: qui tecum vivit et 
regnat in unitate Spiritus 
Mbeti Deus; per omnia 
icula seculorum. 


Host, which I thy thy wea 
worthy servant offer un- 
to thee, my living and 
true God, for my innu- 
merable sins, offences, 
and negligences, and for 
all here present; as also 
for all faithful C 

both living and dead; 
that it may avail both 
me and them unto life 
everlasting. men. 


Wine and Water into the 


O God, who, in creat- 
human nature, hast 
we derfully dignified it, 
and sul more wonder- 
y reformed it: t 
that by the mystery of 
this Water and Wine, w 
may be made partakers 
of his divine nature, who 
vertaker of to hecomo 
er of our human 
namely, Jesus 
thy Son, 
who with thee, in the 


Jemen. unity of, &c. Amen. 


THE ORDINARY 


OsuaTIon of the CBALICE. 


Offerimus tibi Do- 
mine, calicem, salutaris, 
tuam deprecantes cle- 
mentiam: ut in conspec- 
tu divine Majestatis tue, 

ro nostra et totius mun- 
i salute cum odore sua- 
vitatis ascendat. men. 


We offer unto thee, Q 
Lord, the chalice of sal- 
vation, ing thy 
clemency: that it may 
ascend before thy d 
vine Majesty, as a sweet 
odour, for our i 
and for that of the whole 
world. men. 


When the Priest bows before the Altar, he says, 


In spiritu. humilitatis, 
et in animo contrito sus- 
cipiamur a te, Domine: 
et sic fiat sacrificium nos- 
trum in conspectu tuo 
bodie, ut placeat tibi, Do- 
mine Deus. 


1 
: 
: 
S, 
I 


and grant that the saeri- 
fice we offer this in 
thy sight, may be 

ing to thee, O Lord God. 


When he blesses the Bread and Wine, he says, 


Veni, sanctificator, om- 
nipotens -eterne Deus, 
et benedic hoc sacrifi- 
cium tuo sancto nomini 
preparatum. 


fier, and bless this sacri- 
fice, pre 
glory of thy holy name. 


Here, in solemn Masses, he blesses the Incense, saying, 


Per _intercessionem 
beati Michaelis archan- 
geli stantis a dexteris Al- 
taris Incensi, et omnium 
electorum suorum, incen- 
sum istud dignetur Do- 
minus benedicere, et in 
odorem suavitatis acci- 
pere. PerChristum Do- 
minum nostrum. men. 


May the Lord, by the 
intercession of blessed 


Michael the 

standing at the agit howd 
of the Altar of. Incense, 
and ofall his elect, vouch- 


safe to bless this incense, 
and receive it as an odour 


of sweetness. 
Amen. 


OF THE MASS. 


XKV 


At incensing the Bread and Moe ee 
Ma cense 


Incensum istud a te 


sedictum, ascendat ad which thou hast blest, 
Domine, et descendat O Lord ascend to thee, 
wr nos misericordia and may thy mercy de: 


At incensing the Altar, eters 


Jeigatur, — Domine, 
tio mea, sicut incen. 
& in conspectu tuo: 
mtio manuum mea- 
à sacrificium vesper- 
m. Pone Domine 
jam ori meo, et 
um circumstantie la- 
i meis: ut non decli- 
eor meum in verba 
lite, ad excusandas 


in peccatis. 


scend upon us. 


, direbtod as in 


Lord, be 


as evening sacrif 

a watch, O Lord, before 

mouth : and a door 

of prudence around my 

i ; that my heart in- 

c ine not to evil words to 
make excuses in sins. 


On giving the Censer to the Deacon, he says, 

fay the Lord enkindle within us the fire of his 

5 and the flame of everlasting charity. 
Washing his Hands, he says, Ps. xxv. 6. 


AYabo inter inno- 
tes manus meas: et 
"umdabo altare tuum, 


mine. 

Jt audiam vocem lau- 
: et enarrem universa 
"abilia tua. 


Domine dilexi deco- 
à domus tuse, et locum 
titationis glorice tuse. 


Ne perdas cum impiis 
imam meam; et cum 


I will wash my hands 
among the innocent : sites 
will compass thy , 
O Lord. 

That I may hear the 
voice of thy praise: and 
tell all thy wondrous 
works. 

I have loved O Lord, 
the beauty of thy house, 


and the place w thy 
glory dwelleth. 

e not away m 
soul, with the wicked 5 


xxvi 


viris sanguinum vitam 
meam. 

In quorum manibus 
iniquitates sunt: dextera 
eorum repleta est mu- 
neribus. 

Ego autem in inno- 
centia mea ingressus 
sum: redime me,et mi- 
serere mei. 

Pes meus stetit in di- 
recto: in ecclesiis bene- 
dicam te Domine. 


Gloria Patri, et Filio, 
&c. 


THE ORDINARY OF THE MASS. 


nor my life with bloody 


men. 
In whose hands are ink 

quities: their right- 

is filled with gifts. 


But I have walked in 
my innocence: redeem 
me and have mercy on 


me. 
My foot hath stood in 

the direct way: in the 

churches I will bles 

thee, O Lord. 

,,Dlery be to the Father 


Bowing before the middle of the Altar, he says, 


Suscipe sancta Trini- 
tas hanc oblationem, 
quam tibi offerimus ob 
memoriam Passionis, Re- 
surrectionis, et Ascensio- 
nis Jesu Christi Domini 
nostri: et in honorem 
beate Marie semper 
Virginis, et beati Joannis 
Baptistee, et sanctorum 
Apostolorum Petri et 
Pauli, et istorum, et om- 
nium Sanctorum: ut illis 
"proficiat ad honorem, 
nobis autem ad salutem: 
et illi pro nobis interce- 
dere dignentur in coelis, 
quorum memoriam agi- 
mus in terri. Per eum- 

Amen. 


dem, &c. 


Receive O holy Trini 
ty, this oblation which 
we make to thee in me 
mory of the Passion, Re- 
surrection, and Ascension 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
and in honour of the 
blessed Mary ever a 
EE TE 

aptist, the holy A 
Peter and Parl, and of 
al the Saints: thet it 
may be available to their 
honour, and our salve 
tion: 


vouchsafe Nro 


for us in heaven, whoss 


memory we celebrate on 
earth. ugh the same 
Christ our Lord. Amen. 


PREF ACES. 


ning himself towards the People, he says, 


atres: ut me- 
rum sacrifici- 
bile fiat apud 
em omnipo- 


piat Dominus 
de manibus 
lem et glori- 
sui, ad utili- 
jue nostram, 
«cclesie suse 


w the Secret, which 


Brethren, prey that my 
sacrifice and yours may 
be acceptable io God the 
Father Almighty. 


R. May the Lord re- 
ceive the sacrifice from 


of all his holy Church. 
be seen in tls 


xxvii 


gray 
366, the second Secret from Candlemas- 
‘assion-Sunday and from the III. Sunday 
ecost unti] Advent, iic on Doubles and 
taves) is the follow: 
LE T.—Graciously hear us, O God our 
at by virtue of this sacrament, thou may- 
m all enemies, of both soul and 
‘us grace in this life, and glory in the next. 


Sunday, erclusively, till the Ascension, 

" the foregoing is said the SECRET, 

ord, &c, as in the Votiwe Mass, SALVE, 
0 


. M. p. 508. 


mnia secula. — P. World without end. 
R. Amen. Amen. 
The Preface. 
usvobiscum. P. The Lord be with, 
spiritu tuo. you. R. And with thy” 
corda. R. spirit. P. Lift up your 
1 Dominum. hearts. R. Wehavelift- 
agamus Do- ed them up to the Lord. 
nostro. R. P. Let us give thanks to 
justum est. — the Lord our God. R. It 


is meet and just. 
2 


X 


fe 


xxvili 


The PREFACE on Festivals and other 


PREFACES. 


that have 


tone proper, and in Masses for the 


N. B. This mark* refers to the subsequent the 
proper Prefhces port of 


VERE dignum et jus- 
tum est, equum et 
salutare, nos tibi semper, 
et ubique gratias "Barer pia 
Domine sancte, Pater 
omnipotens, eterne Deus. 
* Per Christum Domi- 
num nostrum. Per quem 
majestatem tuam laudant 
angeli, adorant domina- 
tiones, tremunt potesta- 
tes; Coli calorumque 
virtutes, ac beata sera- 
phim, socia exultstione 
concelebrant, Cun qui- 
bus et nostras voces, ut 
admitti jubeas depreca- 
mur, supplici confessione 
dicentes: 


Sanctus, sanctus, sanc- 
tus, Dominus Deus Sa- 
baoth. Pleni sunt coeli 
et terra gloria tua. Ho- 
sanna in excelsis. Be- 
nedictus qui venit in no- 
mine Domini, Hosanna 


ble to salvation, that 
sont gre and 


pla thanks n. 
t ee, ( Lord, 
ther me mighty 


Eod. by wh whom the em 


ls praise thy majesty, 

e dominations adore 
the wers tremble be- 
fore it, the heavens, the 
heavenly virtues, 
blessed 


common un e it. 


as be cate are fall of 

lory. Hosama in 
Ud ighest. Blessed is 
he that cometh in the 
name of the Lord, Ho- 


in excelsis. sanna in the highest. 
On 'Tuiwirr-SowDAy, and every other 
in the Year that has no proper Preface. 


* Qui cum unigenito 
Filio tuo et Spiritu Sanc- 
to unus es Deus, unus es 


* Who together with 
thy only be Son 
and the Holy Ghost, ert 


PREFACES. 


* 
Dominus: non in unius 


substantiee. Quod enim 
de gloria, revelante 
te credimus, hoc de Fi- 
lo tuo, hoc de Spiritu 
Sancto, sine differentia 
discretionis sentimus. Ut 
in confessione verte, sem- 
ptemsque Deitatis, et 
in Personis proprietas, et 
m essentia. Unitas, et in 
adoretur e- 
qualitas Quam laudant 
angeli atque archangeli, 
therubim quoque ac se- 
rphim: qui non cessant 
quotidie, una 

P» dicentes, Sanctus, 


xxix 


one God, and one Lord: 
not in a singularity of one 
Person, but in a Trinity 
of one substance. For 
what we believe of thy 
glory, as thou hast reveal- 
ed, the same we believe of 
thy Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost, without any dit- 
ference or distinction. Se 
that in the confession of 
the true and eternal Dei- 
ty, we adore a distinction 
in the Persons, an unity 
in the essence, and an 
equality in the Majesty. 
om the angels and 
archangels, the cherubim 
also and seraphim praise: 
and cease not daily to 
cry out with one voice 
saying, Holy, &c. 


From Cunistmas-Day til the Epiphany ; on Corpus 


Christi; and on out 


rd's Transfiguration. 


N.B. Prefaces thus marked t are concluded in the 
same manner as this. 


*Quia per incarnati 
Yebi mysterium, nova 
mentis nostre oculis lux 
up claritatis infusit: ut 
dum visibiliter Deum 
Cgnoscimus per hunc 
m invisibilium amorem 


inationibus ; cumque, 


* Since by the mys- 
tery of the Word made 
flesh, a new ray of thy 
glory has appeared to the 
eyes of our souls: that 
while we behold God 
visibly, we may be car- 
ried by him to the love of 
things invisible. f And 
therefore with the angels 


and archangels, with the 
3 


XXX 
omni militia coelestis 
exercitus, hymnum glo- 
rie tus canimus, sine 


fine dicentes, Sanctus, 
Sanctus, &c. 


PREFACES. 


e 6 
thrones and dominating 
and with all the heaveg 
host, we sing an e 
ing hymn to thy gtes 
saying, Holy, &c. , 


On the Epiphany and during tis Octave. 


* Quia cum unigenitus 
tuus in substantia nos- 
tree mortalitatis apparuit, 
nova nos immortalitatis 
sus lucereparavit. ] Et 
ideo, &c. 


* Because when t 
only begotten Son & 
peared in the substan 
of our mortal floahy, ] 

repaired us by Ls 
light of his immortality 
+ And therefore, &c. 


In Lent till Passion-Sunday. 


* Qui corporali jejunio 
vitia comprimis, mentem 
elevas, virtutem largiris 
et preemia. * Per Chris- 
tum, &c. 


vices, elevatest our wj 
derstandin 

on us virtue and its q 
ward. * Thro’ &c. ° 


On Passion and PALM Sunpays, 


Maundy-Thursday, 
* Qui salutem humam 
generis in ligno Crucis 
constituisti: ut unde 
mors oriebatur, inde vita 
resurgeret : et qui in lig- 
no vincebat, in li 
doque vines vinceretur. * Ber 


and Feasts of the Holy Oros 


* Who hast a 

that the salvation df ti 
kind should be wrougi 
on the wood of the crosi 
that from whence desi 
came, thence life mij 
arise, and that he 
overcame by the tré 
might also by the tree# 
overcome. *'Thro', & 


From Horny Saturpay til the Ascension. 


V Ere dignum et jus- 
tum est, sequum et 


I? is truly meet sà 
just, right and 


PREPACES. 


elutare, te quidem Do- 
mie omni tempore, sed 
[in hoc potissimum nocte 
wd die, vel ] in hoc glo- 
rodus predicare, cum 
Pascha nostrum immola- 
tts est Christus. Ipse 
eim verus est Agnus, 
n abstulit peccata mun- 
i. Qui mortem nostram 
moriendo destruxit, et 


vitam resurgendo repara- 
vit ¢ Et ideo, Sc. 


xxxi 


able to salvation, to 
praise thee, O Lord, at all 
times, but chiefly on this 
[night or day, or, at this 
time] when Christ our 
Passover was sacrificed 
for us. For he is the true 
Lamb who hath taken 
away the sins of the 
world. Who by dying 
has destroyed our death, 
and by rising in has 
restored us to life. + And 


From Ascension-Day ill Whitsun-Eve. 


* Per Christum Domi- 
kum nostrum. Qui post 
resurrectionem suam oin- 
nibus discipulis suis ma- 
nifestus apparuit, et ipsis 
cernentibus est elevatus 
in celum, ut nos divini- 
tatis suse tribueret esse 


participes. + Et ideo, &c. 


* Through Christ our 
Lord. Who after his 
resurrection appeared 
openly to all his disciples, 
and in their presence as- 
cended into heaven, to 
make us partakers. of his 
divine nature. |] And 
therefore, &c. 


From Wairtsun-Eve till Trinity-Sunday; and in 
Votive Masses of the Holy Ghost. 


*Per Christum Domi- 
num nostrum. Qui ascen- 
dens super omnes coelos, 
sedensque ad dexteram 
tuam, promissum Spiri- 
tum sanctum [ hodierna 
die] in filios adoptionis 
effudit. Quapropter pro- 
fusis gaudiis totus in orhe 
terrrum mundus exul- 
tat. Sed et superne vir- 
tutes atque angelicre po 


* Vhrough Christ our 
Lord. ho ascending 
above all the heavens, 
and sitting at thy right 
hand, didst send down 
the promised holy Spirit 
[this day ] upon the chil- 

en of adoption. Where- 
fore the whole world dis- 

lays its excess of Joy. 
The heavenly virtues also 
and all the angelic pow- 


ae 


testates, hymnum glorite 
tum concinunt, sine fine 
dicentes, Sanctus, &c. 


PREFAGEB., 


ers, sing in concert sn 
everlasting hymn to thy 
glory, saying, Holy, &e. 


On FrsTIVALS of the B. V. Mary (the Purification 
excepted.) 


* Et te in N.{ Beate 
colaudare, benedicere, et 
predicare. Que et uni- 

itum tuum Sancti 
Spiritus obumbratione 
concepit: et Virginitatis 
gloria permanente, lumen 
eternum mundo effudit, 
Jesum Christum Domi- 
num nostrum.  * Per 


quem, &c. 


On the FEsTIVALS 


ERE dignum et jus- 

tum est, &equum et 
salutare, te Domine sup- 
pliciter exorare, ut gre- 
gem tuum Pastor eterne 
non deseras, sed per bea- 
tos apostolos tuos conti- 
nua protectione custo- 
dias. Ut iisdem rectori- 
bus gubernetur, quos 


operis tui vicarios eidem 


con presesso 
tores, * Et ideo, &c. 


I Here the Name of her several Festivals, as t 


rio, bles, and glori 

False, DiE88, 
thee on the N.] of the 
blessed Mary, ever a Vir 
gin. Who by the over- 
shadowing of the Holy 
Ghost conceived thy on- 
ly begotten Son : and the 
glory of her virginity still 
remaining, brought forth 
the eternal light of the 
world, Jesus Christ our 
Lord. * By whom, &e. 


of the APOSTLES. 


IT is truly meet and 
just, right and avail- 
able to salvation, humbly 
to beseech thee that thou 
O Lord, our eternal 
Shepherd wouldst not 
forsake thy flock, but 
keep it under thy conti- 
nual protection by thy 
blessed apostles. That 
it may be governed by 
those whom thou hast 
appointed its vicars and 
pastors. * And, &c. 


oc 


cur tn the course of the Year, should be ex 


( ii) 
THE CANON OF THE MASS. 


me Pater, por clementiesi- 


Christum 7: id tuum 
Dominum nostrum, sup- 
rogamus ac peti- 
mus, uti accepta habeas, 
hrec. dona, 
hec munera, hrec sancta 
merificia — illibata, im- 
primis quee tibi offerimus 
* pro Ecclesia tua sancta 
Catholica: quam  paci- 
ficare, custodire, adu- 
Bare, et regere digneris 
toto orbe terrarum: una 
eum famulo tuo Papa 
nostro N. et Antistite 
nostro N. 
et omnibus Orthodox- 
is, atque Catholic et 


Apostolicse Fidei Culto- 


CoMMEMORATION 

Memento Domine fa- 

mulorum famularumque 
tuarum N. et N. 


WE therefore, huinb 
pray and besee 


thee most, merciful Fa- 
ther, thro’ Jesus Christ 
thy Son, our Lord, that 
thou wouldst vouchsafe 
to accept and bless these 
pitts, these presents, these 

ly unspotted sacrifices, 
which in the first place 
we offer thee for thy 
holy Catholic Church, to 
which vouchsafe to grant 
peace; as also to pre- 
serve, unite, and govern 
it throughout the world: 
together with thy servant 
N. our 


as also’ all orthodox be- 
lievers and professors of 
the catholic and apostolic 
Faith. 
or THE Liviwa. 

Be mindful O Lord 
of thy servants, men and 
women, N. and N. 


He prays silently for those he intends to pray for. 


Et omnium circum- 
sanum, quorum tibi 
fides cognita est, ot nota 
devotio, pro quibus tibi 
offerimus: vel qui tibi 
offerunt hoc sacrificium 
laudis pro se, suisque 
omnibus: pro redemp- 


And of all here pre- 
sent, whose Faith and 
Devotion is known unto 
thee, for whom we offer. 
or who offer up to thee 
this sacrifice of praise for 
themselves, their fami- 
lies, and-friends: for the 


xxxiv 


tione animarum suarum, 
ro spe salutis et inco- 
umitatis sus: tibique 
reddunt vota sua seterno 
Deo, vivo et vero. 


ComMMUNICANTES, et 
memoriam venerantes, 
inprimis gloriose sem- 
per Virginis Marie, Ge- 
nitricis Dei et Domini 
nostri Jesu Christi : sed et 
beatorum Apostolorum 

tuorum, 
Petri et Pauli, Andres 
Jacobi, Joannis, Thome, 
Jacobi, Philippi, Bartho- 
lomei, Matthei, Simo- 
nis et Thadei: Lini, 
Cleti, Clementis, Xysti, 
Cornelii, Cypriani, Lau- 
rentii, C 80 oni, Jo- 
annis et 1, Cosme 
et Damiani, « et 'omnium 
Sanctorum tuorum : quo- 
rum meritis precibusque 
concedas, ut in omnibus 
protectionis tuse munia- 
mur auxilio. Per eum- 
dem Christum Dominum 
nostrum. Amen. 


THE CANON OF THE MASS. 


redemption of their souls 
for the health and m 
tion they hope for, and 
for which they now. Bg 
their vows to thee, the 


eternal, living, and true 
God. 


CoxMUNICATING with, 
and 
first place, 


Bartholomew, Matthew, 
Simon and Thadew, 
Linus, Cletus, Clement, 
Xyetus, Cornelius, Cy- 
prian, Lawrence, C] 
onus, John and 
osmas and 

of all thy Saints; . by 


whose merits and 
t that we my fe 


Spreading his Hands over the Oblation he saya, - 


ur  oblati- 
onem servitutis nostree, 
sed et cuncte familie 
tuse, queesumus Domine, 
ut  plaoatus accipias: 


à We o bescech 
ee gracious. 
ly to accept this obl 
tion of our servitude 
as also of thy whole fe 





manus suas, item tibi 


BIBITE EX EO OMNES, 
Hic xsT ENIM CALIX 
SANGUINIS MEI NOVI 


ET ETERNI TESTAMEN- 
TI: MYSTERIUM FIDEI: 
QUI PRO VOBIS ET PRO 
MULTIS EFFUNDETUR IN 
AEMISSIONEM | TECCATO- 
RUM. 

-Heec — quotiescumque 
feceritis, in mei memori- 
am facietis. 


Here also kneeling, he 
hal 


Unde et memores, Do- 
mine, nos servi tui, sed 
et plebs tua sancta ejus- 
dem Christi Filii tui, 
mini nostri, tam beate 

jonis necnon et ab 
Inferis, Resurrectionis,sed 
et in Cclos gloriose as- 
censionis, offerimus pre- 
clare Majestati tute, de 
tuis donis ac datis, Hos- 
tiem puram, Hostiam 
sanctam, Hostiam imma- 
culatam, panem sanctum 
vitre soternee, et Calicem 
salutis perpetue. — 
Supra quie. propitio ac 
sereno "vultu respicere 


»^ 


THR CANON OF THE MASS. 


rable hands, givi 
also thanks, fo bi 
and gave it to his: 
ples, saying: 'TAxg 
DRINK YE ALL OP ' 
FOR THIS 18 THE 
LICE OF MY BLOO! 
THE NEW AND ETE 
TESTAMENT: THE: 
TERY OF FAITH: W 
SHALL BE  SHED 
YOU, AND FOR MAN 
THE REMISSION OF. 


sion of the same € 
thy Son our Lord, hi 
surrection from the 
and admirable asce 
into heaven, offer 
thy most excellent M 
ty of thy gifts best 


Host, the holy brea 
eternal life, and cb 
of everlasting salvati 





“8 


centibus, locum refri 

rii, lucis et pacis, ut in- 
dulgeas deprecamur: per 
eumdem Christum Do- 
minum nostrum. Amen. 


THE CANON OF THE MASS. 


- Here striking his Breast, the Priest sus, 


Nobis quoque pecca- 
toribus famulis tuis de 
multitudine miseratio- 
num tuarum sperantibus, 
m aliquam et so- 
cietatem donare digneris, 
cum tuis sanctis apostolis 
et marti us; cum Jo- 
anne, Stephano, Mat- 
thia, 
Alexandro, 
Felicitate, Per- 
petua, tha, Lucia, 
Agnete, Cecilia, Anas- 
tasia, et omnibus sanctis 
tuis: intra quorum nos 
consortium, non sstima- 
tor meriti, sed venite, 
qusesumus largitor ad- 
mitte. Per Christum Do- 
minum nostrum. 
Per uem hec om- 
nia, Domine, semper 
Re 
cas, vivificas, benedicis, 
et prestas nobis Per 
ipsum, et cum ipso, et 
in ipso, est tibi Deo Patri 
omnipotenti, in unitate 
‘Spiritus Sancti, omnis 
honor et gloria. 


Also to us sinners, th 
servants, confidi nu 
multitude of thy mercies, 
vouchsafe to grant some 
part and fellowship with 


thy holy a and 
irtyre? wil John, Se 


hen, Matthias, . Barne- 
fa peius Alara 


cime, Perpetua, 
ucy, Agn 


rit, but of thy own gre 
tuitous pardon. - Throggh 
Christ our Lord. 


ereas,  sanctifi- ate, 


unity of the Ho 
all honour and 


TEE CANON OF THE MASS. 


x omnia secula 

am. R. Amen. 

is salutarib 

taripus 

ni, et divina 

me formati, au- 
icere : 


noster, qui es in 
anctificetur no- 
jum: adveniat 
tuum: fiat vo- 
ta sicut in colo, 
ra: m nos- 
uotidianum da 
xlie; et dimitte 
):bita nostra, si- 
nos dinittimus 
us nostris: et ne 
1cas in tentatio- 
, Bed libera nos 
P. Amen. 
| n08, queesumus, 
ab omnibus 
preteritis, pre- 
et futuris; et in- 
te beata et glo- 
iper Virgine Dei 
3 Maria, cum 
ostolis tuis Petro 
, atque Andrea, 
ibus sanctis, da 
| pacem in die- 
ris: ut ope mi- 
& v ture adjuti, et 
0 Sinus seniper 
t ab omni per- 
je securi. 


Per 
D 


XXXIE 


P. For ever and ever. 
Amen. 


Let us pray. 
sa precepts, 
and following thy divine 
directions, we presume 
to say: 
Our Father, who art 
in heaven, thy longe be 
name: thy om 
come: thy will be done 
on earth, as it is in hea- 
ven give us this day our 
daily bread; and forgive 
us our trespasses, as we 


forgive them that trespass 
against us. And lead us 
not into temptation: 


R. But deliver us from 
evil. Amen. 


Deliver us, we beseech 
thee, O Lord, from all 
evils, past, present, and to 
come; and the in- 
tercession of the blessed 
and ever glorious Virgin 
Mary Mother of God, 
and of the holy apostles 
Peter and Paul, and of 
Andrew, and of al the 
saints, mercifully grant 
peace in our days: that 
thro’ the assistance of th 
mercy, we may be al- 
ways free from sin, and 
secure from all disturb- 
2 


xi 


eundem Dominum nos- 
trum Jesum Christum Fi- 
lium tuum, qui tecum 
vivit et regnat, in unitate 
Spiritus Sancti, Deus. 

P. Per omnia secula 
seeculorum. Amen. 

P. Pax Domini sit 
semper vobiscum. 


R. Et cum spiritu tuo. 


THE CANON OP THE MARG. 


ance. ‘Through the same 
Jesus Christ, thy Soa 
our Lord, who with thee 
and the Holy Ghost 
liveth and reignetb, (od. 
P. World without end, 
T. May th peace of 
. May the 
the Lord be always with 


you. 
R. And with thy spiri 


Breaking the Host, he puts a Particle thereof into ths 
halice saying, May this mixture, and consecré- 
tion of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, be to us that receive it effectual to eternal 


life. Amen. 


Then bowing and striking his Breast, he says: 


Agnus Dei, qui tollis 
peccata mundi, 

miserere nobis, 
* miserere nobis, 
* dona nobis pacem. 


Lamb of God, who 
takest away the of 
the world, * have mercy 
upon us, * have mete 
upon us, * give us peace 


In Masses for the Deap he says twice, Give them 
rest; and lastly, * Give them eternal rest. 


The following Prayer is then also omitted. : 


Domine Jesu Christe, 
qui dixisti apostolis tuis, 
pacem relinquo vobis, 
pacem meam do vobis, 
ne respicias peccata mea, 
sed fidem Ecclesie tue ; 
eamque secundum vo- 
luntatem tuam  pacifi- 
care et coadunare digne- 


wb NÍ]duuuMau. 


>» M 


Lord Jesus Christ, who 
saidst to thy : i 
eave you peace, 
you my regard 


not my sins, the 
faith of thy church; and 
grant her that peace 

unity which is agreeable 
to thy will: who lives 





xiii THE CANON OF THE MASS. 


cipiam, et nomen Do- heaven, and call upon the 


mini invocabo. name of our Lord. 
Striking his Breast, with Humility and Devotion, le 
says thrice, 


Domine, non sum dig- — Lord, I am not worthy 
nus ut intres sub tectum that thou shouldst enter 
meum; sed tantum dic under my roof; say bet 
verbo, et sanabitur ani- the word, and my soul 
ma mea. shall be healed. 


Receiving reverently both Parts of the Host, he says, 


Corpus Domini nostri May the body of our 
Jesu Christi custodiat Lord Jesus Christ pre 
animam meam in vitam serve my soul to li 
eternam. Amen. everlasting. Amen. 


Taking the Chalice, he says, 


Quid retribuam Domi- What return shall I 
no pro omnibus quee re- make the Lord for all be 
tribuit mihi? Calicem has given tome? I wil 
salutaris accipiam, et no- take the Chalice of s. 
men Domini invocabo. vation, and call upet 
Laudans invocabo Do- the name of the 
minum, et ab inimicis Praising, I will call up@® 
meis salvus ero. the Lord, and shall fe 

saved from my enemx 


Recewing the blood of our Saviour, he says, 


Sanguis Domini nostri — The blood of our Lord 
Jesu Christi custodiat Jesus Christ re 
animam meam in vitam my soul to everlasting 
seternam. Amen. life. Amen. " 


Taking the first Ablution, he says, 


Quod ore sumpsimus, ^ Grant, Lord, that what 
Domine, pura mente ca- we have taken with ouf 
piamus, et de munere mouth, we may receivt 
temporali, fiat nobis re- with a pure mi st 


THE CANON OF THE MASS. xliii 


sempiternum. of a temporal gift it may 
me to us an 
remedy. 
king the second Ablution, he says, 
3tuum Domine, May thy body, O Lord, 
npsi, et sanguis which l have received, 
otavi, adhzreat and thy blood which I 
smeis;etpresta have drank, cleave to my 
3 non reinaneat bowels; and grant, that 
macula, quem no stain of sim may re- 
ancta refecerunt main in me, who have 
ita. Qui vivis been fed with this pure 
in secula se- and holy sacrament. Who 
Amen. livest and reignest, &c. 


returns to the Book, and reads the Commo- 
|, which may be seen in its proper place. 


us vobiscum. The Lord be with you. 
"um spiritu tuo. R. And with thy spirit. 
)remus. Let us pray. 


ndlemas-day til Passion Sunday, and from 
. Sunday after Pentecost until Advent, (ex- 
1i Doubles and within Octaves) after the 
Postcommunion, the following ts the 


)JSTCOM. (Mundet.) May the oblation 
vine sacrament, we beseech thee, O Lord, 
nse and defend us; and by the intercession 
essed Mary the Virgin Mother of God, of 
ed apostles Peter and Paul, of blessed N. 
] the saints, free us from all sin, and deliver 
ill adversity. 

w Sunday, exclusively, till the Ascension, in- 
f the foregoing, is said the P. Coma. * Sump- 
. as 1n the Votive Mass SALVE for the 

p. 900. 

the Postcommunion, is added the following 


xliv 


THE CANON OF THE MASS. 


PRAYER. (Et famulos.) um" 


DEFEND also, O Lord, from all adversity, thy 
servant N. our Pope, N. our Bishop, 


together with the people 


committed ,to 


his care: grant peace in our days, and banish all 
wickedness from thy Church: thro’, &c. ' 


Dominus vobiscum. 

R. Et cum spiritu tuo. 

Ite missa est (vel) Be- 
nedicamus Domino. 

R. Deo gratias. 


The Lord be with you 
R. And with thy spirit 
Go, you are dismissed; 
(or) let us bless the Lord, 
t. Thanks be to God. 


In Masses for the Dead. 


P. Requiescant in pace. 
R. Amen. 


P. May they rest in 
peace. R. Amen. 


Bowing before the Altar, the Priest says 


Placeat tibi sancta 
Trinitas, obsequium ser- 
vitutis meee; et preesta, 
ut sacrificium quod 
oculis tuse Majestatis 
indignus obtuli, tbi sit 
acceptabile, mihique, et 
omnibus pro quibus illud 
obtuli, sit te miserante, 
propitiabile. Per Chris- 
tum Dominum nostrum. 
Amen. 


Let the performance of 
my homage be pleasing 
to thee, O holy Trinity 
and grant that the seer 
fice which I, tho’ unwot- 
thy, have offered up m 
the sight of thy Majesty; 
may be acceptable t9 
thee, and thro’ thy mereg 
be a _propitiation for me 
and 


those for whom 3 
has been offered. Te 


Turning himself towards the People, he gives them MÀ 

Blessing, saying, 

May Almighty God, the Father, Son, and Holy « 
Ghost, bless you. Amen. 


P. Dominus vobiscum. 


P. Our Lord be wit 


R. Et cum spiritu tuo, you. R. And with thy 
P. Initium sancti Evange- spirit. P.'The beginning 


t vera quee illumi- 
oem hominem 
em in hunc mun- 


mundo erat, et 
s per ipsum factus 


nundus eum non ' 


K — In propria 
t sui eum non re- 
Xt, Quotquot au- 
seperunt eum, de- 
potestatem filios 


five testimony of 
i 


true light which enlight- 
eneth every man that 
cometh into this world. 

He was in the world, 
and the world was made 
by him, and the world 
knew him not. He came 
unto his own, and his 
own received him not. 
But as many as received 
him, to them he gave 


xlvi 


Dei fieri: his qui cre- 
dunt in nomine ejus, qui 
non ex ne- 
que ex voluntate carnis, 
neque ex voluntate viri, 

ex Deo nati sunt: Et 
VERBUM CARO FACTUM 
EST, et habitavit in no- 
bis; et vidimus gloriam 
ejus, gloriam quasi uni- 


geniti a Patre, plenum 
gratite et veritatis. 


V. R. AND PRAYER FOR THE 


power to be mm 
sons of God: . @ 
that believe in his 
who are born, 1 

blood, nor of the 
the flesh, nor of 
of man, but of 
And THE WORE 


‘MADE FLESH, and 





xiviii ' AT THE BENEDICTION.. : 


Compar sit laudatio. For ever blees Jit 
Amen. ous name, 4 
V. Panem de celo, V. Thou hast 
preestitisti eis, Mleluia. — them bread from | 
uta. 
R. Omne delectamen- R. Re 
tum in se habentem,.4]- whatever is de 
leluia. Alleluia. 
|. The Prayer. 
DEUS , qui nobis, sub QO 99 
Sacramento mira- webdeful 
bili passionis tue memo- ment, has left us. 
riam reliquisti: tribue petual memorial : 
qusesumus, ita nos cor- jon; grant 
poris et sanguinis tui, ch thee, s0 
sacra mysteria venerari verence the sacre 
ut redemptionis tui fruc- teries of thy boc 
tum in nobis jugiter blood, as i& our A 
sentiamus. Qui; ways sensible 
tt ' in thou 
purchased for u&: 
4 Ms. Had) the Priest (holding the Remonstral 
exposes the B. Sacrament fo the 
ration of the io Faithful, the following ANTHEM 
y eusig. 
OSacrum Convivium! —— O Sacred. 
in quo Christus sumitur: which Christ ist 
recojitur memoria passio- the memory of h 
nis ejus: mens impletur sion renewed: tt 
grana: et future Las replenished with 


ibis p pignus datur and e pledge of 
vM | fuo ern 





50 FIRST SUNDAY 


ashamed. Neither let my inimici mei: efenim unti- 
enemies laugh at me: for versi, qui te expects 
none of them that waiton non confundentur. 

thee shall be confounded. Vias tuas, .Domine, a 
Ps. Shéw,O Lord, thy monstra miki: et sentias - 
ways to ome, andteach me fuas edoce me. 


OOP Glory, &e. . . V. Gloria Patr, $e.  — 
To thee, &c. to Ps. Ad te, &c. to Ps. 
Jnd thus the Introit is always repeated. 

Gloria in excelsis is omitted from this Sunday 8l 
Christmas,. and ‘from Septuagesima unit] Easter, 
unless on doubles, Sc. 

o pera Excita, qu quas, —Exert, N^ iereus thee, 

0 y power, and come: t y prom 
tion we may be freed from the imminent dangers of 
our sins, and be saved by thy mercy, who liveth aly 
reigneth, &c. R. Amen. 

From this day to Christmas-eve, olla the Collect of 

the c two following Co 
kasd that thy W. Wi rd, when fhe 1 deliver 
p at ord, when the ange 
boul take flesh in the womb of dee 
sed irgin a Many. give ear to our humble 

and grant, that we, who believe her to be truly 

Mother o of God, may be helped by her prayers. | 
beseech thee, O Lord, the prayers of th 

we ee, e 

that all oppositions and errors E ying eee 

may serve thee with a securo and urlisurbed 

tion. Thro’. &c. Amen. " 

Or 1nslead of the foregoing, the following way} 


For the POPE. Deus omnium.—O God, the yv 





and governor of all the faithful, look down 

mercy on thy.servant N. whom thou haat a 

Pastor over thy Church: and grant, w 

thee, that, both by word and example, he 1 may nit 








So ee MM. ewm — 1 


IN ADVENT. 53 


For te CHURCH. *Quasumus.—We beseech 
thee, O Almighty God, not to leave exposed to the 
dangers of human life, those whom thou hast permit- 
ted to partake of those divine mysteries. Thro’. 

Instead of the last, may be said the following. 

Fer the POPE. May the participation of this divine 
merament protect us, we beseech thee, O Lord: and 
aways procure safety and defence to thy servant N. 
whom thou hast appointed Pastor over thy Church, 
Ter with the flock committed to his charge. 


hulead of Ite missa est, is said, Benedicamus Do- 
mino: which rule is always to be observed when the 
Gloria in excelsis is omitted. 
On the week days in Advent, the Mass of the (ore. 
ing Sunday is said unless there be a ass 
day, but the Alleluias and V. following the 
Gradual are omitted. 


SECOND SUNDAY IN ADVENT. 
Kop INTR Je. XXX. s; 
"DEople of Sion, be- pulus Sion, ecce Do- 
hold the Lord will P minus veniet ad sal- 
come to save the Gen- «andas Gentes: et audi- 
ties: and the Lord will tam faciet Dominus glori- 


. Make the glory of his am vocis sue in latitia 


voice heard to the joy of — cordis vestri. Ps. 79. Qui 
your hearts. Ps. 79. regis Israel intende : qui 
GiveearO thouthatrulest deducis velut ovem, Joseph. 
Irae]: thou that lead- V. Gloria. 

et Joseph like & sheep. 


F. Glo 
COLLECT. Excita, Domine.—Stir up, O Lord, 
car hearts to the ways of thy only begotten 


8on: thet by his coming we may be enabled to serve 
thee with pure minds. Who livest. pi 

For the II. and III. Collects, see the first Sunday, 
page 50. E3 


52 FIRST SUNDAY 


Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my words 
shall not pass away. Crepo. "ot 

OFFERTORY. Ps. xxiv.—To thee O Lord 
have I lifted up my soul. In thee O my God I put 
my let me not be ashamed, neither let my 
enemies laugh at me: for none of them that wait ou 
thee shall be confounded. d 

SECRET. Grant, O Lord, that these 
mysteries may cleanse us by their powerful virtue, 
and bring us with greater purity to him, who ws 
the author and institutor of them. Thro’. 

Of the B. V. M. * Strengthen, we beseech thee, 0 
Lord, in our souls, the mysteries of the true faith: 
that we who confess him, that was conceived of 
Virgin, to be true God, and true man, may, by 
the power of his saving resurrection, deserve to 
come to eternal joys. Thro’ the same, &c. 

For the CHURCH. * Protect us, O Lord, while we 
assist at thy sacred mysteries, that bemg employed 
in acts of religion, we may serve thee both in body 
and mind. " 

Instead of the last, may be said the follows: 

For the POPE. Be appeased, O Lord, with the of 
fering we have made, and cease not to protect thy 
servant N. whom thou hast been pleased to appoint 
Pastor over thy Church. Thro’. 

COMM. Ps. lxxxiv.—For the Lord will give his 
goodness: and our earth shall yield her fruit. 

P. COMM. Suscipiamus.—May we receive, 0 
Lord, thy mercy in the midst of thy temple, that 
with due honour we may prepare for the approach- 
ing soremnity of our reparation. Thro’. . 

Of the B. V. M. * Gratiam tuam.—Pour forth, we 
beseech thee, O Lord, thy grace into our hearts, 
that we, who, by the message of an angel, have 
known the incarnation of thy Son, the Christ, may 
by his passion and cross, come to the glory of bis 
resurrection. Thro’. 





54 SECOND 3UNDAY 


EPISTLE. Rom. xv. 4. 13. ‘Brethren: What 
things soever were written were written for our im 
struction that through patience and the comfort of the 


scriptures we might have hope. Now:the God'of^ 


patience and of comfort grant you to be of one mind 
one towards another, according to Jesus Chrst; 
that with one mind and with one mouth you may 
lorify God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ 
herefore receive one another, as Christ also bath 
received you to the honour of God.' For Isey that 
Jesus was minister of the circumcision for the truth 
of God, to confirm the promises made unto the Fathers. 
But that the Gentiles are to glorify God for his mer- 
cy, as it is written: “Therefore I will .confess 'to 
thee, Oo Lord, among the Gontiles, and n sing to 
y name. nd again: he saith: “Rejoice, 
Gentiles, with his people.”, And in: "E 
the Lord, all ye Gentiles, and magnify him all fe 
people.” And again Isaiah saith: “There shell 
ea root of Jesse, and he that shall rise up to rule 
the Gentiles, in him the Gentiles sball hope.” Now 
the God of Hope fill you with all joy and peace B 
believing, that you may abound in hope, and in th 
power of the Holy Ghost. 


GRAD. Ps.xlix —He shall come in his comer. 


ness and beauty from Sion; God will come visit 
V. Gather to him his saints, who have observed he 
covenant more than sacrifice. Alleluia, Allelusa. .- 
V. I rejoiced at what V.. Letatus eum isha 
was told me: we are to que dicta sunt mili: 9$ 
go up to the house ofthe domum Domini dnm 
ord. Alleluia. Alleluia. ' 
GOSPEL. Matt. xi. 9. 10. —.2t that tim: 
When John had heard in prison the works d 
Christ, sending two of his disciples he said to him: 
Art thou he that art to come, or look we for ane 
ther? And Jesus making answer, said to them: Go 
and relate to John what you have heard and seer. 


A 





56 THIRD SUNDAY 


men: the Lord is nigh. bus : Dominus enim prem 
Be nothing solicitous: but sil soliciR sis: 
in every by prayer sed in omni crakone pei 
and supplication with tones vestre innetescand 


thankagiving let your pe- Deum. Pe. Bens’ 
titions be made known to ist, Domine, ferram 
God. Ps. O Lord thou ui V. Gloria 
hast blest thy land; thou tem tem Jacob. V. 

hast turned away the cap- 


tivity of Jacob. V. Glory. 

Lind edo ,aurem tuam. —Bend thine ear, ^ 
d, we beseech thee, to our prayers, and enlight- 

en the darkness of our minds by the grace: of thy 

visitation, Who livest. 


For the other Collects, see p. 30. 


EPISTLE. Philip. iv. 4. 7.—Brethren: Rejoice 
in the Lord always; again, I say, Rejoice. Let your 
* modesty be known to all men. The Lord is hen 
end suppl ag solicitous: erbe by prayer 
an su on wi ving let our petition 

r known to God. And 4 of God, 

whieh surpasseth all understanding, } keep your hearts 
and minds in Christ Jesus, 

GRAD. Ps. lxxix.—Lord, who sittest on the 
Cherubim, exert thy power, and come. V. 
who rulest Israel, hearken ; thou who leadest Joseph 
as a sheep. Alleluia, Alleluia, 


V. Exert, O Lord, thy V. Excita, Domine 
power, and come to save potentiam tuam, ef veni: 
us. Alleluia. ul salvos facias nos. ^ Al- 

eluia. 


GOSPEL. John i. 19. 298.—.4t that time: The Jews 
sent from Jerusalem Priests and Levites to john, 
to ask him: Who art thou? And he confessed, 

did not deny: and he confessed: I am not the 
Christ. And they asked him: What then? Art 
thou Elias? And he said: I am not. Art thoua 


IN ADVENT. 57 


prophet? And he answered: No. They said there- 
fre unto him: Who art thou, that we may give an 
uswer to them that sent us? What sayest thou of : 
thyself? He said: “I am the voice of one crying in 
te wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord,” 
wid the prophet Isaias. And they that were sent 
were of the pharisees. And they asked him and'said 
b him: then dost thou baptize, if thou be not 
Christ, nor Elias, nor the prophet? John answered 
them, saying: I baptize, with water; but there hath 
food one in the midst of you, whom you know not. 
The same is he that shall come after me, who is 
preferred before me; the latchet of whose shoe I am 
hot worthy to loose. These things were done in 
Bethania beyond the Jordan, where John was bap- 
üzing. CreEpo. 
OFFERT. Ps. lxxxiv.—Lord, thou hast blessed 
thy land: thou hast turned away the captivity of 
Jacob. Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy 


SECRET. May we always, O Lord, offer thee 
this sacrifice of our devotion, both to comply with 
the institution of these sacred mysteries, and won- 
derfully to procure ourselves that salvation which 
thou designest us. Thro’. 

For the other Secrets, see p. 52. 

COMM. Js. xxxv.—Say, be comforted, O ye 
fearful of heart, and fear not; behold our God will 
tome and save us. 

P.COMM.  Imploramus.—Wee implore, O Lord, 
thy mercy, that these divine helps having cleansed us 
from sin, may prepare us for the ensuing solemnity. 

Jr the rest of the Postcommunions see pp. 52 and 


58 WEDNESDAY 


QUATUOR TEMPORA, OR EMBER-DAYR.' 
HE Ember-days, (ao called from our forefathers’ fist 
ing on those days in sackcloth and ashes, or fhosi 
their eating nothing but cakes baked under the embers) 
are the Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday of the fest 
week of Lent, of Whitsun-week, of the third week in 
September, and of the third week in Advent. The spi 
it of the Church is, to en her children at these stated 
times to pray, fast, and perform such other good woths 
as may prevail with God to furnish his Church with 
good pastors; Saturday in Ember-week being the 
pointed day for ordaining and consecrating persons 
the sacred ministry. We are likewise to beg God's ble» 
sing on the fruits of the earth, and give him thanks fü 
those we have already received. 


WEDNESDAY IN EMBER WEEK. 
IN'TROIT. Js. xlv. Ps. xviii. 


Dor down dew, ye heavens, from aM 
let the clouds rain the just: let the be 
opened and bud forth a Saviour. Ps. The heave’ 
show forth the glory of God, and the firmament dé- 
clareth the work of his hands. "V. Glory. 
After Kyrie eleison ts satd, Let us pray. 

Let us kneel down*. Flectamus genua. . 

R. Stand up again. ^ R. Levate. 

COLLECT. Presta quesumus.—Grant we be 
seech thee, O Almighty God, that the a 
solemnity of our redemption may afford us the sie 
cours of this present life, and heap on us the rew: 
of eternal happiness, Thro’. 

I. LESSON. Js. ii. 2. 5.—1In those days the propia 
Isaiah said: In the last days, the mountain of thf 
house of the Lord shall be prepared on the top of 


* At solemn Masses this is sung by the Deacon; whe! 
all kneel, till the Subdeacon, r a little pause, 
them stand up again to join with the Priest whilst b 
says the Collect. 


60 WEDNESDAY IN EMBER-WEEK. 


Emmanuel. He shall eat butter and honey, that bi 
may know to refuse the evil, and to choose the good 


GRADUAL. Ps. cxliv. The Lord is nigh uit 
all them that call upon him ; to all that call upon hin 
in truth. V. My mouth shall speak the praise of th 
Lord : and let all flesh bless his holy name. M 


GOSPEL. Luke i. 26. 38.—At that time: The 
angel Gabriel was sentafrom God into a city of Gay 
lilee, called Nazareth, to a virgin espoused to. 
man whose name was Joseph, of the house 
David; and the Virgin’s name was Mary. Am 
the angel, being come in, said to her; Hail full 
grace, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among 
women. Who having heard, she. was trou 
at his saying, and thought with herself what 
of salutation this should be. And the an j 
to her: Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found grace 
with God. Behold "thou shalt conceive in 
womb, and shalt bring forth & son: and thou 
call his name Jesus. He shall be great, and 
be called the Son of the Most High, and the Lo 
God shall give unto him the throne of David his f 
ther: and he shall reign in the house of Jacob for 
ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end. And 
Mary said to the Angel: How shall this be done, be 
cause I know not man? And the angel answerinf 
said to her: The Holy Ghost shall come upon thet 
and the power of the Most High shall oversht 
dow thee. And therefore also the Holy whi 
shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son ¢ 
God. And behold thy cousin Elizabeth she asi 
hath conceived a son in her old age; and this is th 
sixth month with her that is called barren; becaus®' 
no word shall be impossible with God. And Marf 
said: behold the handmaid ef the Lord, be it done 
to me a^cording to thy word. 


OFFERTORY. Is. xxxv.—Take courage, and 





FRIDAY IN EMBER-WEEK. 


"ipe m See 


Show o 
YS leri 
pora es 


filled. 
fect "ut with a loud 
Sit thou ambig ute 
thy womb, And whence 




















EEE. ® 
iS 

E 

É 

: 

: 

E 

B 


y 


EPEEE 
‘iq 
pi 


of the 


& 
E 


BEES 
P 


EE 


" 


"E 
- 
E 
| 


Pa. xviii—Ho hath set ‘is ti 

legroom a 
ide chamber. V. His going out is 
of heaven, and his circuit even to 
lets knee down, t. Sid up 
LECT. i nos.—Comfort 
unworthy servants, who lie dejected 
.of our crimes, by the coming of thy og 


thee up upon a bigh mountain, tht 
"Tani to Sion? Dit up 


Hid 
É 
t 
i 
i 


Fee 
diis H 
"AI 

Ly 
BS 
ghey 
1 


your God: behold the 
with strength, and his arm sh; 
behold his reward is with him, and his work i 


H 
i 


66 SATURDAY IN EMBER-WEEK. 


forth a saviour: and let justice spring up together: I 
the Lord have created him. TUS 

GRADUAL. Ps. |xxix.—Stir up thy might, O 
Lord, and come to save us. Give ear, O thou that 
rulest Israel: thou that leadest Joseph like a sheep; 
thou that sittest upon the cherubims, shine forth be- 
fore Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasses, 

Let us pray. Let us kneel down. R. Stand up again. 

. V. COLLECT. Preces populi.—Mercifülly hear, 
O Lord, we beseech thee, the prayers of thy peo- 
ple; that we, who are justly afflicted for our sins, 
may receive comfort from thy kind visit Who 
livest. 

V. LESSON. Don. ii. 49.—In those doy: 
The angel of the Lord went down with Azarias, and 
his companions into the furhace: and he drove the 
flame of the fire out of the furnace, and made the 
midst of the furnace like the blowing of a wind 
bringing dew, and the fire touched them not at all, 
nor troubled them, nor did them any harm. 
these three, as with one mouth, praised and glorified, 
and blessed God in the furnace, saying: 


CANTICLE. 

Blessed art thou, O Lord, the God of our fathers: 
and worthy of praise and glory forever. 

And blessed is the name of thy glory ; which is 
holy ; and worthy of praise and glory forever. 

Blessed art thou in the holy temple of thy glory: 
and worthy of praise and glory forever. 

Blessed art thou upon the sacred throne of thy 
kingdom: and worthy of praise and glory forever. 

Blessed art thou, on the sceptre of thy divinity: 
and worthy of praise and glory forever. 

. Blessed art thou, who sittest on the Cherubim, 
beholding the deep: and worthy of praise and glory 
forever. 

Blessed art thou who walkest on the wings of 





' vnm 
68 FOURTH SUNDAY —— 


holdeth, do hold, until he be taken out ¢ 0 
and then that wicked one shall be rev 







V. Thou who sittest on the Cheru! 


a 
ert thy power, O Lord, and come to save us. 
GOSPEL: Lute i ae bu the eet Di 

OFFERTORY. Rejoice exceedingly, 

Ter of. Sion, publish it, O daughter ies ‘i 

behold thy King and Saviour cometh to thee. 
SECRET. us, O Lord, zs boe 

and, being appeased by these offer 

may increase our devotion, and advance. p 


‘Ps. xviii. —He hath rejoiced as a g 
ior ds a: his going out is from, the 
and his circuit even to the end shere 
P. COMM. Quesumus—We heseech 
Lord our God, that thou wouldst make these ae 
which thou hast given us, 
the eet oo repro and bea 4 
tus, both now and hereafter. 
at 
FOURTH SUNDAY IN ADVENT. 
INTROIT. Js, xiv. Ps. xviii. 
door ao down audeo 


EE. PE lou m 

just: let the earth | 

and bud forth 
o Tho YS 


"he 
hearken: thou who leadest Suid as 
ierubim, 














Dur e 


CHRISTMAS EVE. 


in the book of the words of Isaias the ] 
: “A voice of one dm 
Jo tie way oft th 
every valley 
id. bill | ath sb ne ro we my 


full of | 
the Lord is LN ips n x 


thee, O. Lord, grant, 
thee, that the more frequently we [yuberr. 
sacred mysteries, the more our: P idi may i 
For the rest of the Postcommunions gee pp. 58,1 


CHRISTMAS EVE. 
INTROIT. ‘This day you shall know, that 
Lord will come, and save us: and in the 
you shall see his glory. Ps. The earth is the 
and tho fulness thereof: the world, and all that 
diel therein, 7 CUR D 





‘as ourjudge. Who livest. 
ip the only Collect unless il be Sunday, 
itis here mad 











AT MIDNIGHT. 73 


Saviour Jesus Christ: who gave himself 
hat he might redeem us from all iniquity, 
ht cleanse to himself a people acceptable, 
r of good works. These things and 
nd 1 e with all authority. Let no man 


) Ps. cix.—With thee is the principali 
ay of thy strength: in the rightness af 
y: from the womb before the day-star I be- 
V. The Lord said to my Lord: Sit thou 
ht-hand : until I make thy enemies thy foot- 
Jleluis, Alleluia. P. Ps. ii. 'The Lord 
] to me: ‘Thou art my Son, this day have ] 
thee. Alleluia. 
EL. Luke ii. 1. 14.—And it came to pass 
ose days there went out a decree from Cassar 
» that the whole world should be enrolled. 
rolling was first made by Cyrinus the 
‘of Syria. And all went to be enrolled, 
e into his own city. And Joseph also went 
Galilee out of the city of Nazareth into 
| the city of David, which is called Bethle- 
cause he was of the house and fanfily of 
! be enrolled with Mary his espoused wife, 
8 with child. And it came to pass, that 
2y were there, her days were accomplished, 
should be delivered. And she brought 
r first-born son, and wrapped him up in 
ig clothes, and laid him in a manger: be- 
re was no room for them in the inn. And 
re in the same country shepherds watchin 
ing the night watches over their flock. , An 
im angel of the Lord stood by them, and 
itness of God shone round about them, and 
‘ed with a great fear. And the angel said to 
‘ear not: for behold I bring you tidings 
joy, that shall be to all the people: for this 
Q |o co! 


niens 


several times of fes ‘sacred 
Who dec conduct od d come to 


TI. MASS. “At break of day. - 


come, of 
iat 








76 Ili. MASS, UN CHRISTMAS DAY. 


the world, which shall all be moved: thy throne, 

Lord, is prepared from of old,thou art from 
SECRET. May the offerings, O Lord, we 

be agreeable to the mystery of this day's bir 

and always pour forth peace upon us; that as Hi 

who though born man, shewed himself also God 

so may this earthly substance give us that whichi 


divine. E 
SECRET of St. Anastasia. Gracigusly receive 
O Lord, we beseech thee, our offerings, and gras 
by the merits of blessed Anastasia the martyr, ts 
they may avail to our salvation. Thro’. " 
OMM. Zach. ix.—Rejoice, O daughter of Sim 
shout for joy, O daughter of Jerusalem : behold tij 
King wil come to thee the just and Saviour of th 
world. 78 
P. COMM. Hujus nos.—May we, O Lord, & 
ways receive new light from this sacrament, whi 
reneweth to us the memory of that wonderful bith 
which destroyed the old.man. Thro’. oy 
P. COMM. of St. Anast. Thou hast fed,.O Lon 
thy family with these sacred oblations: ever theme 
fore comfort us with her intercession, whose fal 
we celebrate. Thro’. 


AT 
III. MASS. On Christmas-day. 
INTROIT. Isaias ix. 

A Child is torn t» us, PUE natus est sell) 

and a Son is given et Filius datus 88 
tous andthegovernment nobis: cujus  ümperim 
is upon his shoulder: and super humerum ejus, 8 
his name shall be called ' vocabitur nomen qe 
the Angel of the great Magni Concilii Ange 
Council. Ps. Sing to the Ps. 97. Cantate Dom 
Lord a new canticle, for canticum novum: qui 
he hath doné wonderful mirabilia fecit. ) 
things. P. Glory. V. Gloria. 





78 ST. STEPHEN. 


P. A sanctified day V. Dies E 
hath shone upon us: iluzxitnobis: venite 
come, ye Gentiles, and et adorate Dominus, g 
adore the Lord, for this hodie descendit luz meg 
day a great light is come super terram. Allelsy 
down upon the earth. 

Alleluia. 

GOSPEL. John i. In the beginning, &c. as int 
Ordinary, p. xlv. 

OFFERT. Ps. ]xxxviii.—Thine are the heava 
and thine is the earth; the world and the fulm 
thereof thou hast founded: Justice and judgmt 
are the preparation of thy throne. ( 

SECRET. Sanctify, O Lord, our offerings) 
the new birth of thy only begotten Son, and cles 
us from the stains of our sins. ‘Thro’. the sameé,., 


ComMUNICANTES, till the Circumcision. 


BENG united in communion, and _ celebrati 
this most sacred day, [in the Ist Mass, saen 
night] ou which the spotless virginity of the bles 
Mary brought forth a Saviour to this world, mo 
honouring in the first place, the memory of 8 
same glorious V. M. &c. as in p. xxxiv. | 
COMM. Ps. xcvii.—The whole earth hath. set 
the salvation of our God. 
P. COMM. Presta, quesumus.—Grant we b 
seech thee, O Almighty God, that as the Saviourt 
the world, who was born this day, procured for ! 
a divine birth, he may also bestow on us immo 
tality. Who liveth. 
At the end of this Mass is said the Gospel of $ 
Epiphany, p. 91. 





St. STEPHEN the first Martyr. 
INTROIT. Ps. cxviii. 
PRINCES sat, and spoke against me: and sinn€ 
persecuted me: help me, O Lord my God, { 
thy servant hath practised thy commandments. 





oll ST. STEPHENS 


aa Tae is heared pail at JE 
at the right hand of the power of God. Alleluia. 
GOSPEL. Matt. xxiii. 35 39—4 y 
pi ro A d ends 
send to you 
and some of 


m. ihe blood of Abel the just, 
Zacharias the son of 

a Kl ete the temple and the altar. A 
say to you, all these things shall come upon 

[ ovd Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou - 
the prophets, and stonest them that are 
unto thee, how often would I have gathered 
VER Ye eo Eo doth pA nes 


ens under her 
poxgcqged roii 
E I say to you, you shall not see me hei 
PU d Pod he that cometh in the. 
of! 


oy Len CTI the 
a Levite, an 
LAE Mnt pO meu 
JS ove muy spirits deg 

SECRET. Receive, O Lord, these offe; 
L.C e bar eg and as their sufferings 

ols aces nM 

free from sin. 

ps ge mos Qué pee 

standing on the right-| 

God: Gets irt Jen seme rm 
Lio e Rm 





N 


82 THE HOLY INNOCENTS. 


GOSPEL. John xxi. 19. U—/At that tae. 
Jesus said to Peter: follow me. Peter turning about 
saw that disciple whom Jesus loved following, A 
also leaned on his breast at supper, and emi 
Lord, who is he that shall betray thee? Him there 
fore when Peter had seen, he saith to Jesus: Loge 
and what shall this man do? Jesus saith to him 
So I will have him to. remain till I come, what isi 
» to thee? follow thou me. This saying, therefore wet 

abroad among the brethren, that that disciple 
not die. And Jesus did not say to him: He should 
not die; but, so I will have him to remain till 
come, what is it to thee? This is that disciple who 
giveth testimony of these things, and hath writtt# 
these things: and we know that his testimony 9 
true, CREDO. 

OFFERT. Ps. xci.—The just shall flourish 
the palm tree: he shall grow up like the cedar 
Libanus. 

SECRET. Receive, O Lord, the offeri 
make to thee, on his feast, by whose intercession 
hope to be delivered. ‘Thro’. 

OMM. John xxi.—A report was spread umi 
the brethren, that that disciple should not die. Bt 
Jesus said not, he should not die; but so will | tht 
he remain till I come. . 

P. COMM. Refecti cibo .—Being refreshed, 0 
Lord, with this heavenly meat and drink, we humbly 
beseech thee, that we may be assisted by his prayer 
on whose feast we have received these sacred my 
teries. Thro’. | 


The HOLY INNOCENTS. 
‘INTROIT. Ps. viii.—Out of the mouth of infants 
and sucklings thou hast perfected praise to com 
found thy enemies. Ps. Lord, our Lord, how 
admirable is thy name in the whole earth! PF 
ory. 














Weve vts 
Voliva.—Now we 


js 
moto 


o 
veda. 


IU 
pup 
€ E E inni 


COMM. 


Es 


- 


B6 — — SUNDAY WITHIN THE. OCTAVE. 
and 1 know my sheep, and 
beers know, mete E MM 
es on 


GOSPEL. 11. 1645 
Bandey after en brie een | 


OFFERT. Ps. xx.—Thou bast set, O ,onh 
head, a crown of precious stones; he "life c 
thee: and thou didst give it him. Alleluia. —— 





SUNDAY WITHIN THE OCTAVE. 8 
wil, that, in the name of thy beloved Son, we ma 
sound in good works. Thro’. ” ) 
Commems. of Christmas, St. Thomas, &é. by their 
respective Collects, &c. pp. 77. and 85. 
EPISTLE. Gal. iv. 1. 7.—Brethren: As long 
M the heir is a child, he differeth nothing from a 
errant, though he be Lord of all: but is under tu- 
trs and governors, until the time appointed by the 
fther: So we also, when we were children, were 
ig under the elements of the world. But 
when the fulness of the time was come, God sent his 
Son, made of a woman, made under the law: that 
he might redeem them who were under the law; 
thet he might receive the adoption of sons. And 
beause you are sons, God hath sent the Spirit of 
his Son into your hearts, crying: Abba, Father. 
Therefore now he is not a servant, but a Son. And 
fa sor, an heir also through God. 
GRAD. Ps. xliv. and xcii.—Thou art beautiful 
bove the sons of men: grace is poured abroad in th 
*. V. My heart hath uttered a good word, I s 
y works to the King. My tongue is the pen of a 
Tener that writeth swiftly. Alleluia, Alleluia. 
7. The Lord hath Alleluia, Alleluia. V. 
ned, he clothed him- Dominus regnavit, deco- 
with beauty: he hath rem indui: indwit Do- 
ed himself with minus fortitudinem — et 
gth, and armed him- precinrit se virtute. Al- 
"th might. Alleluia. leluia. 
SPEL. Luke ii. 33. 40.—At that time: Joseph, 
ary the mother of Jesus, were wondering at those 
which were spoken concerning him. And 
blessed them, and said to Mary his Mother: Be- 
e child is set for the fall, and for the resurrec- 
many in Isracl, and for a sign which shall be 
icted. And thy own soula sword shall pierce, 
of many hearts thoughts may be revealed. 
H2 








dominion, Power, and regnum in manu 6j 
empire are in his potestas et imperium. 
jad, Give pa the k 9e thy cioe 
nt, to et justiiam. 
in king’ tom dy justice. filo regis. V. Glo 
Glory. 

COLL. Deus, qui hodterna.—O God, whi 
the direction of a star didst this day manifest thy 
Son to the Gentiles; mercifully gran t that we; 
now know thee b füith, m come me at lengtht 
nic of thy Majesty. ro’ the same. 

SSON. Isaias lx. 1. 9.—Arise, be enligl 
ed, O Jerusalem: for thy light is come, and 
glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. For bt 
darkness shall cover the earth, and a mist 

aL but the Lord shall arise upon thee, sn 

li be seen upon thee. And the Ge 

shall walk i in thy light, and kings in the bright 

of m rising. Lift up thy eyes round about and 

these are gathered together, they are com 

thee, thy sons shall come from afar, and thy da 

ters shall rise up at thy side. Then shalt tho 

and abound, and thy heart shall wonder and b 
larged, when the multitude of the sea shall be 
verted to thee, the strength of the Gentiles 

come to thee. The multitude of camels shall « 
thee, the dromedaries of Madian and Epha: all 

from Saba shall come, bringing gold and f 
incense, and shewing forth praise to the Lord. 

Sabe, bringing gold and frankincense, and pu 

nging gold an ncense, an 
ing the praises of the Lord. Arise, be enligtt 
O Jerusalem: for the glory of the Lord is risen 
thee. Alleluia, Allelura. 

V. We saw his star in V. Vidimus stellas 
the east: and are come in ortente; et vei 
with our offerings to cum muneribus, a 
adore the Lord. /lleluia. Dominum. Allelui 





92 I. SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY. 


SECRET. Mercifully look down, O Lord, w 
beseech thee, on the offerings of thy church 
among which gold, frankincense, and myrrh are M 
longer offered ; but what was signified by those of 
ferings is sacrificed and received, Jesus Christ, thy 
Son our Lord. Who liveth. 

CowwuNwicANTEs.—Being united in communio 
and celebrating that mpst sacred day on whieh 
thy only begotten Son, co-eternal with thee in 
glory, appeared in a visible body in the reality 
our flesh. Moreover, honouring in the first place the 
memory of blessed Mary ever a Virgin, zc. p. xxxi 


COMM.—We have seen his star in the east, and 
are come with offerings to adore the Lord. ^ ' . 
P. COMM. Presta, quesumus.—Grant, we be 
seech thee, O Almighty God, that our minds may 
bé so purified, as to understand what we celebrati 
on this great solemnity. Thro’. 


I. SUNDAY after EPIPHANY. 
INTROIT. Is. vi. Ps. xcix. 

Saw a man seated ona Nv’ ezcelso throno vin 

high throne, whom a re virum, quem 
multitude of angels ador- rat multitudo Jogo 
ed, singing all together: psallentes in unum: Exe 
Behold him, whose name cujus imperii nomen est 8 
and empire are tolastfor- eternum. . 
ever. Ps. Sing joyfully Ps. Jubilate Deo omm 
to God, all the earth: terra: servite Domino % 
serve ye the Lord with letitia. "V. Gloria. 
gladness. V. Glory. 

COLLECT. Vota quesumus.—According to th 
divine mercy, O Lord, receive the vows of thy px 
ple, who pour forth their prayers to thee; that the 
may know what their duty requireth of them, an 
be able to comply with what they know. Thro’. 
Here, and at the Secret, and Postcommunion, ts ma 





94 Il, SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY. 


them, and asking them questions. And all thal 
heard him, were astonished at his wisdom and hy 
answers And seeing him, they wondered. And 
his mother said to him: Son, why hast thou done # 
to us? Behold thy father and I have sought thee 
sorrowing. And he said to them: How is it thet 
you sought me? Did you not know that I must be 
about my father's business? And they understood 
not the word that he spoke unto them. And ke 
went down with them, and came to Nazareth: and 
was subject to them. And his mother kept all these 
words in her heart. And Jesus advanced in w* 
dom, and age, and grace with God and mes. 
Crepo. 

OFFERT. Ps. xcix.—Sing joyfully to the Lord, 
all the earth, serve ye the Lord with gladness: pre 
sent yourselves to him with transports of joy, for thé 
Lord is God. 

SECRET. May the sacrifice we have offered to 
thee, O Lord, always enliven and defend us. Thro’. 

COMM. Luke ii.—Son, why hast thou done ® 
with us? I and thy father have sought thee with 
sorrow. And why did you seek me? Did you ne 
know that I must be about the concerns of my 
Father? 

P. COMM.  Supplices.—Grant we humbly be 
seech thee, O Almighty God, that those whom thed 
refreshest with thy sacraments, may, by a life well 
pleasing to thee, worthily serve thee. Thro’ 


m II. SUNDAY after EPIPHANY. 
The FEAST of the HOLY NAME JESUS, 
' INTROIT. Phil. ii. Ps. viii. 
T the name of Jesus I* nomine Jesu omne ge 
let every knee bend nu flectatur calestiun 
in heaven, on earth, and terrestrium el infernorum 
under theearth: and eve- et omnis lingua confitec 
ry tongue confess that the tur, quia Dominus Jess 








TRACES: weaer oF, dese . 1: *. 
@iisvictiin of dur salvation, which we have offer- 
prom, opr Lord, esus Christ ; that thy grace be- 


Wwüe ‘Threw . . =. : > ^ O3 
t following (Being the Gospel of the’ Sunday) is 
v. read at the end of Mass. m 
GOSPEL. John ii. 1. 11.—J/4 that ‘time: There 
We marriage in Cana of Galilee: and fhe z#other 
pdociphen, to the mauriege, And dss wine inte, 
to . ihe wine 

Mucther of Jzsus saith to him: They heve no wine, 
bd Risus saithto her: Women, what is it tome and 
(ee? My hour is not yet come. His mother 
ih to the waiters : Whatsoever he shall say to. you, 
ive. Now there were set there six water pots of 

according to the manner of the purifying of 
P Jews, containing two or three measures apione, 
tus saith to them: Fill the water-pots with wa- 
& And they filled them up to the brim. And 
Bus saith to them: Draw out now, and carry to 
it chief steward of the feast. And they carried it. 


D 1 


id when the chief steward had the water 
Md) wine, and knew not whence it w but. the 


wine, 
nius knew who had drawn the water ; : chief 


98 III, SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY. 


and he manifested his glory, and his disciples‘b 
lieved in him. Deo gratas. 


III. SUNDAY after EPIPHANY. 
INTROIT. Ps. xcvi. 


ADORE God, all you DORATE Dea 
his angels: Sion omnes i 
heard and was glad, and audivit et letata est 
the daughters of Juda re- et exultaverunt filie Juli 
joiced. Ps. The Lord Ps. Dominus regnavit,@ 
hath reigned, let the wuliet terra, letentwr 9 
éarth rejoice, let many sue multe. 

islands be glad. V. Gloria. 

COLLECT. Omnipotens—O almighty e$ 
eternal God, mercifully regard our weakness, a 
stretch forth the right hand of thy majesty to prote 
us. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. Rom. xii. 16.—Brethren: Bes 
wise in your own conceits, To no man rendering@ 
for evil. Providing good things not only in the ae 
of God, but also in the sight of all men. at 
possible, as much as in you, havin ith t 
men. Not revenging yourselves, my Yearly below 
but give place unto wrath. For it is written: *l 
venge to me, I will repay,” saith the Lord. B 
“if thy enemy be hungry, give him to eat: if1 
thirst, give him to drink: for doing this, thou sb 
heap coals of fire on his head.” not overcoll 
by evil, but overcome evil by good. | 

GRAD. Ps. ci. and xcvL— The Gentiles sii 
fear thy name, O Lord: and all the kings of 8 
earth thy glory: V. For the Lord hath built ! 
Sion, and he shall be seen in his glory. Alle 

uia. 

V. Ps. The Lord hath — V. Ps.xcvi. Domi 
reigned, let the earth regnavit, exultel ten 
rejoice: let many islands letentur insule wl 
be glad. Alleluza. Alleuia. 





100 IV. SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY, 


SECRET. May this offering, O Lord, we de 
seech thee, cleanse away our sins: and sanctify thé 
bodies and souls of thy servants, to prepare them for 
worthily celebrating this sacrifice. Thro’. 

COMM. Luke iv. 99.—All wondered at the 
words that came from the mouth of God. 

P. COMM. Quos tantis.—We beseech thee, 0 
Lord, that we, to whom thou vouchsefest the ue 
of these great mysteries, may be made truly worthy 
to receive the benefits thereof. Thro’. 





IV. SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY. 


The Introit, Gradual Offertory, and Communion, & 
on last Sunday, are continued till. Septuagesima. 


COLLECT. Deus qui.. 
GOD, who knowest that thro’ human frailty 
we are not able to subsist amidst so many dat 
gers, grant us health of soul and body; that whet 
soever we suffer for our sins, we may overcome by 
thy assistance. Thro’. . 
After Candlemas the II. Collect (4 cunctis) p. xii 
with its Secret, p. xxvii. and Postcom. p. xliv. # 
continued till Passion Sunday: the rit. (cxeep 
from Ash-Wednesday to Passion Sunday) w 
the choice of the Priest. . 
EPISTLE. Rom. xiii. 8. 10.—Brethren: Owe 
no man any thing, but to love one another: for be 
that loveth his neighbour, hath fulfilled the law. Feq 
“Thou shalt not commit adultery: Thou shalt sf 
kill: Thou shalt not steal: Thou shalt not beg 
false witness: Thou shalt not covet:" and if the@ 
be any other commandment, it is comprised in 
word: “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as th 
The love of our neighbour worketh no evil. 
therefore is the fulfilling of the law. 


GOSPEL. Matt. viii 93. 97.— At that timW 
When Jesus entered into a boat his disciple 


V. SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY. 101 


m; and behold a great tempest arose in 
that the hip was govered with waves, 
asleep. his disciples came to him, 
red him saying: Lord, save us, we pe- 
Jesus saith to them: Why are ye feer- 
F little faith? Then rising’ up, he com- 
» winds and the sea, and there came a 
But the men wondered, saying: What 
man is this, for the winds the sea 
Carepo. 
[. Grant, we beseech thee, O Almighty 
he offering of this sacrifice may always 
frailty from all evil, and be a protection 
o’.! 


WM. Munera tua.—May thy gifts, which 
ertaken of, O God, detach us from all 
wures, and ever refresh and strengthen 
venly food. Thro’. 





SUNDAY after EPIPHANY. 


2]. Familiam.—Preserve, we beseech 

rd, thy family by thy constant mercy, 

ho confide solely in the support of thy 

p may be always defended by thy 
hro’. 


E. Colos. iii. 12. 17.—Brethren: Put 
»fore as the elect of God, holy, and be- 
bowels of mercy, benignity, humility, 
atience: bearing with one another, and 
me another, if any have a complaint 
ther. Even as the Lord hath forgiven 
1 also. But above all these things have 
ich is the bond of perfection: and let the 
hrist rejoice in your hearts, wherein also 
Ned in one body: and be ye thankful. 
rd of Christ dwell in you abundantly, in 
: teaching and admonishiny one another 
I3 


109 VI. SUNDAY AFTER EPIPHANY. 


in psalms, hymns, and spiritual canticles, sing! 
in grace in your hearts fo God. All whatsoever ye 
do in word or.in work, do all in the name of th 
Lord Jesus Christ, giving thanks to God end & 
Father, thro’ Jesus Christ our Lord. 


GOSPEL. Matt. xiii. 94. 30.—.4t that tw 
Jesus spoke this parable to the multitude, sym 
The kingdom of heaven is likened to a man 
sowed good seed in his field. But while men wa 
asleep, his enemy came and oversowed 
among the wheat, and went his way.. And whe 
the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fre 
then appeared the cockle. Then the serves 
of the good man of the house came ar&l seid to hm 
Sir, didst thou not sow good seed in thy field? fre 
whence then hath it cockle? And he said to thea 
An enemy hath done this, And the servants said! 
him: Wilt thou that we go and gather it up? A 
he said: No, st while you gather up the | 
you root up the wheat also together with it Lb 

th grow until the harvest, and in the time 
harvest I will say to the reapers: Gather up first 
cockle, and bind it in bundles to burn, but gather 
wheat into my barn. 

SECRET. We offer thee, O Lord, this sacrifi 
of propitiation: that thou wouldst mercifully foryi 
us our sins, and guide our tottering hearts. 

P. COMM. Quesumus.—We beseech thee, ! 
Almighty God, that we may one day receive 8 
effects of that salvation, of which we have receit 
the pledge in these mysteries. ‘Thro’. ] 








VI. SUNDAY after EPIPHANY. 


COLLECT.  Presia.—Grant, we beseech tb 
O Almighty God, that being always intent up 
what is reasonable and just, we may, both in wt 
and deed, perform what is acceptable to thee. Th 


SEPITAGESIMa £UXDAT. 


usc he did not spogk to them: that the 
22 o5 fulfilled Wwhict was spoken hy the 
S208 72: *I will open my mouth in pare 
— . c ings hidden from the foundation 
-— - ' CREDO. 
-— May this oblation, O God, we be 
..  * 2899. renew, govern and protect us. 
= "T Calestibus. —Being fed, O Lord 
. dninties, we beseech thee, that wi 
-  ...- Linzer after thein, as they preserve ou 


'. ++ VI. Sundays beticeen the Epiphan 

=: mesma, tchat remains are omilled, a» 

- 0 0. guxfü the XXIII. and the last Sunda 

$nDoNN 

ALSTUAGESIMA SUNDAY. 
iNTROIT. Ps. xvii. 





-ar (f death, Ircumdederunt meg 
et oc un = me: and milus mortis, dolor 
- us hell en- inferni — circumdederm 
- 7 — .:: and in me: et in tribulatione m 
0 TU o 3;:7£23dupon ivocart Dominum, de 

5 anc te heardmy audivit. de templo. sant 

- ‘.. csck5eytem- suo rocem meam. Ps. D 

^o. wa iwethee, ligam te Domine, fortit 

<« |. ¢ strength: domea: Dominus firm 

Mn =! Zmnament mentum meum et refugiu 

P "2 wa my deli meum, et liberator met 
2. 07 7 $m V. Gloria. 

oo Preces.—Mercifully hear, we h 


.- ud 


se, |b 


+ Lord, the prayers of thy people: th 


gow an vastly afflicted for our sins, may be me 
ed 


-“ wed for the glory of thy name. Thro’. 


. " Du 1 Cor. ix. 24. and x. 1.—Brethre 
- -x that they that run in the race, ! 


Mf ite pa one receiveth the prize? So r 
s gas obtain. And every one that strive 


brethren, that our fathers were all under 


the seme spiritual drink : (and they drank of 
primal rock thas followed them, end the rock 


tever, Arise, O Lord, let not man prevail. 
TRACT. Ps. cxxix.—De profundis clamavi ad 
| Domine; Domine, exaudi vocem meam. Out of 
6 depths I have cried to thee, O Lord; Lord, 
army voice. V. Let thy ears be attentive to the 
ice of my supplication. P. If thou, O Lord, wilt 
wk iniquities ; Lord, who shall stand it. For with 
ee there is merciful forgiveness and by reason of 
y Law, I have waited for thee, O Lord. 

wa this day till Ash-Wednesday, the ‘Tract is said 

on Sundays and Festivals only. 

GOSPEL. Matt. xx. 1. 16.—.4t that tine: Jesus . 
tke to his disciples this parable: The kingdom of 
iven is like to a householder who went out early in 
morning to hire labourers into his vineyard, A 

en having agreed with the labourers for a penny 


e 





: SEXAGESIMA SUNDAY. 
INTROIT. Ps. xiiii. 


y wonders. P. V. Gloria. 


ECT. Deus qui.—O God, who seest that 
; no confidence in any thing we do: mer- 
‘ant that, by the protection of the Doctor of 
iles, we may be defended against all adver- 
m. 
TLE. 2 Cor. xi. 19. 33, and xii. 1. 9.—JBre- 
Tou gladly suffer the foolish: whereas your- 
6 wise, For you suffer if a man bring you 
: if & man devour. if & man take 
» if a man u a man strike 
rding to dishonour, a if 
been weak in this part. Wherein. if any 
dare 


enxiexsima SUNDAY. 108 


1, But I forbear, lest any man shioutfd think of 
e that which he seeth in me, or uny thing he 
fom me. And lest the greatness of the reve- 
hoald lift me up, there was given me a sting 
ssh, an angel of Satan, to buffet me. For 
ing I thrice besought the Lord, that it might 
‘om me: and he said to me: My grace is 
‘ for. thee: for power is made perfect in 
, Gtadly therefore will I glory in my infir- 
aat the power of Christ may dwell in me. . 
V Ps. ixxxii.—Let the Gentiles know that 
rf name: thou alone art the Most High over 
sarth. V. O my God, make them like a 
ind as stubble before the wind. 


rk. Pe. lix.—Commovisti, Domine, terram, 
asti cam. Thou hast moved the earth, O 
d hast troubled it. V. Heal the breac 

or it is moved. V. That they may flee from 
e bow: that thy elect may be delivered. 
EL. Lake ii Ps 16 diet bed 

t multitude was gathered to 
ned Gut of the cities to meet Jesus, he spoke 
ilitude. A sower went out to sow his seed: 
2 sowed some fell by the way side, and it was 
down, and the fowls of the air devoured it. 
er some fell upon a rock; and as soon as it 
ing up, it withered away because it had no 
. And other some fell among thorns, and 
ns growing up with it, choked it. And 
ne fell upon good ground; and sprung up, ' 
led fruita hurtred-fold. Saying these things 
| out: He that hath ears to hear, let him 
ind his disciples asked him what this paré- 
at be. To whom he said: To you it. 
know the mystery of the kingdom of God 
be rest in parables: that seeing they may 
and bearing they may not understand. Now 
K 


110 QUINQUAGESIMA GUMDAY. 


the parable is this: The seed is the word of Ge 
And they by the way side, are they that hear, thes 
the devil cometh, and taketh the word out of thes 
hearts, lest believing they should be saved. Now. 
they upon the rock, are they who when they hem 
receive the word with joy: and these have no room 
for they believe for awhile, and in time of temptatiss 
fall away. And that which fell among thorns, ae 
they who have heard, and going their way, a 
choked with the cares and the riches and pleasures 
of this life, and yield no fruit. But that on the 


good und, are they who in a and 
cart, hearing the word, keep it, bring rd 


OFFERT. Ps.xvi.—Perfect thou my goi y 
thy paths: that my footsteps be not moved: O & 


seech thee, O Almighty God, that those whom 
thou refreshest with thy sacraments, may, by s lib 
well pleasing to thee, worthily serve thee. dl 





QUINQUAGESIMA SUNDAY. . 
INTROIT. Ps. xxx. "o 

E thou unto me a God STO miki in Dui 

& protector, and a .M'4 protectorem, e 9 
house of refuge, to save locum refugit, uf saleil 
me: for thou art my me facias: quoniam ff 
strength, and my re- mamenlum meum, av 
fuge; and for thy name's fugium meun es tu; | 


QUINQUAGESINA SUNDAY. n 


a wilt lead me, propler nomen tuum dus 

mih me. Ps. mihi eris, el. enutries me. 

O Lord, have I Ps In te, Domine, spe- 

st me never be ravi, non confundar $w 

led: deliver me , «ternum; in justitia tua 

stice and rescue libera me, el eripe me. V. 
e rut. 


» Preces.—Mercifully hear our prayers, we 
thee, O Lord, and being fi from the 
f our sins, preserve us from all adversity. 


TLE. 1 Cor. xiii. 1. 13.—Brethren: If 1 
ith the tongues of men and of angels, and 
charity, I am become as sounding brass, 
ding cymbal. And if I should have pro- 
md should know all mysteries, and all 
ze, and if I should have all faith, so that 1 
move mountains, and, have not charity, I 
ng. And if I should distribute all my goods 
he r, and if I should deliver my body 
rned, and have not charity, it profiteth me 
Charity is patient, is kind: Charity en- 
t dealeth not perversely: it is not puffed 
not ambitious, seeketh not her own, is not 
1 to anger, thinketh no evil, rejoiceth not 
ity, but rejoiceth with the truth: beareth 
"Sy believeth all things, hopeth all things, 
t all things. Charity never falleth away: 
prophecies shall be made void, or tongues 
we, or knowledge shall be destroyed. For 
v in part, and we prophesy in part. But 
at which is perfect is come, that which is in 
li be done away. When I was a child, I 
a child, I understood as a child, I thought 
d. But when J became a man, I put away 
of a child. We now see through a glass 
manner; but then face to face. Now 1 


K 2 


113 QUINQUAGESIMNA 8UXDAT. 


known. And now there remain faith, ho 
rity, these three: but the greatest of 
charity. t 
GRAD. Ps. Ixxvi.—Thou ert God that sien 
dost wonders: thou hast made thy power knowl 
among the nations V. Thou hast delivered tg 
people, the children of Israel and Joseph, by (e 
strength of thy arm. 


TRACT. Ps. xcix. — Jubilate Deo omnis ter 
servile Domino in latilia. Sing joyfully to God, 
the earth: serve ye the Lord with gledness F. 
Come in before his presence with joy. Know ye 
that the Lord he is God. 7. He made us; and nal 
we ourselves: we are his people, and the sheep of 
his pasture. 

GOSPEL. Luke xviii 31. 43. —./44 that imu 
Jesus took unto him, the twelve, and said to them 
Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and all things shell 
be accomplished which were written by the pro 
phets concerning the Son of Man. For he shall @ 
delivered to the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, sad 
scourged, and spit upon: and after they 
scourged him, they will put him to death, and th 
third day he shall rise again. And they understog] 
none of these things, and this word was hid ficii 
them, and they understood not the things that weil 
said. Now it came to pass, that when he diet 
nigh to Jericho, a certain blind man set by ài 
way-side, begging. And when he th 
multitude passing by, he asked what this meesi 
And they told him that Jesus of Nazareth was pii 
sing by. And he cried out: Jesus, Son of Davil 
have mercy on me. And they that went befof 
rebuked him, that he should hold his p 
he cried out much more: Son of David, bat 
mercy on me. And Jesus standing, commands 


know in part: but then 1 shall know, even as I £ 
a 





114 ASH-WEDNESDAY. 


Though public penances are not so frequent as the 
formerly were, the Council of Trent expressly order 
them for public crimes, Sess. xxiv. c 8. de . A 
the directions given in the Roman Ritual, de Sere 
Penit. are: ‘‘ Let not the priest absolve those who hen 
given public scandal, till they have made public satiate 
tion, and removed the scandal." . 

We are therefore to perform this holy ceremony will 
an humble and contrite soul, with a firm resolution d 
entering upon penitential practices in order to pumial 
our sins, and to satisfy for them in a manner that ma) 
bear some proportion to the enormity of our offences. 


THE BLESSING OF THE ASHES. n 


Ast. FT EAR us, O Lord, for thy mercy is kind 
look on us, O Lord, according to th 
multitude of thy mercies. Ps. Save me, O bod: f 
the waters have reached my soul V. Glory. 


Ant. Hear us, &c. to Ps. 
The Lord be with you. .R. And with thy spiri. 


Let us práy.— Omnipotens. 

O Almighty and eternal God spare those t 

repent, shew mercy to those that humbly $e 
treat thee: and vouchsafe to send from heaven t 
holy angel, to f+ bless, and »j« sanctify these ashe 
that they may be a wholesome remedy to all wh 
humbly call upon thy holy name, and conscious ¢ 
their sins, accuse themselves, and deplore thé 
crimes in sight of thy divine Majesty, or humbly # 
earnestly have recourse to thy sovereign bounty: st 
grant, by our calling on thy most holy name, tb 
whoever shall be touched by these ashes for t 
remission of their sins, may receive health of b« 
and defence of soul, Thro’. 

Let us pray.— Deus, qui non mortem. 

O God, who desirest the conversion, and ! 

the death of sinners, graciously consider t 
weakness of human nature, and mercifully vou 
safe to »[« bless these ashes, which we design to 





116 ASH-WEDNESDAY. 


Ant. Let us amend of the sins we have com 
mitted through ignorance: lest suddenly overtaken 
by the day of our death, we seek for time to do pe 
nance, and be not able.to find it.* Look down oa 
us, O Lord, and take pity: for we have sinned 
against thee. V. Help us, O God our Saviour, ad 
deliver us for the glory of thy name, O Lord* 
Look down on us, &c. to V. Glory,,&c. - Look. 
down on us, &c. to V. . 

The Lord be with thee. R. And with thy spirit.’ -. 

Let us proy— Concede nolis. à 
(GRANT us, O Lord, to begin with holy fasting 
our christian warfare; that being to fight 
against spiritual wickedness, we may be aided there 
in by temperance. Thro’. (n 
INTROIT. Wisd. xi. Ps. lvi. 
HOU, O Lord, hast mercy on all, and bun 
none of those things, which thou hast created; 
thou winkest at the sins of men, to draw them 9 
repentance, and thou pardonest them: because thou 
art the Lord our God.. Ps. Have mercy on me O 
God, have mercy on me; for my soul trusteth # 
thee. P. Glory. 

COLLECT. Presta, Domine.—Grant, O Lond, 
that thy faithful may enter on this solemn fast with 
suitable piety, and go through it with unmolested 
devotion. n hro’. \ 
After the II. Collect, A cunctis, p. xx. the ; 

woith its Secret and P. COMM. is pon inued ; 

Passion-Sunday. 

III. COLLECT. Omnipotens.—O Almighty and 
eternal God, who hast dominion over the living as” 
the dead, and art merciful to all, whom thou know 
est will be thine by faith and good works: we hunt 
bly beseech thee, that they, for whom we have pro^ 
posed to offer our prayers, whether this world sti 
retains them in the flesh, or the next world hate 
already received them divested of their bodies, mex 








118 ASH-WEDNESDAY. 


let thy mercies speedily prevent us, for we are M- 
come exceeding poor. (dt this this verae kneel down} fF. 
Help us, O God our Saviour, and for the glory 
thy name O Lord deliver us, and forgive us our am 
for thy name's sake. 


The above Tract is said every Monday, Fi 

and Friday, till Medesay i in. Holy Week, 

there be a proper one appointed. . 

GOSPEL. Matt. vi 16. 21.—/# that si 
Jesus said to his disciples: When you fast be nit 
the hypocrites, sad. For they di their feq 

ey may appear to men to fast. Amen [us 

toy you, they have received their reward. But tha 
when thou fastest, anoint thy head, and wash & 
face: that thou appear not to men to fast, buf 3 
thy Father, who is in secret: and thy Father, W 
seeth in secret, will reward thee. Lay not up ! 
yourselves treasures on earth: where the rust $ 
moth consume, and where thieves break throg 
and steal. But lay up for yourselves tresse 
in heaven: where neither rust nor moth doth di 
sume, and where thieves do not break through, i 
steal, For where thy treasure is, there is thy hes 












OFFERT. Ps. xxix.—I will extol thee, O Lag 
for thou hast upholden me: and hast not made y 
enemies to rejoice over me. O Lord, I have a 
to thee, and thou hast healed me. 


SECRET. Grant, O Lord, that we may 
duly prepared to present these our offerings, 5 
which we celebrate the institution of this ven 
mystery. Thro’. ; 

II. SECRET. Ordinary, p. xxvii. 

III. SECRET. O God, to whom alone is knot 
the number of thine elect to be placed in eters 
bliss: grant, we beseech thee, by the intercession‘ 
all thy saints, that the book” of predestination m 


THURSDAY BEFORE, &c. 119 


xetsin the names of all those, whom we have un- 
iruken to pray for, as well as those of all the faith 


Parrace. Qui corporali jQunio, p. xxx. 

COMM. Ps. i—He that meditateth night and 
by on the law of the Lord shall yield his fruit in 
le season. 

P. COMM. Percepta.—May the mysteries we 
tre received, O Lord, afford us help, that our fast- 
|| may pe acceptable to thee, and become a remedy 
) ro 


us, . 

IL P. COMM. Mundet.—Ordinary, p. xliv. 

OI. P. COMM. Puriicent.—May the mysteries 
? have received, purify us, we beseech thee, O 
mighty and merciful God: and grant, by the in- 
mession of all thy saints, that this thy sacrament 
ay not increase our guilt to punishment, but be a 
ens of obtaining pardon in order to salvation: 
ay it wash away sin, strengthen our frailty, secure 
\against the dangers of the world; and procure 
[pvoness for all the faithful both living dead. 


Letus pray. Bow down your heads to God. 
The Prayer, Inclinantes, over the people. 
|[[ERCIFULLY look down upon us, O Lord, 
bowing down before thy divine Majesty, that 
ty who have been refreshed with thy divine mys- 
d may, always be supported by thy heavenly 
ro’. 


THURSDAY before the I. Sunday in Lent. 
INTROIT. Ps. liv. 


WHEN I cried out to the Lord, he heard my 
voice against those who were coming upon 
W: he that is before all ages and will be for ever, 

them: cast thy care on the Lord, and he 
Wifeed thee. Ps. Hear, O God, my prayer, and 





120 THURSDAY BEFORE I SUNDAY IM LENT. 


despise not my supplication: be attentive to ri? 

hear me. P. Glory. 4 
COLLECT. Deus, qui culpa.—O God, who 

sin art offended, and pacified by repentance, 

fully regard the prayers of thy people, who : 

supplication to thee: and turn away the 

thy anger, which we deserve for our sins." o 


LESSON. Isaias xxxviii. 1. 6.—In those days E. 
echias was sick even to death, and Isaias the son 
Amos the prophet came unto ‘him, and said to 
Thus saith the Lord: Take order with thy housd 
thou shalt die, and not live. And Ezechias turned 
his face towards the wall, and prayed to the 
and said: I beseech thee, O Lord, remember bow 
have walked before thee in truth, and with a 
heart, and have done that which is good in ph 
And Ezechias wept with we eping. 

word of the Lord ame to frais, ma seyn 

to Ezechias: Thus saith the Lord dor D of De 
thy father: I have heard thy prayer, and 1 have® 
thy tears: behold I'will add to thy days fifteen 









And I will deliver thee and this c ity put of the ^ 
of the of the Assyrians, an protect 
saith the Lord Almighty. | 
GRAD. Ps. liv.—Cast thy care upon the 
avid‘ he shall sustain thee: P. When 1 cried out 
the. Lord, he heard: me, and defended me 
those that were coming upon me. " 
GOSPEL. .Malt. viii. from *in the Gospel of 8i 
III. Sunday after Epiphany, p. 99. 
OFFERT. P; xxiv.—To thee, O Lord ‘halve 
lifted. up my soul. O my God: in thee, O 
I: put my trust, let me not be ashamed ; neither 
‘my enemies laugh at me ; for none of them that 
on thee shall be confounded. U 
SECRET. Hear: us, O Lord, we beseech 
and being appeased by these offerings, grant 





122 FRIDAY BEFORE THE 


fast, your own will is found, and exact of 
your debtors. Behold you fast br debates pe 
strife, and strike with the fist wickedly. Do mt 
fast as you have done until this day, to*make yu 
cry to be heard on high. Is this such a fast, al 
have chosen: for a man to afflict his soul for a deg? 
is this it, to wind his head about like a circle, and 
to spread sackcloth and ashes? wilt thou call thisa 
fast, and a day acceptable to the Lord? Is not this 
rather the fast that I have chosen ? loose the bandsof 
wickedness, undo the bundles that oppress, let them 
that are broken go free, and break overy 
burden. Deal thy bread to the hungry, and bri 
the needy and the harbourless into 
when thou shalt see one naked, cover him, sil 
despise not thy own flesh. 'Then shall Aq i 
break forth as the morning, and thy h 
speedily arise, and thy justice shall go befor ti 
face, and the glory of the Lord shall gather thee 
Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall hear: tht 
shalt cry, and he shall say; Here I am, for I'!í 
Lord thy God am merciful. n 
GRAD. Ps. xxvi.—One thing have I asked of tht 
Lord, this will I seek after; that I may dwell 
the house of the Lord. P. That I may see tbi 
delight of the Lord, and be protected in his bal 
temple. 
*TRACT. Ps. cii—Deal not, p. 117. 
GOSPEL. Malt. v. 43. 48. vi. 1. 4—f4 
time ; Jesus said to his disciples ; You have heard 
it hath been said: Thou shalt love thy neighba 
and hate thy enemy. But I say to you, love yom 
enemies, do good to them that hate you: and 3 


for them that persecute and calumniate you: 
ou may be the children of your Father who W1 
eaven, who maketh his sun to rise upon the 

and bad, and raineth upon the just and the unjust. 





( M ) 


SATURDAY before the 1. Sunday in Lent. 
Tre Introit, Gradual, Tract, Offertory, and Comme 
nion, as in the foregoing Mass, p. 121, fc. 

COLLECT. Adesto Domine.—Give ear, O Lon, 
to our prayers, and grant that we may, with tw 
devotion, observe this solemn fast, which wi 
wholesomely instituted for giving health to both of 
. souls and bodies. Thro’. 


LESSON. Isaias lviii. 9. 14.—Thus sasth the Lard 
God: If thou wilt take away the chain out of te 
midst of thee, and cease to stretch out the 
and to speak that which is for nothing. 
thou shalt pour out thy soul to the hungry, end a 
satisfy the afflicted soul, then shall thy light rise ey 
in darkness, and thy darkness shall be as the noo 
day. And the Lord will give thee rest continually, 
and will fill thy soul with brightness, and deliver 
bones, and thou shalt be like a watered garden, 
like a fountain of water, whose waters shall net 
fail. And the places that have been desolate 
ages, shall be built in thee: thou shalt raise up 
foundations of generation and generation: and thes 
shalt be called the repairer of the fences, turning the 
paths into rest. If thou turn away thy foot fromthe 
sabbath, from doing thy own will in my holy Be 
and call the sabbath delightful, and the holy of 
Lord glorious, and glorify him, while thou dost pot 
thy own ways, and thy own will is not found, ® 
speak a word: Then shalt thou be delighted in th$ 
Lord, and I will lift thee up above the hi 
of the earth, and will feed thee with the inheritance 
of Jacob thy father. For the mouth of the Loré 
hath spoken it. 

GOSPEL. Mark vi. 47. 56.—J4 that Wes 
When it was late, the ship was in the midst of d$ 
sea, and himself alone ontheland. And seeing then 
labouring in rowing (for the wind was against them) 





ae Ae WB "UI 
L SUNDAY.IN LENT 4; s.j bas 


E! 


p 
gi 
I 
38 
i 


E 
e 
d 
eg 
E 
€x 
i 
3 
&R 
2 


2E 

H 

m 

x2 & 

E 
z 
* 
$ 






necessities, in peel in stripes, in 
seditions, in labours, in watchiugs, in 
in knowl in_long-sufferin, 


EEUU aa sorrowful, yet al 
rejoicing: as needy, yet enrich ‘many: as. 
nothing, and poseming all hinge D 





198 MONDAY IN THE "o 


* Not by bread alone doth man live, but by 
word that proceedeth out of the mouth of Got. 
Then the Devil took him mto the holy city, and st 
him upon a pinnacle of the temple, said € 
him: If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down; 
for it is written: “He hath given his angels 
over thee, and in their hands shall they bear thee 
lest perhaps thou dash thy foot against a stone. 
Jesus said to him, it is written again, “Thou shsk 
not tempt the Lord thy God.” Again the Devil took 
him up into a very high mountain, and shewed him 
all the kingdoms of the world, and the: of 
them, and said to him: Allthese will I give thee, 
if thou wilt fall down and adore me. Then Jems 
said to him: Begone, Satan: for it is written: *'The 
Lord thy God shalt thou adore, and him only shat 
thou serve.” Then the Devil left him; and 
angels came and ministered to him.” Crepo. 
FFERT. Ps. xc.—The Lord will overshadow 
thee with his shoulders: and under his wings thet 
shalt trust, his truth shall compass thee with a shi 

SECRET. We offer thee, O Lord, in the mot 
solemn manner, this sacrifice at the beginning 
Lent, humbly beseeching thee, that as we retrench 
from the food of our bodies, we may also reffeit 
from all noxious pleasures, Thro’. 

COMM. Ps. xc.—The Lord will overshadow 
thee with his shoulders: and under his wings thot 
shalt trust : his truth shall compass thee with a shiell. 

P. COMM. Tui nos.—May the holy oblation, 9 
Lord, of thy sacrament, give us a new life, that, by 
laying aside the old man, it may bring us to thé 
participation of this saving mystery. Thro’. 


MONDAY, I. WEEK IN LENT. 


INTROIT. Ps. cxxii. 
AS the eyes of the servants are on the hands of 
their masters, so are our eyes on the Lord o™* 


«om^ so. . MP RET Qu iota mo m oem 





130 MONDAY IN THE, &c. 


and you gave me to eat: I was thirsty, and you gen 
me to drink: I was a stranger, and you took t 
in: naked, and you clothed me: sick, and you v* 
sited me: I was in prison, and you came to me 
Then shall the just answer him, saying: Lord, whe 
did we see thee hungry, and fed thee: thirsty, and 
gave thee drink? And when did we see thee! 
stranger, and took thee in: or naked, and clothed 
thee? Or when did we see thee sick or in prison, 
came to thee? And the king answering shall my * 
them: Amen I say to you, us long as you have 

it to one of these my least brethren, you did X ® 
me. Then shall he say to them that shall be 
on his left hand: Depart from me, you c It 
to everlasting fire which was prepared for the dew 
and his angels. For I was hungry, and you gave m 
not to eat; I was thirsty, and you gave me not V 
drink. I was a stranger, and you took me not i: 
naked, and you clothed me not: sick, and in 
son, and you did not visit me. Then shall 
also answer him, saying: Lord, when did we # 
thee hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, @ 
sick, or in prison and did not minister to the®! 
Then he shall answer them, saying: Amen I sey 
you, as long as you did it not to one of these le 
ones, neither did you it to me. And these shall $ 


thy wonders, O Lord, that thou 
des al give me wndersanding, end 1 


LET. San O Lord, the offerings 
Be, and cleanse us from the stains of our 


"Matt. xxv.—Verily, I say to you: : What 
¥.done to one of the least of mine, you have 
ine; ime ye blessed of my ather, take 
n 6 kingdom prepared r you from 

M s Bei Sia, 0 O Lord, 
ularis.— ing 
participation of thy saving mysteries, we 


thee, that as we rejoice in the taste 
we may be renewed by their Thro’ 
Ex E Bow down your heads to God. . 
lbsolve.—Loosen, O Lord, we be- 
ee, the bonds of our sins: and mercifully 
By from us whatever we deserve for them. 


TUESDAY. 
INTROIT. Ps. Ixxxix. 


I, O Lord, hast been our refuge from gene- 

on to mn to generation: from all eternity, thou art. 

mountains were made, or the earth 

world was formed ; from eternity to eternity 

God. P. Glory. 

ECT.  Respice.—Look down, O Lord, on 

and grant that, while we chastise our- 

r mortifying the flesh, our minds may be in- 
an the love and desire of thee. Thre. 

v. 6. 11.—m those days: ale sais 


hel spake, saying ; Seek ye ü 


132 TUESDAY IN THR, é€£e. 


he may be found ; cali upon him while he is nesh 
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the me 
just man his thoughts, and let him retwm to the 
Lord, and he will have mercy on him, and to ar ° 
God, for he is bountiful to forgive. Fer my 
thoughts are not your thoughts: nor your ways my. 
ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are er 
alted above the earth, so are my ways exalted’ abow 
your ways, and my thoughts above your th 

And as the rain and the snow come down from hes 
ven, and return no more thither, but soak the earth 
and water it, and make it to spring, and give 

to the sower, and bread to the eater: so shall my 
word be which shall go forth from my mouth: $ 
shall not return to me void, but it shall do whst- 
soever I please, and shall prosper in the things ft 
which I sent it, saith the Lord Almighty. 


GRAD. Ps. cxl—Let my prayer be directed 
as incense in thy sight, O Lord. V. The lifting up 
my hands as evening sacrifice. , 


GOSPEL. Matt. xxi. 10. 17.—/ft that tiw: 
When he was come into Jerusalem, the whole cif. 
was moved, saying: Who is this? And the 
said: This is Jesus the prophet, From Nazareth of 
Galilee. And Jesus went into the temple of God, 
and cast out all them that sold and bought in the 
temple, and overthrew the tables of the monet! 
changers, and the chairs of them that sold dovest 
and he saith to them: It is written, “My house sos: 
be called the house of prayer; but you have medi: 
it a den of thieves.” And there came to. him tà 
blind and the lame in the temple: and he healed 
them. And the chief priests and scribes seein 
the wonderful things that he did, and the childre* 
crying in the temple, and saying: “ Hosanna to tis 
son of David," were moved with indignation, and mid 
to him: Hearest thou what these say? And Je^ 


Rei epu T. 1389 
dw them: Yea, have you never read? * Out 
tiduthe-of infants and of thon ‘hast 
ot prado Pe And leaving them he went eunt 


WM. Ps. iv. When I called thou didst hear 


accnd v theo, nd d deliver thy dich fom 
tedness. 


EMBER WEDNESDAY. 
INTROIT. Ps. xxiv. 
vernber, O Lord, thy bowels of compassion: 
d thy mercies that are from the beginning of 
rid : lest our enemies rule over us: deliver us, 
of Ierne el from all our distress: F's. To d, 
ave up my soul: in thee, O my 
ny trust; let me not be ashamed. P. Glory. 
. After the Kyrie eleison, ts said: 

Nm he us kneel down. R. Stand on 

Preces nostras. -Mercifully 
ayers, O Lord, we beseech thee, and streteh 
he right ha hand Jor thy power against every thing 


N. Exod. xx. 12. 18.—5h those daye : 





134 EMBER-WEDNESDAY. 


The Lord said to Moses:, Come up to me in 
mount, and be there: and I will give thee 
of stone, and the law, and the commam 
which I have written: that thou mayest teaeh 
Moses rose up, and his minister Josue: and' 
going up into the mount of God, said to te 
ents: Wait ye here till we return to you, ya 
Aaron ond with you: if any question ahs 
you shall refer it to them: And when Mom 
gone up, & cloud covered the mount. Ar 
glory of the Lord, dwelt upon Sinai, cove 
with a cloud six days, and the seventh day be 
him out of the midst of the cloud. And th 
of the glory of the Lord, was like a burni 
upon the top of the mount, in the eyes of th 
dren of Israel. And Moses entering into the 
of the cloud, went up into the mountain: 4 
was there forty days, and forty nights. 

GRAD. Ps.—The troubles of my heart ar 
tiplied: from my necessities deliver me O Lor 
See my abjection and my lahour ; and forgive 
my sins. 

II. COLLECT. Devotionem.—We beseeci 
O Lord, mereifully to regard the devotion 
people: that mortifying their bodies by fasting 
minds may be refreshed by good works, Thi 

IIl. LESSON. 3 Kings xix. 3. 8.—In thos 
Elias came into Bersabee of Juda, and left h 
vant there. And he went forward one day's jc 
into the desert. And when he was there, a 
under a juniper tree, he requested for his sot 
he might die, and said: It is enough for me, 
take away my soul: for I am no better th 
fathers. And he cast himself down, and al 
the shadow of the juniper tree: and behold an 
of the Lord touched him and said to him: 
and eat. And he looked, and behold there ' 
his head a hearth-cake and a vessel of watei 


EMBER-WEDNESDAY. 135 


and drank, and he fell asleep again. And the 
f the Lord came again the second time and 
d him, and said to pum: Arise, eat: for thou 
ta great way to go. d he arose, and ate 
ink, and walked in the strength of that food 
ays and forty nights, unto the mount of God. 


CT. Ps. xxiv.—From my necessities, deliver 
Lord; see my abjection and my labour and 
me all my sins. V. To thee, O Lord, have 
up my soul: in thee, O my God, do 1 put 
st, let me not be ashamed. Neither let my 
slaughat me. V. For none of them that wait 
' shall be confounded: let all them be con- 
Ll, who do vain things. 
PEL. Matt. xii. 38.—/t that time: Some 
Scribes and Pharisees answered him, saying : 
we would see a sign from thee. 0 
ing said to them: An evil and adulterous 
| seeketh for a sign; and a sign shall not 
, but the sign of Jonas the prophet. For as 
ras in the whale's belly three days and three 
so shall the Son of Man be in the heart of 
h three days and three nights. The men of 
shall rise in judgment with this generation, 
]l condemn it; because they did penance at 
aching of Jonas. And behold a greater than 
rere. The queen of the south shall rise in 
int with this generation, and shall condemn 
ume she came from the ends of the earth to 
e wisdom of Solomon, and behold a greater 
olomon here. When an unclean spirit is 
ut of a man, he walketh through dry places, 
r rest, and findeth none. Then he saith: 
return into my house, from whence I came 
And coming he findeth it empty, swept, 
amished. Then he goeth, and taketh with 
ven other spirits more wicked than himself, 


M2 


OFFERT. Ps. pé 
law, which I have loved exceedi 
in practice thy commandinents, wil 

SECRET. We offer thee, O 
of propitiation, that thou wouldst 


us our sins, and guide o our tottering 
COMM. Ps, v—Hesr m; Ed 
voice of my Prayer, © any 
to thee I will p 
P. COMM. 
this th 


our enemies. E 
Let us pray. Bow down your heads to 
PRAYER, Menta. -Eilighte 








it 
Bi 

& 
at á 


j 
) 
üt 

d 


tf 
1 
H 
: 


EERE 
TH 
S 
d 
i 

u i " 
Hits 
igadige 


emen ea die. And if a 
‘Judgment and justice, an not 
i nor lifted u his to 


in my commandments and kept my 
» do according to the truth: he is just, 
God. 


. xvi—Keep me, O Lord, as the 
»ye: protect me under the shadow of 
V. Let my judgment come forth from 
nce: let thy eyes behold the things that 


Malt. xv. 91. 98.—J/M that tune: 
om thence, and departed into the coasts 
Sidon. And behold a woman of Canaan 
t of those coasts, crying out, said to him: 

on me, O Lord, thou Son of David: 
M 


138 EMBER-FRIDAY. 


my daughter is grievously troubled by a devil. ‘1 
answered her not a word. And his disciples 
and besought him, saying: Send her away, fer 
crieth after us: and he answering, said: I wat 
sent but to the sheep that are lost of the hous 
Israel. But she came and adored him, sy 
Lord, help me. ' Who answering said: It is 
good to take the bread of the chil am 
cast it to the dogs. But she said, Yea, 
the whelps also eat of the crumbs that fall from 
table of their masters. Then Jesus answeri 
to her: O woman, great is thy faith: be it 
thee as thou wilt: and her daughter wes e 
from that hour. 

OFFERT. Ps. 33.—The angel of the Lord. 
encamp around about them that fear him: and 
deliver them: taste and see that the Lord iss 

SECRET. We beseech thee, O Lord, tha 
offerings which accompany this wholesome 
may, through thy mercy, save us. Thro’. 

OMM. John vi—The bread, which I 
give, is iny flesh for the life of the world. 

P. COMM. Twuorum.—By the free grant of! 
thy gifis, O Lord, augment our temporal, am 
new our eternal helps. Thro’. 

Let us pray. Bow down your heads to God. 

PRAYER. Da quesumus—Grant, O ] 


- we beseech thee, that all christian people ma 


knowledge what they profess, and love the heat 
mystery they so often approach. Thro’. 


EMBER-FRIDAY. 
INTROIT. Ps. xxiv. 
pRoM my necessities, deliver me, O Lord : se 
abjection and my labour and forgive me, a 
sins. Ps. To thee O Lord have I lifted up my 
in thee O my God, do I put my trust, let men 
ashamed. V. Glory. 











i3 mn 
[ REP : EIE ji EL T 4 Bii 
usu 
3 or B6 E at gage s at $515. ^ 
idudlintbupngl 
Lap Hy! i: Bases HH ay 
HE erence er coe 
a pir EBIRIBI ag aia iil 





EMBER-SATURDAY. 143 


ents which I command you, and do them, to 
1€ Lord your God, and walk in his ways, 
g unto him, the Lord will destroy all these 
before your face, and you shall possess them 
are greater and stronger than you. Every 
hat your foot shall tread upon, shall be 
From the desert, and from Libanus, from 
t river Euphrates unto the western sea shall 
borders, none shall stand against you; the 
ur God shall lay the dread and fear of you 
I the land that you shall tread upon, as he 
ken to you. 

D. Ps. ixxxiii.—Behold O God our protector, 
k down upon thy servants. V. Lord God 
'5, hear the prayers of thy servants. 


way. Let us kneel down. R. Stand up again. 


JOLLECT. Adesto—Give ear O Lord, we 
thee, to our prayers; that, through the as- 
of thy grace, we may be humble in prospe4 
| without fear in adversity. Thro’. 


JESSON. 2 .Machab. i. 23. 27.— In those 
All the priests made prayer, while the sa- 
ras consuming, Jonathan beginning, and the 
wering. And the prayer of Nehemias was 
is manner: * ord God, creator of all 
dreadful, and strong, just, and merciful, 
me art the good king. Who alone art gra- 
rho alone art just, and almighty, and eter- 
o deliverest Israel from all evil, who didst 
the fathers, and didst sanctify them: re- 
e sacrifice for all thy people Israel, and pre- 
y own portion, and sanctify it. Gather to- 
ur scattered people, deliver them that are 
) the Gentiles, and look upon them that are 
. and abhorred: that the Gentiles may know 
1 art our God.” 

D. Ps. Ixxxix.—Turn to us, O Lord, & 


144 EMBER-SATURPAY. 


little, and be reconciled with thy servants. 'F. 
Lord thou hast been our refuge from generation: 
ration. . 
t us pray. Let us kneel down. R. Stand upege 


IV. COLLECT. Preces.—Mercifully hear, wel 
seech thee, O Lord, the prayers of thy people: 6 
we, who are justly afflicted for our sins, may rst 
fully be delivered for the glory of thy name. Tit 

IV. LESSON. Eccles. xxxvi. 1. 10.—Have 
cy, upon us, O God of all, and behold us, and sh 
us the light of thy mercies: and send thy fear 
the nations that have not sought after thee; 
they may know that there is.no God besides. 
end that they may shew forth thy wonders. Lift 
thy hand over the strange nations, that they 
thy power. Foras thou hast been sanctified m 
in their sight, so thou shalt be magnified among th 
in our presence; that they may know thee, á8 
also have known thee, that there is no God ba 
thee, O Lord. Renew thy signs, and work 1 
miracles Glorify thy hand, and thy right A 
Raise up indignation, and pour out 
away the adversary, and crush the enemy. Ha 
the time, and remember the end, that they’ 
declare thy wonderful works, O Lord our 

GRAD. Ps. cxl.—Let my er be directed 
incense in thy sight, O Lord. V. The lifting up 
hands as evening sacrifice. ' 
Let us pray. Let us kneel down. R. Stand pet 

V. COLLECT. Actiones.—Prevent, we 
thee, O Lord, .our actions by thy holy mspirath 
and carry them on by thy gracious assistance: | 
every prayer ahd work of ours may always bi 
from thee, and by thee be happily ended. ) 


V. Leason, with the Canticle and VI. Collect 
pp. 66 and 67. . 
Here are said the 1I. and YII. Collects, as dinecios 
the Mass on Ash-Wednesday p. 116. 


f "EMBER-SATURDAT. Mus 


EPISTLE. 1 Thess: v. 14. 23.— Brethren: We 
bake tie nie comfort the feeble- 
‘support we tient towards all 
nr mone. render E for evil to an: 
i but ever follow that which is good towards 
towards all men. Always rej 
E Tn all things give thapks 
1 in Christ Jesus concerning 
Extinguish not the spirit. Despise not 
But_prove all things: hold fast that 
From all appearance of evil refrain 
dy may the God of peace himself 
jou in all things: that your whole spirit, 
and body may be preserved blameless in 
of our Lord Christ Jesus. 

ACT. Ps. cxvi.—Praise the Lord all ye na- 
ms: praise him all ye people. ¥. For his mercy 
el upon us, and the truth of the Lord 
i for ever. 

L. Malt. xvii. Asin the Mass of to-mor- 


p. 147. 
ERT, Ps.Ixxxvii.—O Lord the God of my 
3 I have eried in the day, and in the night 
prayer come in before thee,O Lord. — ^ 
ET. Sanctify, O Lord, we beseech thee, 
by this holy sacrifice: that what we out- 
by the observance of this fast, may 
v effected in us. Thro’, 

IM. Ps. vii. -O Lord my God in thee, 
it my trust, save me from all them that 
‘me, and deliver me. 

M. Sanctificationibus,— May this holy, 

‘Lord, cure us of all our sins, and become 
edy tous, ‘Thro’. 
Bow down your heads to God; 
_ Fideles.—May thy much desired bles- 
fitebih sothy people: may it hin- 


——À— 











146 


der them from ever swervin 
make them always enjoy thy blessing. 


II. SUNDAY IN LENT. 


from ri a» 





II. SUNDAY IN LENT. 


INTROIT. 


R.Emember, O Lord, 
thy bowels of com- 
passion ; and thy mercies 
that are from the begin- 
ning of the world. t 
not our enemies ever rule 
over us: deliver us, O God 
of Israel, from all our dis- 
tress. Ps. To thee, O 
Lord, have I lifted up my 
soul, in thee, O my God,I 
put my trust; let me not 


Ps. xxiv. 
Emtniscere mutretu 
num tuarum, Domin 
et misericordie tua, qu 
a seculo sunt. Ne wi 

m dominentur weh 
enimicthostri: libera 8 
Deus Israel, ex omsih 


an 11$ nostris. 


s. Ad te, Domine, i 
vavi animam mean: 
meus in te confido, ™ 
erubescam. 


be ashamed. V. Glory. 


COLLECT. Deus qui.—O God, who seest ho 
destitute we are of all strength, preserve us bo 
within and without, that our bodies may be fh 
from all adversity, and our souls purified from | 
evil thoughts. Thro’. 


EPISTLE. 1 Thess. iv. 1. 7. — Brethren: vx 
pray and beseech you in the Lord Jesus, that sti 

ve received of us, how you ought to walk 
please God, so also you would walk, that you m 
abound the more. For you know what 
I have given to you by the Lord Jesus. For 
is the will of God, your sanctification: that y 
should abstain from fornication, that every one 
you should know how to possess his vessel in sam 
fication and honour: not in the passion of lust, I 
the Gentiles that know not God: and that non 
over-reach, nor circumvent his brother in busine 
because the Lord is the avenger of all these thir 
as we have told you before, and have testified. | 


148 MONDAY IN THE 


OFFERT. Ps. cxviiii—I will meditate on t. 
law, Which I have loved exceedingly: and I vw 
practise thy commandinents, which 1 have loved. 

SECRET. Look down, O Lord, we beseec 
thee, on this our sacrifice, that it may increase ow 
devotion, and procure our salvation. Thro’. 

COMM. Ps. v. Understand my cry : hearken to the 
voice of my prayer, O my King and my God, ft 
1o thee will I pray, O Lord. 

P. COMM.  Supplices.—Grant we humbly be 
seech thee, O Almighty God, that those, whom 
thou hast refreshed with thy sacraments, may wot 
thily serve thee in the conduct of their lives. ‘Thr’ 


MONDAY. 
INTROIT. Ps. xxv. 


ELIVER me, O Lord, and take pity on me? 

for my foot hath stood in the right path: In 
the assemblies will I bless the Lord. Ps. Be thou,O 
Lord, my judge, tor I have walked in my inne 
cency ; and trusting in thee, I shall not be weakened 
V. Glory. 

COLLECT. Prasta.—Grant, we beseech thes 
O Almighty God, that thy people who morti 
themselves by abstinence from meat, may likewise 
fast from sin, and follow righteousness. Thro’. 

LESSON. Jan. ix. 15. 19.—1In those dam: 
Danid prayed to the Lord, saying: O Lord our 
God, who hast brought forth thy people out of the 
land of Egypt with a strong hand, and hast made 
thee a name as at this day: we have sinned, we hsve 
committed iniquity, O Lord, against all thy justice: 
let thy wrath and thy indignation be turned ie 
beseech thee, from thy city Jerusalem, and from 
holy mountain. For by reason of our sins, and the 
iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy 
are a reproach to o! that ere round about us, Now 

therefore, O our God, hear the ex es Ss cK hE 





Il. WEEK OF LENT. mp: 


i, and his prayers: and shew thy face upon 
&etuary which is desolate, for thy own sake. 
& O my God, thy ear, and hear: open thy 
and sec our desolation, and the city upon 

name is called: for it is not for our justi- 

t we nt our prayers before thy face, 
¢ the. multitude of thy tender mercies. O 
hear: O Lord, be appeased: hearken and do: 
V invocatsd upon thy city and upon thy peo 
, u y city, and upon thy 
Lerd our Gol pe 
AD. Ps. lxix.—Be thou my helper and my de- 
: O Lord, delay not. V. Let my enemies 
wk my soul, be put to confusion and shame. 
RACT. Ps. cii.—Deal not, p. 117. . 
SPEL. John vii. 21. 99.—J/ that time: 
paid to the multitude of the Jews: I go and 
tall seek me, and you shall die in your sin. 
er I go, you cannot come. The Jews there- 
tid: Will he kill himself, because he said: 
er I go, you cannot come? And he said to 
¥ou are from beneath, I am from above. 
we of this world, I am not of this world. 
fore I say to you, that you shall die in your 
For if you believe not that I am he, you shall 
your sin. They said therefore to him: Who 
a? Jesus said to them: The beginning, who 
eak unto you. Many things I have to speak, 
judge of you. But he that sent me is true: 
e things I have heard of him, the same I speak 
world. Now they understood nct that he call- 
d his Father. Jesus therefore said to them: 
you shall have lifted up the Son of Man, 
hall you know that I am he, and that I do no- 
of myself, but as the Father has taught me, 
things I speak. And he that sent me is with 
d he hath not left ine alone: for I do always 
ws that please hn. 


3 


150 TUESDAY IER /JEE.: 


OFFERT. Ps. xv.—1 will bless the: whe 
hath given me understanding: I set the Lard. i 
in. in my sight: for he is at my right band, band, the 


moved. 7 NS 
SECRET. May this sacrifice of ] 
praise make us, O Lord, worthy ot me 
COMM. Ps. viii.—O Lord our ‘God, bow, sk 
mirable is thy name in the whole earth! «©... 
P. COMM. Hac nos.—May this as 
Lord, cleanse us from sin; and make us perii: 
the heavenly remedy. Thro’. 
Let us pray. Bow down your heads to Gd 
PRAYER. Aldesio.—Hear our prayers ow 
treaties, O Almighty God; and grant that 
whom thou givest hopes o of thy mercy, 
rience the effects of-thy usual clemency. — 


E 


TUESDAY. 
INTROIT. Ps. xxvi. 
M*Y heart nath said to thee, my face hath soogi 
thee: thy face O Lord will I still seek: tm 
not away thy face from me. Ps. The et? 
light and my salvation; whom shall I feer? 


COLLECT. Perfice.—Grant us, O Lord, weit 
seech thee, thy assistance, whereby we ‘mf, 
through the observance of this holy fast, that sli 
we have undertaken by y thy ap ppointment we; mu 
accomplish by thy grac Ü 

LESSON. 3 Kings xvii. a 16.—mh ots a 
'The word of the Lord came to Elias the 
saying: Arise, and go to Sarephta a cily of MP 
Sidonians, and dwell there: for I have co 

a widow woman there to feed thee. He arose, 
went to Sarephta. And when he was come 
gate of the city, he saw the widow woman 
ing sticks, and ho valled her, and seid t9: 








154 WEDNESDAY IN THE 


i I Then came to him the mother of the sons 
of Zebedee with her sons, adoring and asking some- 
thing of him. Who said to her: What wilt thou? 
She saith to him: Say that these my two son 
may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other 
on thy left, in thy kingdom. And Jesus answeribf, 
and said: You know not what you ask. Can yos 
drink the chalice that I shall drink? 'They sey t? 
him: We can. He saith to them: Of my chalice 
indeed you shall drink: but to sit on my right hand 
or left hand, is not mine to give to you, but to them 
for whom itis prepared by my Father.}] Ane the 
ten hearing it were moved with indignation again 
the two brethren. But Jesus called them to hit 
and said: You know that the princes of the 
lord it over them: and they that are the greate, 
exercise power upon them. It shall not be so among 

ou, but whosoever will be the greater among you 
et him be your minister: and he that will be fit 
among you, shall be your servant. Even as the 5a 
of Man is not come to be ministered unto, but t0 
minister, and to give his life a redemption for many. 


OFFERT. Ps. xxiv.—To thee, O Lord, havel 
lifted up my soul: in thee, O my God, I put mf 
trust, let me not be ashamed: neither let my enemie 
laugh at me; for none of them that wait on 
shall be confounded. 

SECRET. Mercifully look down, O Lord, (8 
the offerings we make thee, and by the intercourse 
of these sacred mysteries, release us from the 
of our sins. Thro’. 

COMM. Ps. x.—The Lord is just and het 
loved justice ; his countenance beholdeth righteou* 
ness. 

P. COMM. Sumptis.—We beseech thee, O Lord, 


* Here begins the Gospel of St. James, Fon Why. wil 
closes at t. 


156 THURSDAY IN THE 


ing to his way, and according to the fruit of hi 
devices, saith the Lord Almighty. 
GRAD. Ps. Ixxvii.—Forgive us, O Lord, our 
offences, lest the Gentiles say: Where is now their? 
God? V. Help us, O God our Saviour, and for thy 
glory of thy name, O Lord, deliver us. N 


GOSPEL. Luke xvi. 19. 31. — At that time! 
Jesus said to the Pharisees : There wasa certain rice. 
man, who was clothed in purple and fine linen: and | 
feasted sumptuously every day. And there was & 
certain beggar named Lazarus, who lay at his gate, . 
full of sores, desiring to be fed with the 
that fell from the rich man's table, and no one dil 
give him, moreover the dogs came and licked bs 
sores. And it came to pass that the beggar died, anl 
was carried by the angels into Abraham’s bosou 
And the rich man also died, and he was buried 31 
hell. And lifting up his eyes, when he was in tor 
ments, he saw Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in bs. 
bosom: And he cried, and said: Father Abrahemy 
have mercy on me, and send Lazarus that he may 
dip the tip of his finger in water, to cool my tongt 
for 1l am tormented in this flame. And A 
said to him: Son, remember that thou didst re 
ceive good things in thy life-time, and likewWe - 
Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and-. 
thou art tormented. And besides all this, between 
us and you there is fixed a great chaos: so that they 
who would pass from hence to you, cannot, nof 
from thence come hither. And he said: Then && 
ther, I beseech thee that thou wouldst send him ^ 
my father’s house. For I have five brethren, that bs 
may testify unto them, lest they also come into thw 

lace of torments. And Abraham said to him$-: 
hey have Moses and the prophets: let them het 
them. But he said: No, Father Abraham, but f 1 
any one went to them from the dead, they will do- i 
penance. And he said to Lim. WX they lee wi - 






1 


Il. WEEK OF LENT. 157 


and the prophets, neither will they believe, 
rise again from the dead. 
FERT. Exod. xxxii.—Moses prayed in the pre- 
of the Lord his God, and said: Why, O Lord, 
yu angry with thy people? Let the wrath of 
yal be appeased: remember Abraham, Isaac, 
acob, to whom thou didst swear to give a land 
ag with milk and honey. And the Lord was 
wed: and did not the evil with which he 
iened his people. 
(CRIST. May the fast consecrated to thy name, 
ed, sanctify us by this present sacrifice, that we 
experience inwardly the effects of what we out- 
W profess by our fast. Thro’. 

)MM. John vi.—He that eateth my flesh, and 
wth my blood, abideth in me, and 1 in him, 
the Lord. 

COMM.  Grutia.—May thy grace, O Lord, we 
ich thee, never abandon us but ever make us 
t on oly service, and always procure us 
lp. ‘Thro’. r 


tus pray. Bow down your heads to God. 
LAYER. Adesto—Be favourable, O Lord, to 
ervants, und hear their praycrs in the grant of 
esting mercy; that glorying in thee their Crea- 
bd Governor, they -may have all things per- 
d and perpetuated to them. Thro’. 


FRIDAY. 
INTROIT. Ps. xvi. 
T 1 will appear before thy sight in justice : I 
thall be satisfied when thy glory shall appear. 
Hear, O Lord, my justice: attend to my sup- 
ion. V. Glory. 
LECT. Da quesumus.—Grant, O Almighty 
that, being purified by this fast, we may come 
e approaching solemnity with clean bears. 


o 





ay 


i 











160 SATURDAY IN THE 


By the Lord this hath been done, and it is wonder 
in our eyes.” Therefore I say to you, the kingdt 
of God shall be taken from you, and shall be gi 
to a nation yielding the fruits thereof. And w 
ever shall fall on this stone, shall be broken: but 
whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to 
And when the chief priests and pharisees had 
lis parables, they knew that he spoke of 
And seeking to lay hands on him, they feared tij 
multitude: because they héld him as a prophet. 
OFFERT. Ps. xxxix.—Look down, O Lord 
deliver me; look down, O Lord, to help me, M 
them be confounded and ashamed together that sedl 
after my soul to take it away : look down to my sid 
O Lord. 5 
SECRET. May the effects of this warfare, 4 
Lord, remain in us, and be increased by good worll 
‘hro’. f 
COMM. Ps. xi—Thou, O Lord, wilt prese 
us: and keep us from this generation forever. | 
P. COMM. Fac nos.—Grant, we beseech tha 
O Lord, that having received this pledge of ed 
eternal salvation, we may so direct our course thes 
to, as happily to arrive at it. Thro’. K 
Let us pray. Bow down your heads to God. : 
PRAYER. Da quesumus.—Grent, we bed 
thee, O Lord, to thy people health both of soul 
body, that by the continual practice of good 
they may always be defended by thy powerful pre 
tection. Thro’. 


« SATURDAY. 
INTROIT. Ps. xviii. 
"| HE law of the Lord is unspotted, converti 
souls; the testimony of the Lord is fai 
iving wisdom to little ones. Ps. The heavens sb 
forth the glory of God, and the firmament declare 
the work of his hands. V. Gy. 










a 


* 


108 SATURDAY IN THE 


was the will of God that what I sought came quet 
in my way. And Isaac said: Come hither, thet 
may feel thee my son, and may prove whether tha 
be my son Esau or no: He came near to his fathe 
and when he had felt him, Isaac said: The voit 
indeed is the voice of Jacob, but the hands, are t 
hands of Esau. And he knew him not, because bi 
hairy hands make him like to the elder. Then ble 
sing him, he said: Art thou my son Esau? Hes 
swered: Iam. Thenhe said : Bring me the meats¢ 
thy hunting, my son, that my soul may bless thee. AB 
when they were brought and he had eaten, hea 
fered him wine also, which after he had drunk, ) 
said to him: Come near me, and give me a kis 
my son. He came near, and kissed him. Andim 
mediately as he smelled: the fragrant smell of h 
garments, blessing him, he said: Behold the smt 
of my son is as the sinell of a plentiful field, whit 
the Lord hath blessed. God give thee of the dewt 
heaven, and of the fatness of the earth, abundans 
of corn and wine. And let peoples serve thee, a 
tribes worship thee: be thou lord of thy brethre 
and let thy mother’s children bow dojvn beíe 
thee. Cursed be he that curseth thee: and let hi 
tliat blesseth thee be filled with blessings. Isaac hs 
scarce ended his words, when Jacob being now gol 
out abroad, Esau came, and brought in to his 
meats made of what he had taken in hunting, @ 
ing: Arise, my father, and eat of thy son'a venisol 
that thy soul may bless me. And Isaac said to hia 
Why! who art thou? He answered: I am 
first-born son Esau. Isaac was struck with fe 
and astonished exceedingly : and wondering beyor 
what can be believed, said: Who is he that ev 
now brought me venison that he had taken, and 
ate of all before thou camest? and I have bless 
him, and he shall be blessed. Esau having heard! 


23h. WERE OF: GENT. 163 


words, roared out with a great cry: and 
a consternation, said: Bless me also, my 
ra 1 be mid : phy brother came decentully 
ing. But he said again: Rightly is 
» ealled Jacob: for he hath su Ya 
écond time: my first birth-right he took 
fore, and now thie e second time Ks hath 
my blessing. in he aaid to hi 
fax thou not reserved me also a blessing ? 
mered : I have appointed him thy lord, and 
le all his brethren his servants: I have esta- 
üm with corn and oil, and after this, what 
» more for thee my son? And Esau said to 
st.thou only one blessing, father? 1 he- 
i6, bless me also. And when he wept with 
y; Isaac being moved, said to him:. In the 
e earth, and in the dew of heaven from 
all thy blessing be. 
K Ps. xci. It is good to give praise to the 
d to sing to thy name, O Most High. V 
' forth thy mercy in the morning, and thy 
he night. 
EL. Luke xv. 11. 39. — Af that time: 
ke to the Scribes and Pharisees this parable: 
| man had two sons: and the younger’ of 
1 to his father: Father, give me the portion 
ince that falleth to me. And he divided 
n his substance. And not many days after, 
gerson gathering all together, went abroad 
r country: and there wasted his substance 
ng riotously. And after he had spent all, 
ne a mighty famine in that country, and he 
| be in want. And he went and cleaved 
xf the citizens of that country. And he 
into his farm to feed swine. And he would 
2 filled his belly with the hüsks the swine did 
no man gave unto him. And returning to 





IE SUNDAY IN LENT. 105 


eep in death ; lest at any time my enemy say 
wevailod against him. 

RET. Mercifully grant us, O Lord, by this 
xifice, that we, who desire to be freed from 
l sins, inay not be burdened with those of 


M. Luke xv.—Son, thou oughtest to rejoice 
tby brother was dead, and is come to life 
16 was lost, and is found. 
MM. Sacramenti.—May the sacred taste of 
sacrament, O Lord, penetrate the innermost 
of our hearts, and make us plentifully par- 
its effects. Thro’. 
s pray. Bow down your heads to God. 
VER. Familiam.—Protect, O Lord, we be- 
nee, thy family by thy continual goodness, 
t relieth on the hopes of thy heavenly foe 
y be defended by thy heavenly aid. ‘Thro’. 


III. SUNDAY IN LENT. 
INTROIT. Pe. xxiv. 


eyes are ever 05 mei semper ad 
wards the Lord: Dominum, quia ipse 
tall pluck my feet  evellet de laqueo pedes 
the snare: look meos: respice in me, et 
on me, and have miserere mei quoniam uni- 
n me; for Iam cus et pauper sum ego. 

d poor. Ps. To Ps. Ad te, Domine, le- 
4ord have I lifted vavi animam meam: Deus 
soul: in thee, O meus, in te confide, non 
» i put my trust, erubescam. 

not be ashamed. — V. Gloria. 





y. 

LECT. Quesumus.—Be attentive, we be- 
iee, O Almighty God, to the prayers of thy 
: and stretch. forth the arm of thy divine 
in our defence. Thro’, 


"LE, “pies. v. 1. 9.— Brethren: Be ye 








168 MONDAY IN THE 


COMM. Ps. Ixxxiii.—Tne sparrow bath foand 
herself a house, and the turtle a nest where she may 
lay her young ones; in like manner, O Lord of arms 
my King and my God, let my abode be near thy 
altar: blessed aie they that dwell in thy house, the 
shall praise thee for ever and ever. : 


P. COMM. 4 cunctis.—Mercifully, O Lord, 
beseech thee, deliver us from all guilt and from. 
danger, since thou admittest us to be partakers 6 
this great mystery. Thro’. ' 





MONDAY. 


INTROIT. Ps. lv.—In God will I praise th 
word, in the Lord svill I praise his speed: In 
I will put my trust, I will not fear what man esi 
do against me. Ps. Have mercy on me, O God, fü 
man hath trodden me under foot all the day, warrinj 
he hath afflicted me. V. Glory. 
COLLECT.  Cordibus.—W'e beseech thee, € 
Lord, mercifully to pour forth thy grace into oU 
hearts: that, as we abstain from flesh, so we mf 
keep our senses from all noxious excesses, . 
LESSON. 4 Kings v. 1. 15.—In those dayá 
Naaman, general of the army of the King of Syrii 
was a great man with his mastcr, and honourable 
for by him the Lord gave deliverance to Syria 
and he was a valiant man and rich, but a lepet 
Now there had gone out robbers from Syria, ant 
had led away captive out of the land of Israel a liti 
maid, and she waited u Naaman's wife. Am 
she said to her mistress: I wish my master had beet 
with the prophet that is in Samaria: he would cf 
tainly have healed him of the leprosy which B 
hath. Then Naaman went into liis lord, and 
him, saying: "hus and thus saith the girl, that cam 
from tlie land of Israel. And the King of Syr 
id to him: Go, and I will send a letter to t 


“ifs Sa WRER OF BENT... 10D 


lerem And he departed, and took with 
ten talents of silver, and six thousand pieces of 
ead ten changes of raiment, and brought 
to the king of Israel, in these words: 
thou shalt receive this letter, know that I have 
thee Naaman my servant, that thou mayest 
im of hie y. And when the king of 
had read the letter, he rent his garments, and 
Am I to be able to kill and to give life, 
this man sent to me, to heal a man of his’ 
? mark,and see how he seeketh occasions 
me. And when Eliseus the man of God had 
this, to wit, that the king of Israel had rent 
P garments, he sent to him, saying; Why hast 
rent thy garments? let him come to me and 
him know that there is a prophet in Israel. So 
| came with his horses and chariots and 
ades the door of the howe of Elise us: and Eli- 
Am sent a to him, saying ; an 1 
times in the Jordan, and ty ech shall recover 
and thou shalt be clean. Naaman was an- 
quad went away, saying: I thought he would 
come out to me, and standing would have in- 
‘whed the name of the Lord his God, and touched 
wah his hand the place of the leprosy, and healed 
m. Are not the Abana, and the Pharphar, rivers 
«€ Damascus, better than all the waters of Isracl, 
it I may wash in them, and be made clean? So 
whe turned, and was going away with indignction, 
la servants came to him, and said to him: Father, 
i be prophet had bid thee do some great thing, 
re] 












u shouldst have done it: how much rather 

he now hath said to thee: Wash, and thou 
tk be clean? Then he went down, and washed 
Re Jordan seven times, according to the word of 
he man of God ; and his flesh was restored, like the 
bh of a little child, and was made clean. And 


P 


~ * 


170 MONDAY IN THE IIl, WEEK, &c. 


returning to the man of God with all his train 
came and stood before him, and said: In tra 
know there is no other God in all the earth, 
only in Israel. 

GRAD. Ps. lv.—O God I have declared to 1 
my life: thou hast set mytears in thy sight. V. H 
mercy on me, O Lord, for man hath den meus 
foot: all the day long he hath afflicted me fighi 
against me. 

* TRACT. Ps. cii.—Deal not, p. 117. 

GOSPEL. Luke iv. 23. 30.—At that time: J 
said to the Pharisees: Doubtless you will say 
me this similitude: Physician heal thyself: as p 
things as we have heard done in Capharnaum, 
also here in thy own country. And he said: At 
I say to you, that no prophet is accepted in his 
country. In truth I say to you, there were m 
widows in the days of Elias in Israel, when hes 
was shut up three years and s1x months: when tt 
was a great famine throughout all the land ; and 
none of them was Elias sent, but to Sarephta of Si 
to a widow woman. And there were many ke 
Israel in the time of Eliseus the prophet: andn 
of them was cleansed but Naaman the Syrian. / 
all they in the synagogue, hearing these things, Y 
filled with anger. And they rose up and thrust! 
out of the city: and they brought him to the b 
of the hill, whereon their city was built that t 
might cast him down headlong. But he pas 
through the midst of them, went his way. 

OFFERT. Ps. liv.—Hear O God, my pre 
and despise not my supplication: be attentive to 
and hear me. 

SECRET. Grant, O Lord, that the offering 
make to thee, as a mark of our homage, may 
come to us a sacrament available to our salvet 


Thro’. 


TUPENAT IN THE IIl. WEEK, &c.. Yn 


: Pe. xiii.—Who shall give out of Sion 
3 of Isreel: When the Lord shall have 


fue i the pepe of his people, Jacob sholl 


(M. Presta, names, rent, we be- 

» O Almighty anc and merciful God, that 

ake with our mouths, we may receive 

minds. Thro’. 

ray. Bow down your heads to God. 

rd Subveniat.—May thy mercy, O Lord, 
that by thy protection we may be de- 

mt the da ngers P sin that surround ua, und 

al happiness. Thro’. 





TUESDAY. 


IT. Ps. xvi—I have cried to thee, for 
od, hast 'heard me: incline thy ear unto 
r my words Keep me, O Lord, as the 
hine eye: protect me under the shadow 
ings. Ps. Hear, O Lord, my justice: 
ay supplication. V. Glory. 

‘CT. Exaudinos.—Graciously hear us, O 
and merciful God, and grant us the gift 
continence. Thro’. 


N. 4 Kings iv. 1. 7.—In those days: A 
man of the wives of the prophets cried to 
iying: Thy servant my husband is dead, 
knowest that thy servant was one that 
1, and behold the creditor is come to take 
‘wo sons to serve him. And Eliseus said 
That wilt thou have me do for thee? Tell 
ast thou in thy house? And she answered : 
dmaid have nothing in my house but a 
o anoint me. And he said to her: Go, 
all thy neighbours empty vessels not a few. 
, and shut t y door, when thou art within, 
ws: aud pour gut thereof into all those 





WEDNESDAY IN'THS tr. WEEK, &c. )?2' 


ah wrought tren the right hand of the 
th exalted me : I id not die, but live: and 

ial the works of the Lord. 

May we receive, we beseech thee, 

these sacraments, the effect of our re- 

nj 80 that, by means thereof, we may with- 

wn all human excesses, and thou mayest be- 

on us the gift of salvation. ‘Thro’. 

M. Ps. xiv.—Logli who shall dwell in th 

Je? Or who shall rest in thy holy hill 

walketh without blemish, and worketh 


IMM. Sacris.—Being cleansed, O Lord, , by 
mysteries, grant us, we beseech thee 
din and grace. Thro’. , 
spray. Bow down your heads to God. 
VER. Tua.—Defend us, O Lord, by thy 
m, and ever preserve us from all iniquity. 


WEDNESDAY. 


101IT. Ps. xxx.—But I have hoped in the 
will be glad, and rejoice in thy mercy: for 
st regarded my humility. Ps. In thee, O 
ave I hoped, let me never be confounded: 

ne in thy justice, and rescue me. V. Glory. 

LECT. Presta nobis.—Grant, O Lord, we 
thee, that being improved by this whole- 
3t we may abstain from all pernicious vice, 
that means, more easily obtain thy mercy. 


JON. Exod. xx. 12. 24.— — Thus saith the 

od: Honour thy father and thy mother, that 

yest be long lived upon the land which the 

God will give thee. Thou shalt not kill. 

halt not commit adultery. Thou shalt not 

Chou shalt not Lear false witness against thy 
3 





III. WEEK OF LENT. 175 


fom me, shall profit thee. And he shall not ho- 
mur his father -or mother: and you have made 
void the commandment of God for your tradition. 
Hypucrites, well has Isaias prophesied of you, say- 
ng: *'l'his people honoureth no with their lips, 
but their heart is far from me. And in vain do they 
worship me, teaching doctrines and commandments 
Wmen." And having called together the multitudes 
uto him, he said to them: Here ye and under- 
mand. Not that which goeth into the mouth, de- 
flth a man: but what cometh out of the mouth, 
this detileth a man. Then came his disciples, and 
aid to him: Dost thou know that the Pharisees, 
when they heard this word, were scandalized? But 
heanswering, suid: Every plant which my heavenly 
Fether hath not planted, shall be rooted up. Let 
tem alone: they are blind, and leaders of the 
bind. And if the blind lead the blind, both fall 
Mi the pit. And Peter answering said to him: 
nd to us this parable. But he said; Are you 
abo yet without understanding? Do you not under- 
Mand, that whatsoever entereth into the mouth, 
pen into the belly, and is cast out into the privy ? 
t the things which proceed out of the mouth, 
come forth from the heart, and those things defile a 
man For out of the heart come forth evil thoughts, 
murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false testi- 
inonies, blaspheinies. "These are the things that de- 
Üeainan. But to eat with unwashed hands doth 
mt defile a man. 
OFF ERT. Ps. cviii.—Shew us, O Lerd,thy mercy, 
for the glory of thy name: for thy mercy is sweet. 
SECRET. Receive, O Lord, we beseech thee, 
the prayers of thy people, together with the offering 
of these hosts; and while we celebrate these thy 
mysteries, defend us from all dangers. ‘Thro’. 
COMM. Ps. xv.—Thou hast made known to me 
the ways of life: thou shalt fill me with joy with 
thy countenance. 





HL WEEK .OF LENT. | 17? | 
reve t^ your fathers from the beginning and 


more, path the Lord Jimighty. 
D. cxliv.—The eyes of all hope in thee, 
and thou givest them meat in due season, 
y openes thy hand, and fillest with thy bleas- 
y living creature. 
i Luke i ae 44. — Jt that time: 
out e e, went into 
house. And Simon's wife mother was taken 
reat fever, and they besought him for her. 
ding over her; he commanded the fever, 
ft her. And immediately rising, she min- 
0 them. And when the eun was d arccgt 
t any sick with divers diseases, 
him. But he laying his hands on every 
hem, healed them. And devils went out: 
my, crying out and saying: Thou art the 
lod. "And he rebuking them suflered thema 
eak, for they knew that he was Chris. And 
was day, going out he went into a desert 
nd the multitude sought him, and came to 
d they stayed him that he should not depart 
m. 'To whom he said: 'To other cities I 
iach the kingdom of God: for therefore am 
And he was preaching in the synagogues of 


SRT. Ps. exxxvii. — If I shall walk in the 
' tribulation, thou wilt quicken me, O Lord; 
1 hast stretched forth thy hand against the 
'my enemies; and thy right hand hath saved 


(ET. We offer thee, O Lord, on occasion of 
ious death of thy holy servants, this sacri- 
m which their martyrdom, and that of all 
»ok its beginning. Thro’. 

M. Ps. cxviii.— Thou hast commanded thy 
idments to be kept most diligently. O that 
s may be directed to keep tly justifications. 


178 FRIDAY LS THE 


P. COMM. Sit nobis.—May this thy seen 
O Lord, procure for us that salvation which © 
for by the merits of thy blessed martyrs Cosma 
Damian. Thro’. 

Let us pray. Bow down your heads to Ga 

PRAYER. Subjectum.—May thy heavenly 1 
O Lor, always increase thy people, and 
ever obedient to thy commandments, Thro’. 


FRIDAY. 


INTROIT.—Ps. Ixxxv.—Shew me, O L 
token for good: that they who hate me may | 
and be confounded, because thou, O Lord 
helped me and comforted me. Ps. Bow down 
ear, O Lord, and hear me, for I am needy and 
V. Glory. 

COLLECT. Jejunia.—Let thy kind favo 
Lord, accompany our fast, that as we abstain 
corporal food, so we may likewise refrain fre 
vice. Thro’. 

LESSON. Numb. xx. 2. 13.—In those 
The children of Israel came together a 
Moses and Aaron; and making a sedition 
said: Give us water to drink. And Mose 
Aaron leaving the multitude, went into the : 
nacle of the covenant, and fell flat upot 
ground, and cried to the Lord and said: O 

od, hear tho cry of this people, and op 
them thy treasure a fountain of living water 
being satisfied, they may cease to murmur. 
the glory of the Lord appeared over them. 
the Lord spoke to Moses saying: Take th 
and assembie the people together, thou and / 
thy brother, and speak to the rock before them 
it shall yield waters. And when thou hast bn 
forth water out of the rock, all the multitude 
their cattle shall drink. Moses therefore too 


HL OWERK OP SENT. 9 


ih was before the Lord, as-he had com- 
him, and having gathered together the mul- 
sfore the rock, he said to them: Hear, ye 
s and incredulous: can we bring you forth 
t of this rock? And when Moses had lifted 
sand, and struck the rock twice with the 
e came forth water in gre&t abundance, so 
Prople and their cattle drank. And the 
to Moses and Aaron: Because you have , 
wed me, to sanctify me before the children 
pyou shall not bring these people into the 
I will give them. This is water of 
stion, where the children of Israel strove 
rds against the Lord, and he was sanctifled 


>». Ps. xxvii—My heart trusted in the 
a I found relief: my flesh is healed, and I 
1 pleasure return him thanks. V. To thee, 
have I cried out: answer me, O my God, 
irt not from me. t 


ACT. Ps. cii.—Deal not, p 117. 


"EL. John iv. 5. 41.—At that ttwe; 
ame to a city of Samaria which is called 
near the land which Jacob gave to his 
eph. Now Jacob's well was there. Jesus 
3 being wearied with his journey, sat thus 
rell. It was about the sixth hour. There 
a woman of Samaria to draw water. Jésus 
her: Give meto drink. (For his disciples 
me into the city to buy meats.) Then that 
an woman saith to him: How dost thou, 
Jew, ask of me to drink, who am a Ba- 
woman? For the Jews do not communi- 
h the Samaritans. Jesus answered, and said 

If thou didst know the gift of God, and 
is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou 
i wouldst have asked of him, and he would have 





. Hb WEEK OF LENT. 161 


Mh her? The woman therefore left her 
Ot, and went her way into the city, and saith 
Mem there: Come, sand see a man who hath 
‘all things whatsoever I have done. Is not he 
"t? went therefore out of the city, and 
iMo him. In the mean time the disciples pray- 
,mying:; Rabbi, eat. But he said to them: 1 
mat to eat which you know not of. The disci- 
wefore said one to another: Hath any man 
thim to eat? Jesus saith to them: My meat 
0 the will of him that sent me, that I rhay 
his work. Do not you say, there are yet four 
; and then the harvest cometh? Behold I 
fou, lift up your eyes, and see the countries, 
rere white already to harvest. And he that 
, receiveth wages and Futberem fruit unto 
ting: that both he that soweth, and he 
may rejoice together. For in this is 
true: that it is one man that soweth, and 
ther that reapeth. I have sent you to reap 
which you did not labour: others have la- 
and you have entered into their labours. 
that city many of the Samaritans believed in 
the word of the woman giving testimony: 
ne all things whatsoever I have done. So when 
waritans were come to him, they desired him 
would tarry there. And he abode there two 
And many more believed in him because of 
word. And they said tothe woman: We 
lieve, not for thy saying: for we ourselves 
n him, and know that he is indeed the Saviour 
'orld. 
ERT. Ps. v.—Hearken to the voice of m 
D my King and my God: for to thee will 


RET. We beseech thee, O Lord, mercifully 
the offerings we consecrate to thee, so that 
ay become acceptable to thee, and always 
our salvation. ro’. 


Q 





“nu. WEEK OF LENT. 183 


ment came to them. And when the people 
gted away at noon, Susanna went in, and 
wd in her husband's orchard. And the old 
saw her going in every day, and walking: and 
wero inflamed with lust towards her: an 
wed their own mind, and turned away their 
i that they might not look unto heaven, nor 
amber just a ents. So they were both 
Bded with the love of her, yet they did not 
e known their grief one to the other: for they 
yashamed to declare to one another their lust, 
desirous to have to do with her: and they 
carefully every day to see her. And one 
to the other: Let us now £g home, for it is din- 
lime. So going out they departed one from ano- 
And turning back again, they came both to 
mme place: and asking one another the cause 
acknowledged their lust: and then they agree 
upon a time when they might find her 
» And it fell out, as they watched a fit day, 
went in on a time, as yesterday and the day be- 
with two maids only, and was desirous to 
i herself in the orchard: for it was hot weather 
there was nobody there, but the two old men 
bad hid themselves and were considering her. 
xe said to the maids: Bring me oil, and wash- 
3»alls, and shut the doors of the orchard, that I 
wash me. And they did as she bade them: 
they shut the doors of the orchard, and went 
by a back door to fetch what she had com- 
Jed them, and they knew not that the elders 
! hid within. Now when the maids were gone 
, the two elders arose, and ran to her, and 
Behold the doors of the orchard are shut, 
nobody seeth us, and we are in love with thee, 
refore consent to us, and lie with us. But if 
wilt not, we will bear witness inst 


that a young man was with thee, and there- 
y 4 Q 2 , 


JH. WEEK OF LENT. 185 


t having token this woman, we asked who 
1g man was, but she would not tell us: of 
we are witnesses, ne multitude believed 
i e elders and ju of the | 

[ condemned her to death. Then Buen’ 
out with a loud voice, and said: O eternal 
o knowest hidden things, who knowest all 
xfore they come to pass, thou knowest that 
€ borne false witness against me: and be- 
iust die, whereas I have done none of these 
which these men have maliciously forged 
ne. And the Lord heard her voice. And 
19 was led to be put to death, the Lord 
p the holy spirit of a young boy, whose 
as Daniel: and he cried out with a loud 
f am clear from the blood of this woman. 
Il the people turning towards him, said: 
weaneth this word that thou hast spoken? 
tanding in the midst of them said: Are ye 
h, ye children of Isracl, that without exam- 
or knowledge of the truth, ye have con- 
a daughter of Israel? Return to judgment, 
have borne false witness against her. So all 
ye turned again in haste, and the old men 
him: Come and sit thou down among ns, 
w itus: seeing God hath given thee the ho- 
old age. And Daniel said to the people: 
» these two far from one another, and I will 
| them... So when they were put asunder one 
e other, he called one of them and said to 
thou that art grown old in evil days, now 
sins come out which thou hast committed 
in judging unjust judgments, oppressing the 
t and letting the guilty go free, whereas 
d saith: the innocent and the just thou shalt 
Now then, if thou sawest her, tell me 
vhat tree thou sawest them conversing to- 
He said: wnder a mastick tree. And Daniel 


Q3 





IV. WEEK OF LENT. 187 - 
wrote with his on the ground. When 


they continued asking him, he lifted 
and said to them: He that is without sin 









down, he wrote on the ground. But 
hearing this, went out one by one, beginning at 
és eldest, and Jesus alone remained, and the wo- 


F Who sid: No man, Lord. And Jesus said: Nei- 
he will Icondemn thee. Go, and now sin no more. 
OFFERT. Ps. cxviii.—Direct my steps accordin 
us word, that no injustice may reign in me, 6 


f SECRET. Grant, we beseech thee, O Almigh 

. ed, that the offering of this sacrifice may cleans) 
ad protect our frail nature from all evil. 

MM. John viii.—Woman, hath no man con- 
émned thee? No man, Lord. Neither will I con- 
&mnthee. Nowsinno more. | ' 

P. COMM. Quesumus.—We beseech thee, O Al- 
Mighty God, that we may be reckoned among his 
members, whose body and blood we partake of. 
Who livest, &c. 

letus pray. Bow down your heads to God. 

PRAYER. Pretende.—Stretch forth, O Lord, 
er thy people, the right hand of thy heavenly aid, 
tet they may seek thee with their whole heart, and 
ES 





y obtain what they ask for as they ought. 





IV. SUNDAY IN LENT. 
[Vs Mass of this day, the Church seems to forget 
the sentiments of penance with which she hath 
been occupied from the beginning of Lent. The rea- 
*on whereof is, that formerly such as were to receive 
ism at Easter, were enregistered, after having 
been examined this week: She also saw the time now 


183 IV. SUNDAY IN LENT. 


approaching for the reconciliation of the penitents 
whom sne had subjected to public penance on 
Wednesday. The future birth, therefore, of those who 
were judged worthy of the grace of baptism; and the 
resurrection to a new life of several of her childres, 
who, after having gone astray, return to God by & 
sincere conversion, is this day the subject of her joy. 
INTROIT. Js. Ixvi. Ps.cxxi. 
R Eivice Jerusalem, JEtare, Jerusalem, d 
and meet together all conventum facie om 
you who love her: rejoice nes qui diligitis eam : gaw- 
exceedingly, you who dete cum letilia, quiin tnt 
have been in sorrow, that (itia fuistis, ut erulleis, 
you may leap for joy, et satiemini ab uberibus 
and be satiated with com-  consolalionis vestra. 
fort from her breasts. Ps. cxxi. Letatus sum 

Ps. I rejoiced at the ‘in his que dicta sual 
things that were said to mihi: in domum Domisf 
me: we shall go into the «bimus. 
house of the Lord. V. Gloria. 

V. Glory. 

COLLECT. Concede.—Grant, we beseech thet, 
O Almighty God, that we, who are justly afili 
according to our demerits, may be relieved by thy 
comforting grace. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. Gal. iv. 22. 31.—Brethren: It is 
"written that Abraham had two sons: the one pe 
bond-woman, and the other by a free-woman. 
he who was of the bond-woman, was born accord- 
ing to the flesh: but he by the free-woman, was 
promise. Which things are said by an allegory. 
l'or these are the two testaments. The one from 
Mount Sina, engendering unto bondage; which ® 
E gar: for Sina is a mountain in Arabia, which hath 
affinity to that Jerusalem which now is, and is i1 
bondage with her children. But that Jerusalem, 
which is above, is free; which is our mother. For 
it is written: “Rejoice, thou barren, that bearest 
not: break forth and cry, thou that travailest not: 


TIMES e" 
ee 


Gd duc £I95 


IV. SUNDAY IN LENT. 189 


y are the children of the desolate, more than 
wt hath a husband.” Now we, brethren, as 
w, are the children of promise. But as the 
was born according to the flesh, persec 
was after the spirit: so also it is now. But 
th the scripture? “Cast out the bond-wo- 
. her son: for the son of the bond-woman 
be heir with the son of the free-woman.” 
we are not children of the bond- 
but of the free; by the freedom wherewith 
ath made us free. 
). Ps. cxxi.—I rejoiced at the things that 
d to me; we shall go into the house of the 


t peace be in thy strength, and abundance in 


re. 

JT. Ps. cxxiv.—Qui confidunt in 

ts Sion : non commovebitur in aternum, que 
* Jerusalem. ‘They that trust in the Lord, 
as mount Sion: he shall not be moved for- 
t dwelleth in Jerusalem. V. Mountains are 
yout it; so the Lord is round about his peo- 
henceforth now and for ever. 

"EL. John. vi. l. 15.—At that time: Jesus 
2r the sea of Galilee, which is that of Tibe- 
d a great multitude followed him, because 
' the miracles which he did on them that 
eased. Jesus therefore went up into a moun- 
[there he sat with his disciples. Now the 
ie. festival day of the Jews, was near at hand. 
lesus therefore had lifted up his eyes, and 
t avery great multitude cometh tc him, he 
'hilip: Whence shall we buy bread that these 
? And this he said to try him: for he him- 
w what he would do. Philip answered him: 
indred penny-worth of bread is not sufficient 
n, that every one may take a little. One of 
ples, Andrew, the brother of Simon Teter, 


wey So 





14 e t - 
IV, WEEK ÓP LENT. 191 


prayer; give ear to the words of my mouth 
ML IO, aoetgore have risen up against me; and 
t» bave sought after my soul. V. Glory. " 
Suabnighty God, that we, who annual jlebrato 
we, who annually ce 
@s holy fast, may be well pleasing to thee both in 
Wy and mind. Thro’. 
“LESSON. 3 Kings i. 16. 28. — In those days: 
men that were harlots, came to king Solo- 
in, and stood before him: and one of them said: 
thee, my Lord, I and this woman dwelt 
ia one house, and I was delivered of a child with 
her in the chamber. And the third day after that I 
wes delivered, she also was delivered ; and we were 
and no other person with us in the house, 
wetwo. And this woman's child died in the 
For in her sleep she overlaid him. And 
in the dead time of the night, she took my 
from my side, while thy handmaid was asl 
ead laid it in her bosom: and laid her dead child in 
my bosom. And when I rose in the morning to 
give my child suck, behold it was dead ; but consid- 
Wing him more diligently when it was clear day 
Ifrund that it was not mine which I bore. And thé 
ether woman answered : It is not so as thou sayest, 
but thy child is dead, and mine is alive. On the 
contrary she said: Thou liest: for my child liveth, 
ead thy child is dead. And in this manner they 
stove before the king. Then saith the king: The 
ene saith, my child is alive, and thy child is dead. 
And the other answereth, Nay, but thy child is 
tad, and mine liveth. The king therefore said: 
Bring me a sword. And when they had brought a 
?wd before the king, divide, said he, the living 
child in two, and give half to the one, and half to 
the other. But the woman, whose child was alive, 
€i to the king (for her bowels were moved upon 
her child) I beseech thee, my Lord, give her the 





IY. WERK IN LENT. 108 


id. But Jesus did not trust himself to 
we he knew all men, and because he 
that any should give testimony of mun, 
what was in man. 
X Ps. xcix.—Sing joyfülly to God, all 
»rve the Lord with gladness; come be- 
ence with exceeding great joy, for be the 
f is God. 
*. May the sacrifice we have offered thee, 
p^ give us life, and defend us. Toro’. 
s. xviii.—From my secret sins cleanse 
l, and from those of others: spare thy 


[. Sumptis—May the receiving of these 
ries, we beseech thee, O Lord, advance 
edemption. Thro’. 

y. w down your heads to God. 

L^ Deprecationem.—We beseech thee, O- 
ur prayer, and grant us thy protection, 
who inspirest usto ask it. Thro’. 


TUESDAY. 
I. Ps. liv.—Hear, O God, my prayer, 
not my supplication: be attentive to me 
» Ps. lam grieved in my exercise ; and 
the voice of the enemy, and at the trib- 
esinner. V. Glory. 
?T. Sacre.—We beseech thee, O Lord, 
y fast we observe may be to our improve- 
y conversation, and draw down upon us 
.Succours of thy mercy. Thro’. 
[. Exod. xxxii. 7. 14.—In those 8: 
spoke to Moses, saying: (Go, get thee 
ple, which thou hast brought out of 
Fe t, hath sinned. They have quickly 
1 the way which theu didst shew them, 
ve made to themselves a molten calf, and 
d it, and sacrificing victims to it, have 








€ IV, WEEK OF LENT. . 195 


sone of you keepeth. the law. Why seek you to 
kime? The multitude answered and said : V hou 
ht a devil: Who seeketh to kill thee? Jesus an- 
sewed, and said to them: One work I have done: 
Qi you all wonder: therefore Moses gave you cir- 
dimeision: (not because it is of Moses, but of the 
Ker) and on the Sabbath-day you circumcise a 
men. If a man receive circumcision on the Sab- 
lth-day, that the law of Moses may not be bro- 
lit; are you at me, because I have healed 
| Ve whole man on the Sabbath-da ? J udge not ac- 
fing to the appearance, but judge just Judgment. 
E therefore of Jerusalem "m : "Ts ot is he 
they seek to kill? And behold he speaketh 
$enly, and they say nothing to him. Have the 
ters known for a truth that this is the Christ? But 
W know this man whence he is; but when the 
Grist cometh, no man knoweth whence he is. Jesus 
@refore cried out in the temple, teaching and say- 
ip: You both know me, and you know whence 1 
$a: and Iam not come of myself; but he that 
"at me is true, whom you know not, I know 
him, because I am from him, and he hath sent me. 
They sought therefore to apprehend him: and no 
5m laid hands on him, because his hour was not 
"come. But of the people many believed in him. 
OFFERT. Ps. xxxix.—With expectatio I have 
Wüited for the Lord, and he hath looked upon me: 
tad he heard my prayer; and hath put into my 
mouth a new canticle, a hymn to our God. 
SECRET. May this offering, O Lord, we beseech 
cleanse away our sins: and sanctify both the 
bodies and souls of thy servants for worthily celebrat- 
ke sacrifice. Thro’. 

MM. Ps. xix.—We will rejoice in thy salva- 
fon: and in the name of the Lord our God we shall 
be exalted. 

P, COMM. Hujus nos. May the receiving of 
R 


IV. WEEK OF LENT. 197 


valk in my commandments, and to keep my 
ats, and do them. And you shall dwell in 
which I gave to your fathers, and you shall 
people, and I will be your God, saith the 
ye 


D. Ps. xxxiii. — Come, children, hearken to 
ill teach you the fearof the Lord. .". Come 
n, and be erlightened: and your face shall 
onfounded. 
JLLECT.  Presia.—Grant, we beseech 
Almighty God, that the devotion, which 
ts punish ourselves by this yearly fast, may 
te us rejoice to the end that, suppressing 
ives all earthly affections, we may more 
eeive thy heavenly mspirations. Thro’. 
SSSON. Is. 1.16. 19.—T hus saith the Lord 
Vash yourselves, be clean, take away the 
our devices from my eyes: cease to do per- 
learn to do well: seek: judgment, relieve 
‘essed, judge for the fatherless, defend the 
And then come, and accuse me, saith the 
"your sins be as the scarlet, they shall be 
white as snow: and if they be red as crim- 
‘shall be white as wool. If you be willing, 
hearken to me, you shall eat the good 
"the land, saith the Lord Alnighty. 
). Ps. xxxii.—Blessed is the nation whose 
he Lord: the people whom he hath chosen 
iheritance. V. By the word of the Lord the 
were established ; and all the power of them 
jirit of his mouth. 
\CT. Ps. cii.—Deal not, p. 117. 
"EL. John ix. 1. 38.—Alt that time: Jesus 
by, saw a man that was blind from his 
nd his disciples asked him: Rabbi, who 
aed, this man, or his parents, that he should 
blind? Jesus answered: Neither hath this 
R 3 








IV. WEEK OF LENT. 201 


en the man of God saw her coming towards 
» said to Giezi his servant: Behold that 
itess. Go therefore to meet her, and say to her: 
vell with thee, and with thy husband, and 
iy son? And she answered: Well. And 
he came to the man of God to the mount, 
ght hold on his feet: and Giezi came to re- 
er. And the man of God said: Let her 
x her soul is in anguish, and the Lord hath 
rom me, and hath not told me. And she 
aim: Did J ask a son of my Lord? Did]! 
to thec: Do not deceive me? 'Then he said 
: Gird up thy loins, and take up my staff in 
d, and go. If any man meet thee, salute 
: and if any man salute thee, answer him 
od lay my staff upon the face of the child. 
» mother of the child said: As the Lord 
and as my soul liveth, 1 will not leave 
He arose, therefore, and followed her. 
zi was gone before them and laid the staff 
1€ face of the child, and there was no 
or sense: and he returned to meet him, 
. him, saying: 'The child is not risen. Eli- 
refore went into the house, and behold the 
; dead on his bed. And going in he shut the 
on him, and upon the child, and prayed to 
"d. And he went up, and lay upon the 
and he put his mouth upon his mouth, and 
s upon his eyes, and his hands upon his 
and he bowed himself upon him, and the 
flesh grew warm. Then he returned and 
in the house, once to and fro: and he went 
lay upon him: and the child gaped seven 
nd opened his eyes. And he called Giezi, 
1to him: Call this Sunamitess. And she 
alled went in to him. And he said: "Take 
son. She came and fell at his feet, and 





IT. WEEK OF LENT. 203 


te prey: Bow down your heads to God. - 

LY. Populi.—O God, the author and 

of thy people, deliver them fiom the sins, 
are that they may be always 

leasing in thy sight, and safe under thy pro- 


FRIDAY. 


ROIT. Ps. ay hU. O bord. on of ny 

s always in sight: my 

y redeemer. Ps. The heavens shew forth 
of God, and the firmament declareth the 
his hands. V. Glory. . 

. Deus qui.—O God, who by thy 
le mysteries givest new life to the world; 
we beseech thee, that thy Church may ad- 
in the observance of thy eternal precepts, 
ver be destitute of thy temporal assistance. 


SON. 3 Kings xvii. 17. 24.—In those days: 
m of the woman, the mistress of the house, 
c and the sickness was very grievous, so that 
ras no breath left in him. And she said to 
what have I to do with thee, thou men 
d? Art thou come to me, that my ini- 
should be remembered, and that thou 
it kill my son? And Elias said to her: Give 
son. And he took him out of her bosom, 
Tied him into the upper chamber where he 
and laid him upon his own bed. And he 
» the Lord and said: O Lord, my God, hast 
fflicted also the widow, with whom I am 
sort maintained, 80 as to kil) her son? And 
tehed, and measured himself upon the child 
times, and cried to tho Lord and said: O 
ay God, let the scul of this child, I beseech 
return ‘ato uis bedy And the Lord heard 
ice cí Fliae ard the 2oul of the child return- 








‘saruRDA AY IN THE IV. WEEK Or, &c. 207 
Jews, and ied out: Lazarus, rus, come forth. And he 
| ‘who had been dead four days, came forth bound 
lnmds and feet. 

NA COMM. Hac Mey the receiving of this 
, WRment, we beseech thee, O Lord, ever free 
vl Goh: our sins, and protect us ftom all adversity. 
1 : Let us pray. Bow down your heads to God. 
; COPRAYER. Da nobis.—Grant, we beseech thee, 
3D Almighty God, that we, who are sensible of our 
Jm werniness, and confide in thy power, may al- 
rejoice in the effects of thy goodness. Thro’. 














SATURDAY. 


.OINTROIT. Js. lv.—You that thirst, come to the 
cetera, saith the Lord: and you that have no money, 
, Come and drink with joy. Ps. xxvii. Attend, O my 
«people, to my law: incline your ears to the words of 
. Ay mouth. V. Glory. 

-, COLLECT. Fiat Domine.—Grant us, O Lord, 

|” We beseech thee, an increase of devotion: for then 

. aly will our fasts avail us, when they are well 

. jpleesing to thy goodness. Thro’. 

| LESSON. Js. xlix. 8. 15.—Thus saith the Lord: 
In an acceptable time I have heard thee, and in the 
day of salvation I have helped thee: and I have 
preserved thee, and given thee to be a covenant of 
‘the people, that thou mightest raise up the earth, 
and possess the inheritances that were destroyed; 
that thou mightest say to them that are bound: 
Come forth: and to them that are in darkness: 
Shew yourselves. They shall feed in the ways, 
and their pastures shall be "in every plain. They 
shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall the heat 
nor the sun strike them; for he that is merciful to 
them shall be their shepherd, and at the fountains 

-of waters he shall give them drink. And I will 

S2 





PASSION SUNDAY. 209: 
N 
| laid hands on him, because his hour was 


come. 

ERT. Ps. xvii.—The Lord is my firmament, 

Iz my deliverer : and in him will I hope. 
T. Be appeased, O Lord, we beseech 

ith these our offerings; and, in thy mercy, 

our will, even when it rebelleth, to subinit 


M. Ps. xxii—The Lord ruleth me: and 
want nothing, he hath set me in a place of 
; he hath brought me up on the water of 


nent. 

)MM. "Tua nos.—May thy sacred mysteries, 
, we beseech thee, purify us, and, by their 
, make us well pleasing to thee. Thro’. 

8 prey: Bow down your heads to God. 
YER. Deus qui.—O God, who choosest 
> shew mercy, than to be angry with those 
pe in thee: grant we may worthily lament 
we have committed, that so we may find the 
fthy comfort. Thro’. , 





PASSION SUNDAY. 


two last weeks of Lent are, in a particular man- 
consecrated to the Passion of Jesus Christ. And 
i that upon which we are now entering, be only 
ation to the following, and the Church representa 
other objects to our thoughts, the passion of 
i nevertheless often referred to, for which reason 
is called Passion-suNDAY. 

'salm Judica, as well as the Gloria Patri, at the 
is omitted; and those who have written on the 
, assert this to be agreeable to the ancient prac- 
hey further in general observe, that the particu- 
monies of these two last weeks, but more espe- 
'the three last days in Lent, are venerable remains 
nt usages. 


S3 


1 


210 PASSION SUNDAY: : 


INTROIT. P^». xiii. 


JUDGE. me, O God, DICA me, Dem, 8: 
and distinguish my -discerne causes me 
cause from the ation that de gente non senile. 

is not holy: deliver me homine tnigue d & 
from the unjust and de- eripe me: qw 
ceitful man: forthou art Deus meus, 
my God and my strength. mea. . 
Ps. Send forth thy light Ps. Emile lucem tums 
and thy truth: for they et veritatem tuam: Uu. 
have conducted me, and me deduxerunt e£. addi 
brought me to thy holy eruni in moniem owed 
mount, and into thy te ta- fuum, ef in a 
bernacles. Judge me, &c. iua. Judica me Tu : 


Gloria Patri is omilted tll. Easter. 
COLLECT. Quaesumus, -Mercifuly look "n 
on thy people, we beseech thee, O prtection, ey 
that, by thy bounty and | 
be governed and guarded both in body and su 
Thro’. 


EPISTLE. Heb, i ix. 11. 1. s Brehren: Chit 
being come an high priest of the good thing 
come, by a greater and more perfect d cie Mf 
made with hands, that is, not of this creation: nt 
ther by the blood of goats, or of calves, but by MÀ 
own blood, entered once into the Holies, havi 
obtained eternal redemption. For if the blood 
goats and of oxen, and the ashes of an heifer rines 
sprinkled, sanctify such as are defiled, to the clea, 

ing of the flesh: how much more shall the blood of 
Christ (who by the Holy Ghost offered hime : 
unspotted unto God) cleanse our conscience from. 
dead works to serve the living God? And thet 
fore he is the mediator of the new testament: dei ; 
by means of his death, for the redemption of tbott : 
transgressions which were under the former test 











PASSION SUNDAY. 11 


wey that are called may receive the promise 
al inheritance. 

D. Ps. cxlii—Deliver me, O Lord, from 
mies; teach me to do thy will. Ps.. xvii. 
) Lord, art my deliverer from the enraged 
: thou wilt put me out of the reach of 
at assault me: and thou wilt rescue me from 
ghteous man. ' 


ACT. Pe. cxxviii.—S. ezpugnaverunt me 
ile mea. Many a time have they ought against 
my youth. P. Let Israel now say : They have 
tacked me from my youth. 7. But they 
t prevail over me: the wicked have wrought 
y back. P. They have lengthened their ini- 
he Lord, who is just, will cut the necks of 


EL. John viii. 46. 59.—Al that time: Jesus 
the multitude of the Jews: Which of you 
vince me of sin? If I say the truth to you, 
ou not believe me? .He that is of 
he words of God. Therefore you hear them 
use you are not of God. The Jews therefore 
d; and said to him: Do not we say well that 
_a Samaritan and hast a devil? Jesus an- 
I have not a devil: but I honour my Fa 
. you have dishonoured me. But I seek not 
glory: there is one that seeketli and judg- 
men, amen, I say to you: If any man keep _ 
d, he shall not see death for ever. The 
'refore said: Now we know that thou hast a 
Abraham is dead, and the prophets: and 
yest: If any man keep my word, he shali 
e death for ever. Art thou greater than 
her Abraham, who is dead? and the pro- 
€ dead. Whom dost thon make thyself? 
iswered : If I glorify myself, my glory is no- 
It is my Father that glorificth me, of whom 


212 MONDAY IN PASSION WEEK. 


ou say that he is your God. And you haw 
own him, but I know him. And if I shoal 
that I know hin not, I should be like to you, ! 
But 1 do know him, and do keep his word.  / 
ham your father rejoiced that he might seo my 
he saw it, and was glad. The Jews then & 
him: ‘Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hat 
seen Abraham? Jesus said to them: Amen, § 
1 say to you, before Abraham was made, I 
They took up stones therefore to cast ot him. 
Jesus hid himself, and went out of the temple. 

OFFERT. Ps. cxviii.—I will praise the 
Lord, with my whole heart: reward thy serva 
shall live, and keep thy commandments: sav 
according to thy word, O Lord. 

SECRET. May these offerings, O Lord, 
loosen the bonds of our wickedness, and obt& 
us the gifts of thy mercy. Thro’. 

Preface. *Qui salutem human generis, p. XX 

COMM. This is the body which shall be « 
ered up for you: this isthe cup of the new cov 
in my blood, saith the Lord. As often as yo 
ceive them do it in remembrance of me. 

P. COMM. Adesto.—Help us, O Lord our 
and forever protect those whom thou hast refn 
with thy sacred mysteries. ‘Thro’. 


MONDAY. 

INTROIT. P5.lv.—Have mercy on me, O: 
for man hath trodden me under foot: all the day 
he hath afflicted me fighting against me. P: 
enemies have trodden on nie all the day long, foi 
are many that make war against me. Haven 
&c. to Ps. 

COLLECT.  Sanct;fica.—Sanctify, O Lon 
beseech thee, our fasts, and mercifully grant 1 
pardon of all our sins. Thro’. 


LESSON. Jonas iii. l. 10.—In those days: 


MONDAY IN PASSION WEEK. : 913 


word of the Lord came to Jonas the second time, 
Min, Arise and go to Ninive the great city: and 
ch in it the preaching that I bid thee. And 
MS arose, and went to Ninive according to the 
ped of the Lord: now Ninive was a great city of 
fee days journey. And Jonas began to enter into 
‘g@y one day's journey: and he cried and said: 
days and Ninive shall be destroyed. And 
B men of Ninive believed in God: and they pro- 
ned a fast, and put on sackcloth from the great 
lito the least. And the word came to the Ki g 
A Ninive: and he rose up out of his throne, an 
away his robe from him, and was clothed with 
kcloth, and sat in ashes. And he caused it to be 
Reclaimed and published in Ninive from the mouth 
ing and of his princes, saying: Let neither 
R nor oxen nor sheep, taste any thing: 
KM them not feed, nor drink water. And let men 
M beasts be covered with sackcloth, and cry to the 
Wed with all their strength, and let them turn every 
me from his evil way, and from the iniquity that 
in their hands... Who can tell if God will turn, 
| forgive: and will turn away from his fierce 
meer, and we shall not perish? And God saw their 
works, that they were turned from their evil way: 
ad the Lord our God had mercy on the people. 


1 GRAD. Ps. liii—O God, hear my prayer: give 
‘@rto the words of my mouth. V. Save mé, O God, 
by thy name, and rescue me by thy might. — 


. *TRACT. Ps. cii.—Deal not, p. 117. 


GOSPEL. John vii. 32. 39.—.4t that ime: The 
valers and Pharisees sent ministers to apprehend 
dems. Jesus therefore said to them: Yet a little 
while I am with you: and then I go to him that 
sent me. You shall seek me, and shall not find me: 
ead where I am, thither you cannot come. The 
Jews therefore, said among themselves: Whither 

























Passion wxrx. 215 | 


N. Dan. xiv. 27. 42.—In those days: The 
Bebylon gsthered together against the 
said to him: Deliver up to us Daniel, 
destroyed Bel, and killed the Dragan, 
ve will destroy thee and thy house. 

w that they ee upon im violently: 
constrain necessity, he ivered 
vem. And they cast him into the den of 
x0 was there six days. And in the den 


seven lions, and they had given to them. . 


ses every day, and two sheep: but then 
not given unto them, to the intent that 
devour Daniel. Now there was in Judea 
called Habacuc, and he had boiled pot- 
xad broken bread in a bowl; and was 
he field to it to the reapers. And 
f the Lord said to Habacuc: Carry the 
ich thou hast, into Babylon to Daniel, 
1e lions’ den. And Habacuc said: Lo 

r Babylon, nor do I know the den. 

Xff the Lord took him by the top of: his 
‘arried him by the hair of his head, and 
Babylon over the den in the force of his 
ad Habacuc cried, saying: O Daniel, 
it of God, take the dinner that God hath 
And Daniel said: 'Thou hast remember- 


rod, and thou hast not forsaken them that ' 


And Daniel arose and ate. And the 
3 Lord presently set Hebacuc again in his 
And upon the seventh day the king 
wail Daniel: and he came to the den, an 
ind behold Daniel was sitting in the midst 
& And the king cried out with a loud 


ig: Great art thou, O Lord, the God of : 
nd he drew him out of the lions’ den. : 


hat had been the cause of his destruction, 
» the den, and they were devoured in a 
fore him. Then the King said: Let all 


a 





PASSION WEEK. 217 


SECRET. ‘The sacrifices we beg to be offered 
to thee, O Lord, are such tokens of temporal com- 
that we cannot despair of thy ete promises. 


COMM. Ps. xxiv.—Deliver me, O God of Israel, 
from all my distress. 

P. COMM. Da nobis.—Grant, we beseech thee, 
O Almighty God, that as we daily celebrate these 
dine mysteries, we may be made worthy of the 
tewards of heaven. Thro’. 


letus pray. Bow down your heads to God. 


PRAYER. Da nobis.—Grant us, O Lord, we be- 
mech thee, perseverance in thy service; that in our 
deys thy faithful may increase both in number and 
goodness, ‘Thro’. 





WEDNESDAY. 

INTROIT. Ps. xvii—O my deliverer from the 
wgry Gentiles, thou wilt place me out of the reach 
€ those that assault me: thou, O Lord, wilt rescue 
mefrom the unrighteous man. Ps. I will love thee, 
0 my strength: the Lord is my support, my 


Lord, | 
lo an my deliverer. 

COLLECT.  Sanctificato. —Enlighten, O God of 
mercy, the hearts of thy people by means of this holy 
fat; and since all our devotion is the effect of thy 

, mercifully hear the petitions we make. Thro’. 

LESSON.  Lev.xix. 10. 19.—1n those days: The 
lord spake to Moses, saying: Speak to all the as- 
tmbly of the children of Israel, and thou shalt say 
V tem: I am the Lord your God, You shall not 
weal, You shall not lie: neither shall any man de- 
tive his neighbour. Thou shalt not swear falsel 

my name, nor profane the name of thy God. 
amthe Lord. ‘Thou shalt not calumniate thy neigh- 
bur, nor oppress him by violence. The wages of 
that has been hired by thee, shall not abjde with 


tad 





PASSION WEEK. 210 


magnatch them out of the hand of my Father. I 
Wi the Father are one. The Jews then took up 
to &one him. Jesus answered them: Many 
works I have shewed you from my Father ; for 
of those works do you stone me? "The Jews 
d him: For a good work we stone thee not, 

Mbr blasphomy: and because that thou being. 
BS makest thyself God. Jesus answered them: Is 
MMC written in your law: / said, you are Gods? If 
alled them &, to whom the word of God 
spoken, the scripture cannot be broken; 
fou say of him, whom the Father hath sanctified 

bent into the world: Thou blasphemest: be- 
line { said, I am the Son of God? If I do not the 
w-of my Father, believe me not. But if I do: 
gh you will not believe me, believe the works, 
yeu may know and believe that the Father is in 
and I in the Father. e. 
JFFERT. Ps.lvii—Deliver me, from my en- 
s,O my God; and defend nie, O Lord, from 
Mii that rise up against me. - 
ECRET. Grant, O merciful God, that we may 
thee, with a gincere heart, this sacrifice of pro- 
jon and praise. * 

COMM. Ps. xxv.—I will wash my hands with 
iejunocent : and will coinpass thy altar, O Lord, that 
may hear the voice of thy praise: and publish all 
iy wonderful works. 

P.COMM. Calestis.—Having received thy hea- 
mig gift, we humbly beseech thee, O Alinighty 
led, that it may produce in us the effect of the sa- 
iament, and procure our salvation. Thro’. 

Let us pray. Bow down your heads to God. 
PRAYER. desto.—Hear our prayers and en- 
uen, O Almighty God, and grant that those to 


thou givest hopes of thy mercy, may experi 
ce the effects of thy res clemency. "Tro." 
















E 
^ 


ac& 


[ 990 ] 
THURSDAY. 


INTROIT. Dan. iii.—All thou hast « 
O Lord, thou hast done with great justie 
we have sinned against thee, and have 
thy commandments: but do thou make 
glorious, and deal with us according to th 
of thy mercies. Ps. cxviii.—Blessed are 
filed in the way, who walk in the law of 


COLLECT. Presta.—Grant, we be 
O Almighty God, that the dignity of hui 
which hath been wounded by excess, mi 
by the practice of healing temperance. ' 

LESSON. Dan. iii. 34. 45.— In those 
rias prayed to the Lord, safing: Deliver 
for ever, we beseech thee, for thy name’ 
abolish not thy covenant: and take no 
mercy from us, for the sake of Abraham t 
and Isaac thy servant, and Israel thy hi 
whom thou hast spoken, promising that tl 
multiply their seed as the stars of heaven 
sand that is on the sea shore. For we, ( 
diminished more than any nation, and t 
low in all the earth this day for our sins. 
there at this time prince, or leader, or 
holocaust, or sacrifice, or oblation, or 
place of first-fruits before thee. That w 
thy mercy : nevertheless in a contrite hear 
ble spirit let us be accepted. As in ho 
rams, and bullocks, and as in thousands o 
so let our sacrifice be made in thy sigl 
that it may please thee: for there is no c 
them that trust in thee. And now we 
with all our heart, and we fear thee, an 
face. Put us not to confusion, but deal 
cording to thy meekness,aud according t 
tude of thy mercies. And deliver uae 
- thy wonderful works, enà ge ten Ww 


THURSDAY IN PASSION WEEK. 991 


lord: and let all them be confounded that shew 
tris to thy servants, let them be confounded in all 
thy might, and let their strength be broken: and let 
tem know that thou art the Lord, the only God, 
aad glorious over all the world. O Lord our God. 
D. Ps. xcv.—Bring fip sacrifices, and come 
ino his courts; adore ye the Lord in his holy court. 
F.Ps. xxviii. The Lord will discover the thick 
woods ; and in his Temple all shall speak his glory. 
GOSPEL. Luke vii. 36. 50.— Al that time: 
One of the Pharisees desired him to eat with him. 
And he went into the house of the Pharisee, and sat 
down to meat. And behold a woman that was in 
the city, a sinner, when she knew that he gat at 
meat in the Pharisee’s house, brought an alabaster 
box of ointment: and standing behind at his feet, 
to wash his feet with tears, and wiped 
them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, 
ex anointed them with the ointment. And the 
Pharisee, who had invited him, seeing it, spoke with- 
in himself saying: This man, if he were a prophet, 
would know surely who and what manner of wo- 
man this is that touched hii, that she is a sinner. 
And Jesus answering, said to him, Simon, I have 
somewhat to say to thee. But he said: Master, say 
i. A certain creditor had two debtors, the one 
owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty. And 
whereas they had not wherewith to pay, he forgave 
them both. Which therefore of the two loveth him 
most? Simon answering, said: I suppose that he 
t whom lie forgave most. And he said to him: 
Thou hast judged rightly. And turning to the wo- 
man, he said unto Simon: Dost thou see this woman ? 
I entered into thy house, thou gavest me no wa- 
ter for my feet; but she with tears hath washed my 
feet and with her hairs hath wiped them. Thou gavest 
me no kiss; but she, since she came in, hath not 
ceased to kiss my feet. My head with oil tho 
T3 


^9 


zd rumir' iy ^sttour 


didst not anoint; but she with ointment 
ed my feet. Wherefore I say to thee: 
are forgiven her, because sho hat loved m 
whom less is forgiven, he loyeth less. And 
to her: Thy sins are forgiven thee. And 
sat at meat with him began to say within t 
Who is this that forgiveth sins also? And he! 

the woman: ‘Thy faith hath made thee safe, gvit 

OFFERT. Ps cxxxvi.—Upon the riyers of Bi 
lon there we sat, and wept, when we ret 

O Sion. 

SECRET. O Lord our God, who hast upp 
the offerings to be consecrated to thee, 
chiefly of those creatures, which thou cre: 
the support of our weakness: grant, we beseech 
that they may be to us both a in this life, 
sacrament to procure us that which is eternal. 

COMM. Ps. cxviii—Remember, O Lord, 
promise thou madest to thy servant, by which 
gavest me hope: it is that which hath comforted 
in my distress. " 

P. COMM. Quod.—Grant, O Lord, that 
have received with our mouths we may ale 
with a pure mind: and that, of a temporary UY 
may become to us ah eternal remedy. ‘Thro’ 

Let us pray. Bow down your heads to God, 

PRAYER. Esto—Be propitious, O 
beseech thee, to thy people: that, for 
displeaseth thee, they may find comfort 
thy law. Thro’, 























FRIDAY. 
'INTROIT. Ps. xxx.—Have mercy on ma! 
Lord, for Lam in distress: deliver me and 
from the bands of my enemies, and my 
Lord, let me never be put to shame, since 
.talled on thee. Ps. In thee, O Lord, have I 
let me never be confounded, deliver vae si | 





224 FRIDAY IN 


do you consider that it is expedient for; 
one man should die for the people, and 

whole nation perish not. And this he spok 
himself: but being the high-priest that 

prophesied that Jesus should die for the nati 
not only for the nation, but to gather in 

children of God, that were dispersed. 

day therefore they devised to put him t 
Wherefore Jesus walked no more openly at 
Jews, but he went unto a country near th 
unto a city that is called Ephrem, and there. 
with his disciples. 

OFFERT. Ps. cxviii.— Blessed art thou 
teach me thy law; and deliver me not u 
proud ones who calumniate me: and I wil 
answer to those who reproach me. 

SECRET. Grant, O merciful God, tha! 
always worthily serve at thy altar, and ol 
vation by constantly partaking of what i 
thereon. Thro’. 

COMM. Deliver me not up, O Lord, to 
of my pursuers: for unjust witnesses have 

inst me, and iniquity hath belied itself. 

P. COMM. Sumpti sacrificii.—May the 
O Lord, we have partaken of, always prote 
repel from us all that is hurtful. ‘Thro’. 

tus pray. Bow down your heads to 

PRAYER.  Concede.—Grant, we beset 
O Almighty God, that we who seek the h 
thy protection, may be delivered from all 
serve thee with a secure mind. ‘Thro’. 





ON FRIDAY IN PASSION WEI 
The SEVEN DOLOURS of the B. V. 


INTROIT. John xix.—There stood by 
of Jesus, his mother, and Wie worher’s eur 
the wife of Cleophas, and Selome, wi V 





236. ,FHPAE.BS.. 
Cujus animam gornentem, contristabtun qt dq 


tem pertransivit Ug. 
'O quam cutis of aft, tuit ills beapdig Maie 


niti! 

"dus mtierebat, et dolebat, et tremebet, ah 
bet nati penas inclyti. 

"Quis est homo qui non fleret, Chir et 
videret, in tanto supplicio! 

pla de it nón contristari, piam Maire bots 

olentem cum Filio A 
ccátis sites gentis vidit Jesum in inci 

et fles lis subditum ) 

Vidit suum dulcem natum, morientem dois 
dum emisit spiritum. 

Eia Mater, fons amoris! me sentire vim dates, 
fac ut tecum 

Fac ut ardeat cor meum in amando Chésig 
Deum, ut sibi complaceam. dd 

Sancta Mater istud agas, crucifixi fige plages dif 
di meo valide. : 

Tui nati vulnerati,tam dignati pro me pati, po 
nas mecum divide. 

Fac me vere tecum flere, crucifixo condolere #& 
nec ego vixero. ! 

Juxta crucem tecum stare, te libenter sociare a 
planctu desidero. 

Virgo virginum preclara, mihi jam non sis amets 
fac me tecum pan pangere. 

Fac ut portem Christi mortem, passionis' fae cot 
eortem, et plagas recolere. 

Fac me plagis vulnerari, cruce hac inebriari, ol 
amorem filii. 

Inflammatus et accensus, per te, virgo, sim d& 
fensus, in die judicii. 

Fac me cruce custodiri, morte Christi preemunitiy 
confoveri gratia. 

Quando corpus morietur, fap ut anime doner 
Paradisi gloria. Jtmen. af 


Modi Vii L 


Jak xix, 95. 97. — A that ie; 

que too ‘by the cross of Jesus, his tie mother and 

nde diner, y Mary of of Cleo Dleopbas, d Mary 

ad seen p mo- 

ted the dieciple: Sstatidin cng, hona he loved, he 

to his mother : ‘Women, hold thy son ; after 

‘he saith to the disciple: Behold thy. mother. 

from that hour the disciple took her to his own. 

'T. Remember, O Virgin-mother of God, 

thou standest in the presence of the Lo 

im our favour, that thou mayest turn away 


from us. 
We offer thee, O Lord Jesus Christ, 
and sacrifices, humbly intreating thee, 
T5 who, in our prayers o f the day, epmenome. 
transfixion o ths most ewoet eeul of blessed 
v mother, may receive our reward with her 
her blessed companions that stood under th 
this holy assembly being multiplied, 
@o merits of thy death. Who livest. 
"PREFACE. [In thetransfixion. Ordinary, p. xxxii. 
«00MM. Happy are the sensed of the blessed 
Mary, who, without dying, merited the crown 
W martyrdom under the cross of the Lord.- 
: P, COMM. Sacrificia. — Grant, O Lord Jesus 
Christ, that the sacrifice we have partaken of, while 
With devotion we celebrate the transfixion of thy bles- 
wd Virgin-mother, may, through thy mercy, obtain 
Be us the effect of every salutary good. W o livest. 


the end of Mass is read the Gospel of Friday, p. 223. 


: SATURDAY. 
The Introit, Offertory, and Co pununion as on Fri- 
COLLECT. Pr cla: P May the people 
ro — the conse- 
Wasted to thy service, we beseech thee O Lord, iun- 
in the affections of piety; that, instructed by 
holy mysteries, they may be so much the more 















* 
Pastor wezx. 229 


ibd cried: Hosanna, blessed is he that cometh 
» name of the Lord, the King of Israel. And 
found a young ass, and sat upon it, as it is 
n: “Fear not, daughter of Sion: behold, thy 
cometh sitting on an ass's colt.” These things 
sciples did not know at the first: but when 
was glorified, they then remembered that 
things were written of him; and that they had 
hese things to him. The multitude therefore 
estimony, which was with him, when he called 
us out of the grave, and raised him from the 
For which reason alsp the people came to 
him: because they heard he had done this 
le. The Pharisees therefore said among them- 
: Do you see that we prevail nothing ? behold, 
hole world is gone after him. Now there 
certain Gentiles among them that came up to 
on the festival day. ‘These therefore came to 
;, who was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and de- 
Qm, saying: Sir, we would see Jesus. Philip 
h, and telleth Andrew. Again Andrew and 
told Jesus. But Jesus answered them, saying: 
tour is come that the Son of Man shall 
ed. Amen, amen, I say to you, unless the 
of wheat falling into the ground, die ; itself re- 
th alone. But if it die, it bringeth forth much 
He that loveth his life shall lose it: and he 
ateth his life in this world, keepeth it unto 
ernal. If any man minister to me, let him 
me: and where I am, there also shall m 
er be. If any man minister to me, him will 
ather honour. Now is my soul troubled. And 
shall I say? Father, save me from this hour. 
this cause I came unto this hour. Father, 
‘thy name. A voice therefore came from hea- 
“I have both glorified it, and will glorify it 
"^ The multitude therefore that stood and 
esid that it thundered. Others said: An en- 
U 


PALM SUNDAY. 231 


membrance of what the Jewish people did, when Jesus 
Christ, mx days before his passion, made his triumphant 
eatry into Jerusalem riding on an ass's colt, as had been 
fretold by the prophet, and was received with the joy- 
fal acclamations of the multitude, as well as those of 
his disciples. 

Let us, therefore, assist at the ceremony of this day 
with recollection and piety: and whilst we bear the 
Palms in our hands, let us adore him, who conquered 
lel by his death, and endeavour to partake of his 
tiumph, by overcomi sin, &nd every inclination 
contrary to the spirit.of God. 
dflier sprinkling the Holy Water, as usual on other 

Sundays, the Office begins thus: 
. AwrHEM. Hosanna to the Son of David: blessed 
B he that cometh in the name of the Lord. O King 
M Israel : Hosanna in the highest. 
The Lord be with you. R. Ard with thy spirit. 
Let us pray. 

. COLLECT. Deus quem.—O God, whom to love 
B true righteousness, multiply in our hearts the gifts 
of thy holy grace: and since, by the death of thy 
only Son, thou hast made us to hope for those 
things which we believe ; grant that by his resurrec- 
Gon, we may arrive at the happy end of our journey. 
Who liveth. 

LESSON. Exod. xv. 27. and xvi. 1. 7.—1In those 
days : The children of Israel came into Elim, where 

re were twelve fountains of water, and seventy 
Pim-treos: amd they encamped by the waters.— 

hap. xvi. And they set forward from Elim; and 
all the multitude of the children of Israel came into 
the desert of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, 
the fifteenth day of the second month after they came 
out of the land of Egypt. Aud all the congregation 
of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and 
Aaron in the wilderness. And the children of Israe\ 
mid to them: Would to God we had died by the 
hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sx 

U2 


232 PALM SUNDAY. 


quesos ace ae » th 
hiave you brought us into ert, th 


+ let the le 

what is sufficient for pie: y that I 
them whether hen ee in my law, 
But the sixth day let them provile for to 7 
and let it be doul o to that were 
EA a Mess Aaron ah 

n of Israel : in the evening you shall know 
the Lord Hath brought you forth ou it of the land of 


5 the shall see ie 
Um and in Nu e glory 


‘the 

phon ams ve a What'are e 
this man perfo many wonders 

him go on thks, sl wi elite i him: 
Romans will come and destroy both our 
and us. P. But one of them, named 
the high priest of that year, said to them: - 
your interest that one man should die for the | 
and not tlie T matio 


n 

joe ed 
R. Tesi 

o D zd 

‘The spiri! read; 

Thy will ‘pe doe. y 

enter not into temptati. 


drawing near to Jerusalem; and being. 
age, at mount Olivet, he sent two of 





PALM SUNDAY. 933 


ye, that the Lord hath need of them: and 
t he will let them go. Now all this was 
t it might be fulfilled which was spoken by 
ret, saying : “Tell ye the daughter of Sion: 
hy king cometh to thee, meek, and sittin 
ass and a colt the foal of her that is used 
ke.” And the disciples going, did as Jesus 
led them. And they brought the ass and 
and laid their garments upon them, and 
n sit thereon. And a very great multitude 
ieir garments in the way: and others cut 
ughs from the trees, and strewed them in 
and the multitudes that went before and 
ywed, cried, saying: ‘ Hosanna to the 
David: Blessed is he that cometh in the 
the Lord.” 
$ BLESSING OF THE PALMS. 
ord be with you. #. And with thy spirit. 
Let us pray. Auge fidem. 
se, O God, the faith of them that hope in 
| mercifully hear the prayers of thy sup- 
let thy manifold mercy come upon us, and 
branches of palm trees, or olive trees, be 
and as in a figure of the Church thou didst 
Noah going out of the ark, and Moses go- 
f Egypt with the children of Israel; so let 
ing palins and branches of olive trees, go 
; Christ with good works, and enter through 
eternal joys. Who, &c. .K. Amen. 
> Lord be with you. #. And with thy spirit. 
up your hearts on high. .R. We have rais- 
up to the Lord. V. Let us give thanks to 
our God. A. It is meet and just. 
ruly meet and just, right and available to 
, always and in all places to give thee thanks, 
Lord, Almighty Father, eternal God, who 
jus in the assembly of thy saints. For thy 
serve thee, beaguise they acknowledge thee 


934 PALM SUNDAY. 


for their only Creator and God. And the whee 
creation praiseth thee, and thy saints bless thee: bé 
cause they confess with freedom, before the king 
and powers of this world, the great name of 
only begotten Son. Before whom the angels 
archangels, the thrones and dominations stand, 
with all the troops of the heavenly host, sing a byms 
to thy glory, saying without ceasing: ! 
Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord the God of armies 
The heavens and the earth are full of thy gloty: 
Hosanna in the highest. Blessed is he that 
in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest. 
The Lord be with you. R. And with thy spiri. 


Let us pray. Petimus. . 

We beseech thee, Ó holy Lord, Almighty Fathit, 
Eternal God, that thou wouldst be pleased tosjebles 
ancefesanctify this creature of the olive tree, 
thou madest to shoot out of the substance of d$ 
wood, and which the dove returning to the mk 
brought in its bill: that whoever receiveth it, may 
find protection of soul and body: and that it my 
prove, O Lord, a saving remedy, and a sacred seg 
of thy grace. Thro’. & Amen. 

etus pray. Deus, qui dispersa. 

O God, who T raiherest what is dispersed, and 
preservest what is gathered ; who didst bless the pe 
ple, that carried boughs to meet Jesus; blesssfeaist 
these branches of the palm-tree and olive-tree, whidl 
thy servants take with faith in honour of thy name 
that into whatever place they may be carried, ti 
inhabitants of that place may obtain thy blessing: 
and thy right hand preserve from all adversity, ant 
protect those that have bcen redeemed by our 
Jesus Christ thy Son. Who liveth. R. men. 

Let us pray. Deus qut miro. 

O God, who by thy wonderful order of thy pret 
idence would even im insensible things shew us th 
manner of our salvation y grewx, We eaeedh Nun 





2936 PALM-SUNDAY. 


Here the Priest sprinkles the Palms with Holy Wes 
saying Sprinkle, &c. as in p. xiii. hang 
fumed them thrice with incense, he says : 

The Lord be with you. R. And with thy spiri 

Let us pray. Deus, qui Filium. 

O God, who, for our salvation, didst send into ths 
world thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord that he migl£ 
humble himself to our condition, and call us beck 
to thee. For whom also, as he was coming to Jert- 
salem to fulfil the scriptures, a multitude of faitbfel 
people with a zealous devotion spread their garments 
together with palm branches in the way: we 
beseech thee, that we may prepare him the way of 
faith, out of which the stone of offence and the rock 
of scandal being removed, our actions may flouri 
with branches of righteousness, so that we may bj 
worthy to follow his steps. Who liveth. .R. Amey 
The Palms, being blessed, are distributed to the peegla 

kneeling and kissing them as well as the 

hand. During the distribution the following Ae 

thems are repeated till the whole are distributed: . 

AwTHEM. The Hebrew children carrying olive 
branches met the Lord, crying out, and saying. 
Hosanna in the highest. ' . 

Antuem. The Hebrew children spread theg 
garments in the way, and cried out, saying: H 
na to the Son of David: blessed is he that co 
in the name of the Lord. " 

The Lord be with you. A. And with thy spirit! 

Let us pray. Omnipotens. 

O Almighty and Eternal God, who wouldst haw 
our Lord Jesus Christ ride on the colt of an ass, and 
didst inspire the crowds of people to spread thelt 
garments, and branches of trees in the way, and 8 
sing Hosanna to his praige : grant, we beseech the 
that we may imitste theif innocence, and deserve ti 
partake of their mers. Thro’. BR. Amen. 





238 PALM-SUBDAY, 


art thou who art come in the multitude ol 
mercy: Hosanna in the highest. 

ANTHEM. The multitude goath out to meet thal 
deemer with flowers and palms, and payeth th 
mage due to a triumphant conqueror: the Ge 
proclaim the Son of God: and their voices ren 
skies in the praise of Christ: Hosanna in the hi 


ANTHEM. Let us faithfully join with the an 
children, singing to the Conqueror of death: 
sanna in the highest. 


ANTHEM. A great multitude that was met toy 
at the festival cried out to the Lord: Bl 
that comcth in the name of the Lord: Hosanna 
highest. 


At the return of the Procession, two or four ck 
go into the church, and shutting the door, will 
faces towards the Procession, sing the tw 
verses of the following Hymn,* To thee, O ( 
&c. which are repeated by the Priest and the 
without the church. Then they who are 1 
sing the following verses; to which those th 
without, after every two verses, answer, 

e. T° thee, O Christ, be glory, praises loud: 

To thee, Hosanna, cried the Jewish ert 
R. To thee. 


We Israel’s monarch, David’s Son proclaim: 
Thou com’st, blest King, in God's most holy 1 
R. To thee. t 
Angels and men, in one harmonious choir, 
To sing thy everlasting praise conspire. 
R. 'To thee. 
Thee Israel's children met with conqu'ring pa 


To thee our vows we pay in loudest psalms. 
R. 'To thee. ) ' 


For thee on earth with boughs they stre wd the 
To thee in heaven we Sag welotioua xS. 


R. To thee. 





- 940 PALM-SUNDAT. 


improve by the example of his patience, and partis 
of his resurrection. Tro’. 

EPISTLE. Philip ii. 5. 11.—Brethrea: Ia 
this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jess; 
who being in the form of God, thought it not reb- 
bery, to be equal with God: but emptied himself, 
taking the form of a servant, being made in the like 
ness of men, and in habit found as a man. 
humbled himself, becoming obedient unto death; 
even to the death of the cross.  F'or which cause God 
also hath exalted him, and hath given him a seme 
which is above all names: that in the name of Jesus 
every knee shall bow, of those that are im heaven, 
on earth, and under the earth. And that ewe 
tongue should confess that the Lord Jesus Christ » 
in the glory of the Father. 

GRAD. Ps. lxxii.—Thou hast held me by sy 


right hand, and hy thy will thou hast conducted me: ^ 


and with glory thou hast received me. V. How good 
is God to Israel, to them that are of a right heart! 
But my feet were almost moved, my steps had well 
nigh slipt, because I had a zeal on sinners seeing the 


prosperity of sinners. 
| TRACT. Ps. Xr Deus Deus meue, respi at 
me: quare me dereliquisti God, my 

upon me: why hast thou forsaken me? P. far from 
my salvation are the words of my sins. PF. Omy 
God I shall cry by day, and thou wilt not heer: 
and by night, and it shall not be imputed as folly 2 
me. JP. But thou dwellest in the holy place, thé 
praise of Israel. P. In thee have our fathers hoped 
and thou hast delivered them. V. They cried out® 
thee, and they were saved: they trusted in thee, 
were not confounded. FV. But I am a worm, and D0 
man: the reproach of men, and the outcast of the 
people. JP. All they thaj saw me have laughed m 
to scorn: they have spoken with the lips, and wag 
ged the head. V. He hoped in the Lord, said they 


= + —— oo — 


342 PaLM-SUNDAY. 


of the twelve, who was called Judas Isd 
chief priests, and said to them: What wi 
me, and I will deliver him unto you? B 
pointed him thirty pieces of silver. And fi 
forth he sought an opportunity to ' 
on the first day of the Azymes the disciy 
Jesus, saying: Where wilt thou that we: 
thee toeat the pasch? But Jesus said: 
the city toa certain man, and say to him: 
saith iny time is near at hand, I will kee 
at thy house with my disciples. And tl 
did as Jesus appointed to them, and the 
the pasch. Now when it waa event 
down with his twelve disciples And 
were eating, he said: Amen, I say to yc 
of you is about to betray ine. And they 
much troubled, began every one to ser 
Lord? But he answering said: He that 
hand with me in the dish, he shall betray 
Son of man indeed goeth, as it is writt 
but wo to that man, by whom the Son o 
be betrayed. It were better for him, | 
had not been born. And Judas, that be 
answering said: Isit]l, Rabbi? He sa 
Thou hast said it. And whilst they wer 
Jesus took bread, and blessed, and broke 
to his disciples, and said: Take ye, an 
is my body. And taking the chalice heg 
and gave to them, saying: Drink ye all oi 
this is my blood of the New Testament | 
be shed for many for the remission of sing, 
to you, I will not drink from hencefo 
fruit of the vine, until that day when I al 
new with you in the kingdom of my Fat 
hymn being said, they went out into mc 
hen Jesus said to them: All you shall 
lized in me this night. For it is writt 
strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the 


PALM-SUNDAY. 243 


be dispersed.” But after I shall be risen again, I 
wil go before you into Galilee. And Peter an- 
Wering, said to him: Although all shall be scan- 
dalized in thee, I will never be scandalized. Jesus 
md to him: Amen, I say to thee, that in this 
igit, before the cock crow, thou wilt deny me 
thrice. Peter saith to him: Yea, though I 


yeu here, till I go yonder, and pray. And taking 
With him Peter and the two sons of Zebedi:e, he 
began to grow sorrowful and to be sad. Then he 
mth to them: My soul is sorrowful even unto 
deeth: stay you here and watch with me. And 
Ping a little further he fell upon his face, praying, 
ad saying: My Father, if it be possible, let this 
chalice from me. Nevertheless, not as I will, 
but as thou wilt. And he cometh to his disciples, 
and findeth them asleep, and he saith to Peter: 
What? Could you not watch one hour with me; 
Watch ye, and pray that ye enter not into tempta- 
ton. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is 
Weak. Again the second time he went, and pray- 
(saying: My Father, if this chalice may not pass 
away but [ must drink it, thy will be done. And 
be eometh again, and findeth them sleeping ; for their 
tyes were heavy. And leaving them, he went 
tain; and he prayed the third time, saying the self-: 
ame words. ‘Then he cometh to his disciples, and 
Mith to thein: Sleep ye now, and take your rest: 

d the hour is at hand, and the Son of Man 
gall be betrayed into the hands of sinners. Rise, 
kt us go: behold he is at hand that will betray me. 
As he yet spoke, behold Judas, one of the twelve, 
ame, and with bim a great multitude with swords 
ti clubs, sent from the chief priests and the anci- 

X 





PALM SUNDAY. 945 


thou be the Christ the Son of God. Jesus saith to 
him: Thou hast said it. Nevertheless I say to you, 
hereafter you shall see the Son of Man sitting on 
he right hand of the power of God, and coming in 
he of heaven. Then the high-priest rent 
Hs garments, saying: He hath blasphemed, what 
irther need have we of witnesses? Behold, now 
‘ea have heard the blasphemy: what think you? 
lut they answering, said: He is guilty of death. 
"hen did they spit in his face, and buffet him, 
Md others atruck his face with the palms of their 
ends, saying: Prophesy unto us, O Christ; who is 
8 that struck thee? But Peter sat without in the 
curt: and there came to him a servant-maid, say- 
ig: Thou also wast with Jesus the Galilean. But 
8 denied before them all, saying: I know not what 
sou sayest. And as he went out of the gate, ano- 
ser maid saw him, and she saith to them that were 
tere: This man also was with Jesus of Nazareth. 
ind again he denied with an oath: That I know 
(t the man. And after a little while they came 
aat &tood by, and said to Peter: Surely thou also 
rt one of them; for even thy speech doth discover 
hee. "Then he began to curse and swear that he 
new not the man. And immediately the cock 
rew. And Peter remembered the words of Jesus 
vhich he had said: Before the cock crew, thou 
rit deny me thrice. And going forth, he wept 
mterly. And when morning was come, all the 
thief priests and ancients of the people took counsel 
Waist Jesus, that they might put him to death. 
ind they brought him bound, and delivered him to 
*ontius Pilate the governor. Then Judas, who be- 
rayed him, seeing that he was condemned, repent- 
ng himself, brought back the thirty pieces of silver 
© the chief priests and ancients, saying: I have 
Hhned, in betraying innocent blood. But they 
mid: What is that to us? look thou to it. And 


X3 


















246 PALM SUNDAY, . 
casting down the pieces of silver in the temple, hs 
departed, and went and hanged himself with an he 
ter. Butthe chief priests having taken the picoat 
of silver, said: It is not lawtul to put them into the 
carbona, because it is the price of blood. And after 
they had consulted together, they bought with them 
the potter’s field, to be a burying place for rar: 
rs. For this cause that field was called Hace 
dama, that is, the field of blood, even to this day 
Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jee 
mias the prophet, saying: “And they took the . 
thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was pri 
ed, whom they prized of the children of Israel Ant 
they gave them unto the potter’s field, as the Lord 
appointed to me." And Jesus stood before the, 
vernor, and the governor asked him, saying: 
thou the king of the Jews? Jesus saith to him: 
Thou gayest it. And when he was accused by tbe 
chief priests and ancients, he answered nothing. 
Pilate saith to him: Dost thou not hear how gres 
testimonies they allege against thee? And he & 
swered him to never a word; so that the govern 
wondered exceedingly. Now upon the solemn df 
the governor was accustomed to release to the iwi 
ple one prisoner, whom they would. And he 
then a notorious prisoner, that was called Barabbes 
They therefore being gathered together, Pilate stil: 
Whom will you that I release to you, Barabbes «f 
Jesus that is called Christ? For he knew that fot 
envy they had delivered him. And as he was sittmg 
in the place of judgment, his wife sent to him, 8f 
ing: Have thou nothing to do with that just 
For I have suffered many things this day in a dress 
because of him. But the chief priests and ancieé 
persuaded the people, that they should ask Berar 
bas, and make Jesus away. And the governor ££ 
swering, said to them: Whither will you of 
two to be released unto you? Bur they wad, 


Pal 





248 PALM-8UNDAY. 


by, blasphemed him, wagging their 
and saying: Vah, thou that destroyest the compe 
God, and in three days dost rebuild it, save thy own- 
eelf: if thou be the Son of God, come down from 
the cross. In like manner- also the chief priess 
with the scribes and ancients, mocking, said: 
He saved others; himself he cannot save: if hebe 
the king of Israel, let him now come down from the 
cross, and we will believe him. He trusted in God: 
let bim now deliver him, if he will have him: for he 
said : I am the Son of God. And the self same thing 
the thieves also that were crucified with him e 
proached him with. Now from the sixth hour 
was darkness over the whole earth, until the ninth 
hour. And about the ninth hour Jesus cried withs 
loud voice, saying: Eli, Eli, lamma sabecthesi? 
that is, “my God, my God, why hast thou forseken 
me?" And some that stood there and heard, said: 
This man calleth Elias, And immediately one of 
them running, took a sponge, and filled it with vine- 
gar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink. 
And the others said: let us see whether Elias wil 
come and deliver him. And Jesus again crying Wi 
a loud voice, yielded up the ghost. * And behold 
the veil of the temple was rent in two fror the top 
even to the bottom, and the earth quaked, and the 
rocks were rent. And the graves were opened; 
many bodies of the saints that had slept arose. 
coming out of the tombs after his resurrection, came 
into the holy city and appeared to many. Now tbe 
Centurion, and they that were with him watching 
Jesus, having seen the earthquake and the thing 
that were done, were sore afraid, saying: 

this was the Son of God. And there were thee 
many women afar off who had followed Jesus from 
Galilee, ministering unto him: among whom w® 
Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of Jame 


* Here all kneel, and pause. 


PALM SUNDAY. 249 


imd Joseph, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee. 
And when it was evening, there came a certain rich 
men of Arimathea, named Joseph, who also himself 
wes a disciple of Jesus. He went to Pilate, and 
waked the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded 
that the body should be delivered. And Joseph tak- 
m. the body, wrapped it up in a clean linen cloth, 
laid it in his own new monument, which he had 
out in a rock. And he rolled a great stone 
the door of the monuinent, and went his way. 
there was there Mary Magdalen, and the other 
sitting over against the sepulchre. 
|\ Here the Priest says, Cleanse my heart, &c. p. xx. 
ND the next day, which followed the day of 
preparation, the chief priests and the Pharisees 
Mme together to Pilate, saying: Sir, we have re- 
membered, that that seducer said, while he was 
Nt alive: After three days I will rise again. Com- 
wand therefore the sepulchre to be guarded until the 
hird day: lest perhaps his disciples come and steal 
lim away, and say to the people he is risen from 
he dead : and the last error shall be worse than the 
wet. Pilate said to them: You have a guard; go, 
(ward it as you know. And they departing, made 
he gepulchre sure, sealing the stone, and setting 


8. 

OFFERT. Ps. Ixviiii—My heart hath expected 
wproach and misery: and I looked forone that would 
preve together with me; but there was none: and 

one that would comfort me, and I found none: 
bey gave ine gall for my food, and in my thirst they 
fave me vinegar to drink. 

SECRET. Grant, we beseech thee, O Lord, 
that what hath been offered in the presence of thy 
divine Majesty may procure us the grace of devotion, 
and effectually obtain a blessed eternity. Thro’ 

COMM. Melt, xxvi.—Father, if this cup cannot 
mess away, but I must drink it, thy will be dane 


250 MONDAY IN 


P. COMM. Per hujus.—May our vices, O Lord, 
be destroyed, and our righteous desires fulfilled by 
the efficacy of these mysteries. Thro’. 

In private Masses, the Gospel Matt. xxi. (as aber 
fn the blessing of the Palins, p. 232,) ts here read 

instead of the ordinary Gospel, John i. p. xlv. 


MONDAY IN HOLY WEEK. 


INTROIT. Ps. xxxiv.—Judge thou, O Lord, then 
that wrong me; overthrow them that fight against 
me: Take hold ofarms and shield, and rise upto 
me, O Lord, my mighty Saviour. Ps. Bring ow 
the sword, and shut up the way against them thet 

rsecute me; say to my soul, I am thy salvation. 

udge thou, O Lord, &c. to Ps. 

COLLECT. Da, quesumus.— Grant, we beseech 
thee, O Almighty God, that we, who through our 
weakness, faint under so many adversities, m 
cover by the passion of thy only begotten Son. 
with thee and the Holy Ghost, liveth, &c. 

LESSON. Is. 1. 5. 10.—1n those days: Teas 
said: The Lord God hath opened my eer, and I 
do not resist: I have not gone back. I have given 
my body to the strikers, and my cheeks to them tht 
plucked them: I have not turned away my faee 
from them that rebuked me, and spit upon m* 
The Lord God is my helper, therefore am I not con- 
founded. He is near that justifieth me, who wil 
contend with me? let us stand together. Who 8 
my adversary ? let him come near to me. 
the Lord God is my helper: who is he that shall 
condeinn me? Lo, they shall all be destroyed 882 
garment, the moth shall eat them up. Who 8 
there among you that feareth the Lord, that heereth 
the voice of his servant, that hath walked in dark- 
ness, and hath no light? let him hope in the name 
of the Lord, and lean upon his God. 

GRAD. Ps. xxxiv.—Arise, O Lord, be attenuve 








252 TUESDAY IN 


O Lord, inspire us with divine fervour: that wemy 
delight both in their effect and celebration. Thre. 
Let us pray. Bow down your heads to God. 
| PRAYER. Adjunc.—Help us, O God, our eive 
! tion; and t that we may celebrate with je 

| memory of these benefits, by which thou hast 
! pleased to redeem us. ‘Thro’. 
( 





TUESDAY. . d 

INTROIT. Gal. vi.—We ought to glory in te 

e cross of our Lord Jesus Christ: m whom is our ss 
vation, life, and resurrection; by whom we het 
been saved and delivered. Ps. lxvi. May God have 
mercy on us, and bless us; may his 
shine upon us, and may he have mercy on us, We 
ought, c. to Ps. | " 

OLLECT. Omnipotens-—O Almighty and evel 
lasting God, grant that we may so ce 
mysteries of our Lord's passion, as to obtain ty 
pardon. 'lhrough the saine. "d 

LESSON. Jer. xi. 18. 90.— I those. dep! 
Jeremias said: Thou, O Lord, hath shewed m™ 
and I have known: then thou shewdst me their d 
mgs. And I was as a meek lamb, that is carried! 
be a victim: and 1 knew not that they had 
counsels against me, saying: Let us put wood Ví 
his bread, and cut him off from the land of the Er 
ing, and let his name be remembered no more. Di 
thou, O Lord of Sabaoth, who judgest justly, 
triest the reins and the heart, let me see thy reveap 
on them: for to thee I have revealed my cause, 

G . Ps. xxxiv.—When they were treuble . 
some to me, I clothed myself with hair-cloth, aad! 
humbled my soul with fasting ; and I will Bhd 
tinue to pour forth my prayer in my bosom. V. Judi ‘ 
thou, O Lord, them that wrong me: overthrow the& 
that fight against me: take hold of arms and shield: 
asd rise to help me. 


i 


¢ 


- 


;LNQUEUNEERIE. as 


in PARBION of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, 
B . 6 io Mark xiv. and xv. . 





say to you, wheresoever this 1 shall'be 
cached in 

fh done shall be told for a memorial of her. 
ad Judas Iscariot, one of tho twelve, went to the 
lief pri to betray him to them. Who hearing 
were ; and promised to give him money. 
ad he sought how he might conveniently be 

m. Now on the first day of the unleavened becad, 
hem they sacrificed the asc, the disciples say to 
m: Whither wilt thou that we go and prepere for 
me to eat the pasch? And he sendeth two of 
bdisciples, and saith to them: go ye into the city, 
Bl there shall meet you, a man carrying a pitcher 
f water, follow him: and whithersoever he eel 


254 TUESDAY IN 


? 
I 


go in, say to the master of the house: 
saith: Where i is my refectory, that I 

h with my disciples? And he will 
large dining room furnished; and th 


eat the 


T 
d 


ye re for us. And his disciples’ went their T 
came into the city ; and the found ss he told o: 
them, and they prepared the pasch. And whm 


1 
: 


evening was come, he cometh with 
And when they were at table 





eating, Jes 

saith: Amen I say to you, one of you that estsuth jm 
with me shall betray me. But they began to k — 
sorrowful, and to say to him one by one; li —- 
I? Who saith to them: one of the twelve, Wi) m 
dippeth his hand in the dish with me. And tt. 4 
Son of Man indeed goeth, as it is written of Mj FP 
but wo to that man by whom the Son of Man — 
be betrayed. It were better for him, if that me , 


had not been born. And whilst broi were 


la. 


E 
EB 
^B 
Q. 

s 
E 
e 
E 
S 
Ss 
"Ss. 
'w 
an 
f: 
ze 
d 
yh 


to them: and they ad of it. And e seid - 
them: This is my blood of the New Town E 
which shall be shed for many. Amen I py fel Y 
you, that I will drink no more of this fruit d ] 
vine, until that day when I pall drink it new in? | 
ingdom of God. And when they had 

hymn, they went forth to the mount [E Hia 
And Jesus saith to them: You will all be scandalisedl ^ 
in my regard this night; for it is written: “I wll ,*« 
strike the shepherd, and the sheep shall be disper) Ang 
ed.” But after I shall be risen again, I will gob pu 
fore you into Galilee. But Peter saith to him: Mb : 
though all shall be scandalized in thee, yet xw ,. ** 
And Jesus saith to him: Amen I say to o thee, Y wai 
even in this night, before the cock crow twice M . 
shalt deny me thrice. But he spoke the mores vM ^ 
mently: Although I should die together wit int we 





256 TUESDAY IW 







as to & robber with swords and staves to aj 
hend me? I was daily with you in the 
teaching, and you did nót lay hands on me. . 
that the scripture may be fulfilled. Then Ny 
disciples leaving him, all fled away. And a carta 
young man followed him, having a lmen cloth caf. 
about his naked body: and they laid hold on ham 
But he casting off the linen cloth, fled from thes 
naked. And they brought Jesus to the high a pow! 
and all the priests and the scribes and the anei 
were assembled together. And Peter followed hil 
afar off even into the palace of the high priest; ail 
he sat with the servants at the fire and warmed hss 
self. And the chief priests and all the count 
sought for evidence against Jesus that they migtt 
ut him to death, and they found none. For mssg 
re false witness against him, and their evidesst 
were not agreeing. And some rising up, bore fis 
witness against him, saying: Weh bim sey: 1 
will destroy this temple made with hands, af 
within three days I will build another not made wih 
hands. And their witness did not agree. And ts . 
high-priest rising up iri the midst, asked Jesus, ay 
ing: Answerest thou nothing to the things thet sé 
laid to thy charge by these men? But he held is 
peace and answered nothing. Again the high-prisé 
asked him, and said to him: Art thou Christ is 
Son of the blessed God? And Jesus said to him: I 
am. And you shall see the Son of Man sitting ei 
the right hand of the power of God, and comis 
in the clouds of heaven. Then the high-pris 
rending his garments, saith: What need we any furth® 
witnesses? You have heard the blasphemy. Wis ^ 
think you? Who all condemned him to be guilt} 
of death. And some to spit on him, and ® 
cover his face, and to buffet him, and to say to him! 
Prophesy: and the servants struck him with the 
palms of their hands. Naw when Peter was in the 





958 TUESDAY IN 


should rather release Barabbas to them. And Pil 
again answering, saith to them: What will you tha 
that I do with the king of the Jews? But the 
again cried out: Crucify him. And Pilate saitht 
them: Why, what evil hath he done? But dw 
cried out the more: Crucify him. And Pilate beim 
willing to satisfy the people, released to them Bi 
rabbas, and delivered up Jesus, when he hs 
scourged him, to be crucified. And the soldisi 
led him away into the court of the palace, and the 
called together the whole band; and they clothes 
him with purple, and platting a crown of thorns, thy 
xut it upon him. And they began to salute hm 
ail, king of the Jews. And they struck his he 
with a reed: and they did spit on him. And bowis 
their knees, they adored him. And after thg 
had mocked him, they took off the purple from hit 
and put his own garments on him, and they ka 
him out to crucify him. And they forced one S 
mon, a Cyrenian, who passed by, coming out d 
the country, the father of Alexander and of 
to take up his cross. And they bring him into B 
lace called Golgotha, which being interpreted i 
he place of Calvary. And they gave him & 
drink wine mingled with myrrh; but he took it net 
And crucifying him, they divided his garments ess 
ing lots for them, what every man should ta 
And it was the third hour, and they crucified bm 
And the inscription of his cause was written ove 
Tue Kine or THE Jews. And with him tj 
crucify two thieves, the one on his right hand 8& 
the other on his left. And the scripture was 
ed which saith: * And with the wicked he was r* 
puted.” And they that passed by blasphemed hit 
wagging their heads, and saying: Vah, thou tb 
destroyest the temple of God, and in three ds) 
buildest it up again: Save thyself; coming dow 
from the cross. In like manner also the chief pries 





260 WEDNESDAY IN 


when he had understood Eb the centurion, e 
gave the body to Joseph. oseph buying 
linen, and taking him down, wrapped him up is th 
fine linen, and laid him in a sepulchre which wm 
hewn out of a rock, and he rolled a stone to te 
door of the sepulchre. a 

OFFERT. Ps. cxxxix.—Keep me, O Lord, from 
the hands of the sinful man; and from unjust nasa 
deliver me. R 

SECRET.—May these sacrifices, O Lord, we be 
seech thee, which are accompanied with healing fasis 
mercifully repair us. Thro’. 

COMM. Ps. Ixviii—The judges in the ga 
spokg.against me, and they that drank wine, medi 
songs against me. But I poured forth my Ie 
thec, O Lord: it is time, O God, to shew t 
good will to me, according to the multitude of tij 
mercies, 

P. COMM.  Sanetificationibus.—May these tii 
holy mysteries, O Almighty God, both cure our vieti 
and become an eternal remedy to us. Thro’. 

Let us pray. Bow down your heads to God. 

PRAYER. Tua nos.—May thy mercy, O 
purity«us from the corruption of the old man, 
enable us to put on the new. Thro’. 


WEDNESDAY. 

INTROIT. Pail. ii.—At the name of Jesus eret 
knee should bow, of those that are in heaven, @ 
earth, and under the earth: because the Lord becase 
obedient unto death, even the death of the crom: 
therefore the Lord Jesus Christ is in the Glory cf 
God the Father. Ps.ci O Lord, hear my pray 
and let my cry come unto thee. At the name, &c 

Immediately after Kyrie eleison, &c, is said: 
Let us pray. Let us kneel down. R. Stand up age® 
I. COLLECT. Presta.—Grant, we beseech thee 


HOLY WEEK. 261 


Almighty God, that we who continually are pun- 
ed for our excesses, may be delivered by the 
mon of thy only begotten Son. Who, &c. 


» LESSON.  Jeaias lxii. 11. ]xiii. 1. 7—Thus 
kthe Lord God: Tell the daughter of Sion: Be- 
d thy Saviour cometh. Who is this that cometh 
n Edom, with dyed garments from Bosra, this 
ntiful one in his robe, walking in the greatness 
35s strength? I, that speak justice, and am a de- 
ler to save. Why then is thy apparel red, and 
garments like them that tread in the wine press? 
we trodden the wine press alone, and of the 
tiles there is not à man with me: I have tramp- 
on them in my indignation, and have trodden 
n down in my wrath, and their blood is sprink- 
upon my garments, and I have stained all my 
wel For the day of vengeance is in my heart, 
year of my redemption is come. I looked 
at and there was none to help: I sought, and 
e was none to give aid: and my own arm hath 
d me, and my indignation itself hath helped me. 
| I have trodden down the people in my wrath, 
made them drunk in my indignation, and have 
ight down their strength to the earth. I will re- 
nber the tender mercies of the Lord, the praise 
he Lord for all the things that the Lord hath be- 
red on us. 

RAD. Ps. Ixviii—Turn not away thy face from 
servant, for I am in trouble: hear me speedily. 
Bave ine, O God, for the waters are come in even 
omy soul; I stick fast in the mire of the deep, 
. there is no sure standing. 

The Lord be with you. R. And with thy spirit. 
I. COLLECT. Deus qui.—O God, who wouldst 
'e thy Son suffer on the cross, to deliver us from 
‘power of the enemy ; grant that we thy servants, 
y obtain the grace of his resurrection. Thro’ the 
he, 


—. 





- HOLY WERK: 263 


and he shall divide the spoils of the 
5 he hath delivered his soul unto death, ard 
puted with the wicked: and he hath borne the 
many, and hath prayed for the transgressors. 
(CT. Ps. ci.—Hear, O Lord, my prayer; 
my cry come unto thee. V. Turn not away 
e me, in the day when I am in trouble; 
iy ear d me. V: In what da ever i 
upon thee, hear me speedily. V. For 

e vanished like smoke; and my bones are a5 
were fried in a frying-pan. P. I am smitten 
j and my heart is withered ; because I forgot 
my bread. V. Thou, O Lord, arising wilt 
ercy on Sion; for the time to have mercy on 
ome. 


ASSION of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, 
according to Luke xxii.—xxiii. 


that time: The feast of unleavened bread, 
rhich is called the Pasch, was at hand. And 
ef priests and the scribes sought how they 
xut Jesus to death: but they feared the peo- 
nd Satan entered into Judas, who was sur- 
Iscariot, one of the twelve. And he went, 
coursed with the chief priests and the magis- 
how he might betray him to them. And 
ere glad, and covenanted to give him money. 
a promised. And he sought opportunity to 
him in the absence of the multitude. And 
‘of the unleavened bread came, on which it 
cessary that the pasch should be killed. And 
Peter and John, saying : Go and prepare us 
ich, that we may eat. But they said: ere 
ou that we prepare? And he said to them: 
l, as you go into the city, there shall meet 
man carrying a pitcher of water; follow him 
e house where ho entereth in: and you 

the good man of the house: The Master 





266 WEDNESDAY IN 


ing, behold a multitude: and he that was ahi 
Judas, one of the twelve, went before them, 
drew near to Jesus to kiss him. And Jesus mid 
him: Judas, dost thou betray the Son of Man wih 
a kiss? And they that were about him, seeing wisi 
would follow, said to him: Lord, shall we aie 
with the sword ? And one of them struck the servet 
of the high priest, and cut off his right ear. But ® 
sus answering, said: Suffer ye thus far. And wha 
he had touched his ear, he healed him. And Jews 
said to the chief priests and magistrates of the temgls, 
and the ancients that were come to him: Are 
come out, as it were against a thief, with swell 
and clubs? When I was daily with you in the a 
ple, you did not stretch forth your hands 
me, but this is your hour, and the power of 
ness, And apprehending him, they led him te 
high priest’s house: but Peter followed afar. 
And when they had kindled a fire in the midtw 
the hall, and were sitting about it, Peter was in 
midst of them. Whom when a certain servant maid 
had seen sitting at the light, and bad eersedly 
beheld him, she said: This man also was with. Ms 
But he denied, saying: Woman, I know him 
And after a little while, another seeing bim, sit 
Thou also art one of them. But Peter ssidi 
man, Iam not And after the space as it were sf. 
one hour, another certain man saying: Oft. 
truth this man was also with him: for he is a: 
Galilean. And Peter said: Man, I know not wi 
thou sayest. And immediately as he wes 96 
speaking, the cock crew. And the Lord 
looked on Peter. And Peter remembered the 
of the Lond, as he had said Before the cock ~ 
ou shalt deny me thrice. And Peter going 
wept bitterly. And the men that held bim, modsl 
him, and struck him. And-they blindfolded bit 
and smote him on the face. And they asked bm 





268 WEDNESDAY IN 


And Herod and Pilate were made friends tht 
same day: for before they were enemies to one 
another. Then Pilate calling together the chief 
priests, and the magistrates, and the people, said ©. : 
them : You have brought this man to me as one tbst.. 

perverteth the people, and behold I, having exam 

ined him before you, find no cause in this man touch . 
ing those things wherein you accuse him. No, nog, 

Herod neither. For I sent you to him, and belio. - 
nothing worthy of death is done to him. 1 wá. 
chastise him therefore and release him. Now of:. 
necessity he was to release unto them one 4 
the feast day. But the whole multitude Logos 
cried out at once, saying: Away with this maa. 

Barabbas, w 























and release unto us ho for. a cet 
tain sedition made in the city, and for a murder, wap: 
cast into prison. And Pilate again spoke to them, :- 
desiring to release Jesus. But they cried out 4 
saying : Crucify him, crucify him. And he said to the 
the third time : Why, what evil hath this man dose?, 
I find no cause of death in him. ‘I will chastise his. 
therefore, and let him go. Bug they were inst. , 
with loud voices requiring that he might be croci, 
fied: and their voices prevailed. And Pilate 
sentence that it should be as they required. 
he released unto them him who for murder. 
sedition had been cast into prison, whom they 
desired: but Jesus he delivered up to tbeir wil, 
And as they led him away, they laid hold on os, 
Simon of Cyrene, coming from the country : and tht$ 
laid the cross on him to carry after Jesus. 
there followed him a great multitude of people, ex. 
of women who bewailed and lamented him, B&.- 
Jesus turning to them, said: Daughters of Jem. 
salem, weep not over me, -but weep for your 
selves, and for your children. For behold the 
shall come, wherein they will say, Blessed are 
barren, and the wombs that have not borne, and thO — . 
paps that have not given Suck. Then shall the¥ 


'tó the mountains: Fall upon us: and 
sover us. For if in the green wood 
things, what shall be done in the dry ? 


| there; and the robbers, one on the 
md the other on the left. And Jesus 


t 
le stood beholding, and the rulers with 
him, saying: He saved others, let him 
, if he be Christ, the elect of God. 
liers also mocked him, coming to him, 
tim vinegar, and saying: If thou bethe 
wa, save thyself. And there was also 
on written over him in letters of Greek, 
d Hebrew: Tuis 1s THE Kine oF THE 
one of those robbers who were hang- 
xd him, saying: If thou be Christ, save 
s. But the other answering, rebuked 
Neither dost thou fear God, seeing thou 
. same condemnation: And we indeed 
receiye the due reward of our deeds; 
hath done no evil. And he said to Je- 
member me when thou shalt come in- 
ym. And Jesus said to him: Amen l 
iis day thou shalt be with me in para- 
was almost the sixth hour; and there 
over all the earth until the ninth hour. 
was darkened ; and the veil of the tem- 
in the midst. And Jesus crying witha 
id: Father, into thy hands 1 commend 
nd saying this, he gave up the ghost*. 
iturion seeing what was done, glorified 
: Indeed this wasa just man. And al: 
3 of them that were come together to 


* Here all kneel, and pause. 
23 


270 WEDNESDAY IN HOLY WEEK. 


tha: sight, and saw the things that were done, retur 
ed striking their breast. And all his acquaintance, 
and the women that had followed him from Galijes, 
stood afar off, beholding these things. 
Here is said the Prayer, Cleanse my heart, &c. 9.2% 
ND behold there was a man named Joseph wha 
was a counsellor, a good and just man: (tht 
same had not consented to their counsel and 
of Arimathea, a city of Judea, who also hi 
looked for the kingdom of God. This man went s 
Pilate and begged the body of Jesus. And taki 
him down he wrapped him in fine linen, and 
him in a sepulchre that was hewed in stone, whe 
in never yet any 1nan had been laid. 
FERT. Ps. ci.—Hear, O Lord, my prayer;esi 
let my cry come to thee: turn not away thy fee 
from me. ; 

SECRET. Accept, O Lord, we beseech the 
the offerings we have made; and mercifully great 
that we may receive, with pious sentiments, whl 
we celebrate in the mystery of the passion of ett 
Lord. Thro’ the same. ; 

COMM. P5. ci.—I mingled my drink with weeping 
for having lifted me up, thou thrown me dows 
and I am withered like grass; but thou, O Led 
endurest for ever: thou shalt arise, and have mag 
on Sion; because the time to have mercy on Mt 
is come. 

P. COMM. Largire.—Grant, O Almighty Ged 
that we may have a lively hope, that thou gre 
us eternal life by the temporal death of thy Son, re 
presented in these adorable mysteries. Thro’ the sam 

Let us pray. Bow down your heads to God. 

PRAYER. RHespice.—Look down, O Lord, ™ 
beseech thee, on this thy family, for which ed 
Lord Jesus Christ scrupled not to be delivered Bi 
the hands of wicked men, and undergo the 
ment of the cross. Who liveth, &c. in secre. 


wef Ef 
MAUNDY-THURSDAY. 


LECT. Deus, a quo.—O God, from whom 
das received the punishment of his sin, and 
f the reward of his confession : t us the 
f thy mercy; that.as our Lord Jesus Christ, 
me of his passion, bestowed on both different 
| according to their merits; so, having de- 
the old man in us, he may give us grace to 
in with him. Who liveth. 
JTLE. 1 Cor. xi. 20. 32. 





272 THE MASS FOR 


the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was be- 
trayed, took bread, and giving thanks, broke, ead 
said: TAKE YE AND EAT: THIS IS MY BODY WHICH 
SHALL BE DELIVERED FOR YOU: THIS DO FOR THR 
COMMEMORATION OF ME. In like manner 
Chalice, after he had supped, saying: Tats Ca 
LICE IS THE New TESTAMENT IN MY BLOOD: THY 
DO YE, AS OFTEN AS YE SHALL DRINK IT, FOR THE 
' COMMEMORATION OF ME. For as often as you 

eat this bread, and drink the chalice, you shall shew 
the death of the Lord, until he come. Therefore 
whosoever shall eat this bread and drink the chalice 
of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of pe 
and blood of the Lord. But let a man prove hi 
and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of the 
chalice. For he that eateth and drinketh unwoür 
thily, eateth and drinketh judgment to himself, nt 
discerning the body of the Lord. Therefore are 
there many infirm and weak among you, and 
sleep. But if we would judge ourselves we 
not be judged. But whilst we are judged, we ate 
chastised by the Lord: that we be not condemned 
with this world. 


GRADUAL. PH. ii. 


Christ for us became Christus factus eat pre 
obedient untodeath,even nobis obediens usque dl 
to the death of the cross, mortem, mortem — auits 
V. For which cause, God crucis. V. Propter 
also hath exalted him,and et Deus eraltavit 
hath given him & name, e£ dedu tli nomen, 
which is aboveallnames. esi super omne nomen 
GOSPEL. John xiii. 1. 15.—Before the festivd 
day of the pasch, Jesus knowing that his hour ¥# 
come that he should pass out of this world to 
Father : having loved his own who were in the 
he loved them unto the end. And when supper v9 
done, (the devil having now put it into the heert of 


MAUNDY-THURSDAY. 273 


ot, the son of Simon to betray him) 
t the Father had given him all things 
ds, and that he came from God, and 
id: he riseth from supper, and layeth 
ments, and having taken a towel, ginded 
ter that, he putteth water into a basin, 
) wash the feet of the disciples, and to 
rith the towel wherewith he was girded. 
therefore to Simon Peter. And Peter 
: Lord, dost thou wash my feet? Jesus 
id said to him: What I do, thou know- 
but thou shalt kuow hereafter. Peter 
; Thou shalt never wash my feet. Je- 
lhün: If I wash thee not, thou shalt 
with me. Simon Peter saith to him: 
ly my feet, but also my hands and my 
; saith to him: He that is washed, need- 
to wash his feet, but is clean wholly. 
+ clean, but not all. For he knew who 
would betray him; therefore he said: 
all clean. 'l'hen after he had washed 
d taken his garments, being set down 
id to them: Know you what I have 
? You call me, Master, and Lord: and 
l,for so I am. If then I, being your 
ister, have washed your feet; you also 
ih one another’s feet. For I have given 
iple, that as I have done to you so do 


REDO. 
OFFERTORY. Ps. cxvii. 

hand of the Dextera. Domini fecit 
lisplayed its virtulen: dextera Domi- 
ight hand of ni exaltavit me; non mo- 
lh raised me  riar, sed vivam, et narra- 
not die, but bo opera Domini. 

ish the works 


'‘—We beseech thee, O holy Lord, Al- 


274 THE MASS FOR 


mighty Father, Eternal God, that our Lord Jens 
Christ, thy Son, may make our sacrifice ac 
to thee, who on this day.commanded his disciplesto 
celebrate it in memory of him. Who. 
COMMUNICANTES.—Being united in com- 
munion and celebrating this most sacred day o& 
which our Lord Jesus Christ was betrayed for us; 
and also honouring in the first place the memory # 
glorious Mary, ever a Virgin, and Mother of the 
same God, and our Lord Jesus Christ: as also thy 
blessed apostles, &c. (as in the OnpINARY, p. xxxiv. 
HANC IGITUR.—We therefore beseech thet 
O Lord, graciously to accept this offering of us thy 
servants, and of thy whole family, which we 
in memory of that day on which our Lord Jews 
Christ commanded his disciples to celebrate the 
mysteries of his body and blood; and dispose ow 
days in peace, preserve us from eternal damnation, 
and rank us in the number of thy elect. Thro’. 


N. B. In delestation of the traitorous kiss 4 
Judas, the PAX after Agnus Dei is not given to-dé} 


COMMUNION. John xiii. 


The Lord Jesus, after Dominus Jesus, pot 
he had supped with his quam cenavit cum ; 
disciples, washed their pulis suis, lavit. pedes € 
feet, and said to them: rum, et ait ilis: sch 
Do you understand what quid fecerim vobis, t$? 
I have done to you, I Dominus et Magister? 
who am your Lord and Exemplum dedi volis 9 
Master? I have set you ef vos tla faciatis. 
an example, that you may : 
do the same. 


P. COMM. RefectiiWe beseech thee, O Lor 
our God, that being nourished with this life-girnd 
food, we may receive by thy grace, in immor® 
glory, what we celebrate in this mortal life. Thro: 


MAWEDT-FRURSDAY. 


wo 


tthe PRESANCTIFIED HOST, reserved - 


Mass of to-morrow, i$ 
he place prepared for its 


Ayman is sung. 


1em efficit ; 


is rceplin, the fl 


mentum 
Veneremur cernui ; 


Genitori, genitoque 
Laus et jubilatio; . 
Salus, honor, virtus, quo- 


que 
Sit et benedictio : 


'Procedenti ab utroque 


Compar sit laudatio, 


VESPERS. 
LICEM salutaris accipiam, et nomen Do- 


dni invocabo. 


Ps. 


DI propter 
locutus sum; 
em humiliatus 
L 

d in excessu 


Quid retribuam De- 
mino, * pro omnibus 
que retribuit mihi? . 


376 


Calicem salutaris acci- 
piam, *et nomen Domi- 
ni invocabo. 


Vota mea Domino red- : 


dam coram omni populo 
ejus; 
spectu Domini mors sanc- 
torum ejus. 

O Domine, quia ego 
servus tuas, *ego servus 
tuus, et filius ancillee tue. 

Dirupisti vincula mea: 
* tibi sacrificabo hostiam 

Ps. 

AP Dominum, cum tri- 

bularer, clamavi, *et 
exaudivit me. 

Domine, libera ani- 
mam meam a labiis ini- 
quis, *et a lingua do- 
losa. 

Quid detur tibi, aut 
quid apponatur tibi * ad 

inguam dolosam ? 

itte potentis acu- 
tee, * cum carbonibus de- 
solatoriis. 


*pretiosa in con- . 


VESPERS FOR 


laudis et nomen Doinhi 


Ant. Calicem, &, : 

Ant. Cum his qui ed 
runt pacem eram paciii- 
cus; dum loqueber ilis 
impu me grate 

cxix. 

Heu mihi, quia incelr 
tus meus prolongatus dif; 
habitavicum habi 
Cedar: * multum ined 
fuit anima mea. 

Cum his qui oderit 
pacem, eram pacifies; 

cum loquebar illis, €$- 
ugnabent me grati ^ 
d nt. Cum his, &&. | 
Ant. Ab hominibus ar 
quis libera me Domins. 


Ps. cxxxix. 


ERIE me, Domine, 
ab homine malo: * 
a viro iniquo eripe me. 
Qui cogitaverunt ini- 
uitates in corde; * tota 
ie constituebant prcelia. 
Acuerunt linguas suas 
sicut serpentis; * vene- 
num aspidum sub labiis 
eorum, 


Custodi me, Domisa 
de manu ris; “ul 
ab hominibus inii 
eripe me. 

Qui cogitaverunt 
plantare gressus 
absconderunt superbi 
queum mihi, 

Et funes extender 
in laqueum ; * juxts iit 


0 ad te. 

tur oratio mea, 
'ensum, in con- 
tuo; * elevatio 


perum. 

Verumtamen justi con- 
fitebuntur nomini tuo; * 
et habitabunt recti cum 


queo quem statuerunt 
mihi, et a scandalis ope- 


, exl 


ad excusandds excusa- 
tiones in peccatis. 

Cum hominibus 
rantibus — iniquitatem ; 
* et non communi 
cum electis eorum. 

Corripiet me justus in 
misericordia, et increpe- 
bit me; * oleum autem 
peccatoris non impingyet 
caput meum. 

Quoniam adhuc et o- 
ratio mea m beneplaci- 
tiseorum: . * 
sunt juncti petrse judices 
eorum. ' ' . . 


- Aa 


Audient verba mea 

uoniam potuerunt.  * 

icut crassitudo terre 
erupta est super terram. 

Dissipata sunt ossa 
nostra secus infernum ; * 
quia ad te, Domine, Do- 
mine, oculi mei; in te 
speravi, non auferas ani- 
mam meam. 

Custodi me a laqueo, 


VESPERS FOR 


quem statuerunt n 
et a scandalis oper 
inivuitatém. ' 
Cadent in reticu 
peccatores ; “sin 
gum ego donec 
Ant. Custodi nmi 
Ant. Considerab 
dexteram ; et vid 
et non erat qui cog 
ret me. . 


Ps. cxli. 


OCE mea ad Domi- 

num clamavi: * vo- 
ce mea ad Dominum de- 
precatus sum. 

Effundo in conspectu 
ejus orationem meam, * 
et tribulationem meam 
&nte ipsum pronuntio; 

In deficiendo *ex me 
spiritum .meum: * et tu 
cognovisti semitas meas. 

n via hac, qua am- 
bulabam, * absconderunt 
superbi laqueum mihi. 

Considerabam ad dex- 
teram et videbam; * 
et non erat qui cognos- 
ceret ine. . 

Perht fuga a me, * et 


non erat qui requir 
mam meam. 
Clamavi ad te, | 
ne, * dixi: tu « 
mea, portio mea ] 
ra viventium. 
Intende ad depre 
nem meam; * qui 
miliatus sum nini 
Libera me a: 


*quentibus me; 


confortati sunt 
Educ de custodi 
mam meam ad cal 
dum nomini tuoj, 
expectant i i 
retribuas mihi. 
Ant. Considersbt 
dexteram. &c. '' 


At the Magnificat. 


Ant Coenantibus au- 
tem illis accepit Jesus 
et benedixit ac 

regit, deditque discipulis 
suis. 


V. Christus : 
est pro nobis 
ens usque 


tem. 


- 
chio guo ; * dispersit su- 
perbos mente cordis sui. 


Deposuit potentes de 


salutari sede; * et exaltavit hu- 


es - 
Esurientes — implevit 
bonis; * et divites dimisit 
"Buscep Íemelpu 4 
itlaraelpu 4m 
suum recopdatu ni- 
gericordie suz. . . 
Sicut locutus er ad 
patres nostros, * Abr: .am, 
et semini ejus, in sv :uls. 
Ant. Ccenantibu. &c. 


is kneel, and soy, Our Father, &c. in secret. 
3. ]. ' 


suere mei Deus, * 


secundum multitu- 
1 miserationum tu- 
* dele iniquitatem 


le 
iplius lava me ab 
tate mea; * et a 
to meo munda me. 
oniam iniquitatem 
| ego cognosco; * 
tatum meum eontra 
L semper. 

i soli peccavi, et 
a coram te feci; * 
üficeris in sermoni- 
de, et vincas cum 
tis. 


Ecce enim in inquita- 
tibus conceptus sum; * 
et in peccatis concepit 
me mater mea. - 

Ecce enim veritatem 
dilexisti ; * incerta et oc- 
culta sapientie tute ma- 
nifestasti mihi. " 

erges me. hyaso 
et b dibor; * lay is 
me, et super nivem deal- 
babo 


r. 

Auditui meo dabis 
gaudium et letitiam; * 
et exultabunt ossa humi- 
liata. 

Averte faciem tuam a 
peccatis meis ; * et omnes 
iniquitates meas dele. 


A a2 


Cor mundum crea in 
me, Deus; * et spiritum 
rectum innova in visceri- 
bus meis. 

-Ne projicias me a fa- 
cie tua; *et spiritum sanc- 
tum tuum ne auferas a 


me. 

Redde mihi letitiam 
salutaris tui; * et spiritu 
principali confirma mé. 

Docebo iniquos vias 
tuas; * et impii ad te 
convertentur. 

Libera me de sanguin- 
ibus, Deus, Deus salutis 
mere; * et exaltabit 


lingua mea justitiam 
tuam. 
Domine, labia mea 


GOOD-FRIDAT. 


aperies, * os meum 
annunuabit laudem ti 
am. . 
Quoniam si voluisset 
sacrificium, dedissem ut- 
ue; * holocaustis nos 
electaberis. 

Sacrificium Deo spi 
tus contribulatus;* cr 
contritum ki humiliatum 

us, non icies. 

Benigne fan Domist, 
in bona voluntate tat 
Sion; * ut redi 
muri J em. 

Tunc acceptabis mcr 
ficium justitiie, 
tiones et holocansa; * 
tunc imponent super & 
tare tuum vitulos. 


PRAYER. Respice.—Look down, page 270. 





* GOOD-FRIDAY. 


MASS of the PRESANCTIFIED. 

The Priest (with his Ministers, having for some fist 
lain prostrate in the sanctuary, tn silent le 
arises and goes up and kisses the middle of the air: 
then a Reader begins the Lessons, in an anit 
voice, without any title, whilst the Priest reads tes 
at the same time, in a low voice, at the Episti sib 
0 r. . 

. LESSON. | Osee vi. 1. 6.— Thus saith the Lard? 

In their affliction they will rise early to me: Cot 

and let us return to the Lord. For he hath tai. | 

us, and he will heal us: he will strike, and he wi | 





282 0G00D-FRIDAY. 


less than may suffice to eat the lamb, he shall tele 
unto him his neighbour that .joineth to his hous, 
according to the number of souls which may 
enough to eat the lamb. And it shall be a Jams 
without blemish, a male of one year; according tt 
which rite also he shall kill a kid. And you shal 
keep it unto the fourteenth day of this month: and 
the whole multitude of the children of Israel shall 
sacrifice it in the evening. And they shall take of 
the blood thereof, and put it upon both the side 
posts, and on the upper door posts of the houses, 
wherein they shall eat it. And they shall eet the 
flesh that night roasted at the fire, and unleavesed 
bread, with wild lettuce. You shall not eat 

any thing raw, nor boiled in water, but only 

at the fire: you shall eat the head with the feet and 
entrails thereof. Neither shall there remain st. 
thing of it until morning. If there be any th 
left, you shall burn it with fire. And thus you 

eat it: you shall gird your reins, and you have 
shoes on your feet, holding staves in your 

and. you shall eat in haste: for it is the Phase (tht 
is the passage) of the Lord. 

TRACT. Ps. cxxxix.— Eripe me, Domine, d 
homine malo : a tiro iniquo libera me, &c. 

Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man: resesé 
me from the unjust man. V. Who have devised * 
iquities in their hearts: all the day long they demgt 
ed battles. V.They have sharpened their ton 
like a serpent: the venom of asps is under their 
V. Keep me, O Lord, from the hand of the wicked 
and froni unjust men deliver me. P. Who have 
posed to supplant my steps; the proud have hid 8 
net forme. P. And they have stretched out 
for a snare: they have laid for me a stumbling 
by the way side. V. I said to the Lord; thou atf 
my God; hear, O Lord, the voice of my suppli 
tion. V.O Lord, Lord the might of my salvauot! 


MASS OP THE PRESANCTIFIED 283 


cover thou my head in the day of battle. V. Give 
te not up, O Lord, from my desire to the wicked: 
hey have plotted against me, do not thou forsake 
be, lest they should triumph. — P. The head of 
her compassing me about: the labour of their lips 
kal overwhelm them. V. But as for the just the 
lel give glory to thy name: and the upright shall 
well with thy countenance. 
fe PASSION of our LORD JESUS CHRIST 
according to John xviii. and xix. 
T that time : Jesus went with his disciples over 
the brook Cedron, where there was a garden, 
we which he entered with his disciples. And Judas 
lo, who betrayed him, knew the place; because 
ews had often resorted thither together with bis 
Beiples. Judas therefore having received a band 
f soldiers, and. servants from the chief priests and 
is Pharisees, cometh thither with lanterns, and 
and weapons. Jesus therefore knowing all 
lings that should come upon him, went forth, and 
tid to them: Whom seek ye? They answered 
im: Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus saith to them: I am 
& And Judas also, who betrayed him, stood 
"th them. As soon therefore as he had said to 
bem: I am he: they went backward, and fell to 
ie ground. Again therefore he asked them: Whom 
tek ye? And theyssid: Jesusof Nazareth. Jesus 
mswered: I have told you, that I am he. If there- 
we you seek me, let these go their way. That the 
Mrd might be fulfilled which he said: Of them 
thom thou hast given me, I have not lost any one. 
then Simon Peter having a sword drew it: and 
truck the servant of the high-priest, and cut off his 
Whtear. And the nameof the servant was Malchus. 
lems then said to Peter: Put up thy sword into 
he scabbard: The chalice which my Father hath 
en me, shall I not drink it? Then the band, and 
tribune, and the servants of the Jews took Jesus, 
md they bound him: And they led him away to 


984 GOOD-FRIDAY. 


Annas first, for he was father-in-law to Caipha 
who was the high-priest of that year. Now Gi 
has was he who had given the counsel to the Jess 
That it was expedient that one man should die fi 
the people. And Simon Peter followed Jesus, andit 
did another disciple. And that disciple wes knot 
to the high-priest, and went in with Jesus inte ® 
court of the high-priest. But Peter stood sat di 
door without. The other disciple therefore we 
was known to the high-priest, went out, and spas 
to the porteress, and brought in Peter. àü 
maid that was porteress, saith to Peter: Art 4j 
thou also one of this man's disciples: He suit 
Iam not. Now the servants and officers stood. 
a fire of coals, because it was cold, and 
themselves. And with them was Peter also 
and warming himmelf. The high-priest then 
Jesus of his disciples and of his doctrine, Jeg 
answered him: I have spoken openly to the weal 
I have always taught in the synagogue, and inti 
temple, whither all the Jews resort ; and in 
have spoken nothing. Why asketh thou me? a 
them who have heard what I have spoken we 
them: behold they know what things, 1 have mil 
And when he had said these things, one of the ef 
cers standing by, gave Jesus a blow, saying: 4 
swerest thou the high-priest so? Jesus answered bise 
If I have spoken evil, give testimony of the evil: ii 
if well, why strikest thou me? And Annas sent hif 
bound to Caiphas the high-priest. And Simoa P 
ter was standing, and warming himself. They sii 
therefore to him: Art not thou also one of hsd* 
ciples? He denied it, and said: Iam not. Omd 
the servants of the high-priest (a kinsman to Bf 
whose ear Peter cut off) saith to him: Did not ia 
thee in the garden with him? Then Peter 
denied: and immediately the cock crew. 
they led Jesus from Caiphas to the governor's i 


was morning; and they wént ‘hot frit the 
it they might not be defiled, but that they 
at the pasch. Pilate therefore went ‘out to 


| 
E 
iE 
8 


To thee. Pilate then said to them: Take 
à, and judge him En to ‘liye, 
vs therefore said to him : ft is not fe 
Pew. ‘That the word of Jesus 
e which he sax signifyi ‘what 
should die: Has ere wit tar b 
and called Jesus and seid to him: 
of the Jews? Jesus answered: pre 


‘orld, my servants would certainly strive that 
mot be delivered to the Jews: but now nit 


lease unio you the king of the Jews? Then 
ey all again saying : Not this man but Barab- 
ow Borabbas was a robber. Then therefore 
vok Jesus, and scourged him. And the sol- 
atting a crown of thorns, put it upon hie 
nd they put on him a purple garment. Any 
ne to him, and said: Tisil king of the Jown 


286 GOOD-FRIDAY. 


and they give him blows. Pilate therefore went 
forth again, and saith to them: Behold I bring him 
forth unto you, that you may know that I find no 
cause in him. (Jesus therefore came forth boating 
the crown of thorns, and the purple t) 

he saith to them: Behold the man. When the chief 
priests therefore and the servants had seen bim, eT 
cried out saying: Crucify him, crucify bim, Pi 
saith to them: Take him you, and crucify him: for 
I find no cause in him. e Jews answered him: 
We have a law; and according to that law he ought 
to die, because he made hipiself the Son of God 
When Pilate therefore had heard this saying, he 
feared the more. And he entered into the hall 
again; and he said to Jesus: Whence art thou? 
But Jesus gave him no answer. Pilate therefore saith 
to him: Speakest thou not to me ? knowest thou not 
that I have power to crucify thee, and I have power 
to release thee? Jesus answered: Thou shouldst 
not have any power against me, unless it were given 
thee from above. Therefore he that hath delivered 
me to thee, hath the greater sin. And from thence. 
forth Pilate sought to release him. But the Jews 
cried out, saying: If thou release this man, thou art 
not Ceesar’s friend. For whosoever maketh hi 

a king, speaketh against Caesar. Now when Pilste 
had heard these words, he brought Jesus forth: and 
sat down in the judgment-seat in the place thats 
called Lithostrotos, and in the Hebrew Gabbathe 
And it was the parasceve of the pasch, about the 
sixth hour, and he saith to the Jews: Behold your 
king. But they cried out: Away with him, end 
with him, crucify him. Pilate saith to them: 

I crucify your king ? The chief priests answered : We 
have no king but Cesar. Then therefore he de 
livered him to them to be crucified. And they tock 
Jesus, and led him forth. And bearing his own 
cross, he went forth to that place which is called 


MASS OF THE FRFSANCTIFIED. 287 


, but in Hebrew Golgotha. Where they 
| him, and with him two others, one on 
6, and Jesus in the midst. And Pilate wrote 
so: and he put it upon the cross. And the 
was JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING 
E JEWS. This title therefore many of the 
| read: because the place where Jesus was 
| was nigh to the city; and it was written 
w, in Greek, and in Latin. Then the chief. 
f the Jews said to Pilate: Write not, The 
the Jews ; but that he said, I am the king of 
% Pilate answered: What I have written, I 
itten. The soldiers therefore when they had 
| him, took his garments (and they made four. 
» every soldier a part), and also his coat. 
3 coat was without seam, woven from the 
mughout. They said then one to another: 
ot cut it, but let us cast lots for it whose it 
; that the scripture might be fulfilled which 
They have parted my garments among them 
n my vesture they have cast lots? And the 
indeed did these things. Now there stood 
ross of Jesus, his mother, and his mother’s 
flary of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalen. 
esus therefore had seen his mother, and the 
standing whom he loved, he saith to his 
Woman, behold thy Son. After that, he 
the disciple: Behold thy mother. And from 
r the disciple took her to his own. After- 
sus knowing that all things were now accom- 
that the scripture might be fulfilled, said: 
Now there was a vessel set there full of ine. 
ad they putting a spon lof vine ut 
iut it to his mouth. Josus therefore when he 
m the vinegar, suid it is consummated. And 
his head, he gave up the ghost.* Then the 


* Here all kneel, and pause. 


288 €G00D FRIDAY. 


Jews (because it was the parasceve) that the bodes 
might not remain upon the cross on the sabhath-dey 
(for that was a great sabheth-day), besought Pils 
that their legs might be broken, and that might 
be taken away. "The soldiers therefore came: ani 
they broke the legs of the first, and of the othr 
that was crucified with him. But after they cams 
to Jesus, when they saw that he was already deal, 
they did not break his le But one of the soldier 
with a spear opened his side, and immedimeiy 
there came out blood and water. And he that aw 
it hath given testimony : and his testimony is tres. 
noweth that he seith true; that you 
may believe. For these thinge were done thet the 
scripture might be fulfilled: “You shall not hresk 
a bone of hin.” And again another scripture sash: 
“They shall look on him whom they pierced.” 


Here is said, Cleanse my heart. OgpriNARY, p. XI. 


AND after these things Joseph of Arimathea (be- 
cause he was a disciple of Jesus, but secrelly 
for fear of the Jews) besought Pilate that he mi 
take the body of Jesus, And Pilate gave leave. 
came therefore and took away the body of Jems. 
And Nicodemus also came, he who at the first cam 
to Jesus by night, bringing a mixture of myrrh end 
aloes, about one hundred pound weight. They took 
therefore the body of Jesus, and bound it in linea 
cloths with the spices, as the manner of the Jewsis 
ta bury. Now there was in the place, where be 
Was crucified, a garden: and in thé garden a new 
sepulchre, wherein no man had yet been lid. 
T: therefore, because of the parasceve of tbe 
Jews, they laid Jesus, because the sepulchre wes 
nigh at hand. 


Then the Priest, wanting on the Epistle side, sage @ 
0WOUwS. 
[Let us pray, most dearly beloved bréthren, fbr the 


-0 PR HR. mem manam nA anml mam 


MASS OF THE PRESANCTIFIED. 285 
hey Church of God, that the Lord God would be 
pleased to grant it peace, maintain it in union, and 
preserve it all over the earth. That he would like- 
wise bring into her bosom, the princes and poten- 
tates of the whole world, and grant us peace and 
imnmquilli i "n life and to glorify God the 
igaty. 
test. Let us pray. Deacon. Let us kneel down. 
S up again. 
) Almighty and Eternal God, who, by Christ, hast 
revealed thy glory to all nations; preserve the 
rks of thine own mercy, that thy Church, which 
pread over the whole world, may persevere with 
pnstant faith in the confession of thy name. Thro’ 


sme, R. 








X us pray also for our most Holy Father, Pope N. 
bat our Lord God, who hath made choice of him 
b the order of the Episcopacy, may him 
whealth and safety for the good of his holy Church, 
uo overn the holy people of . 


us pray. Deacun. Let us kneel down. 
lescon. Stand u 


again. 

Almighty and Fxernal God, by whose appoint- 
ment all things are established and maintained ; 
fully regard our prayers, and by thy goodness, 
ve the Prelate chosen to govern us; that the 
ian people, who are governed by thy authority, 
vrease the merits of their faith under so great 
y. Thro’. R. Amen. 

3 also pray for all Bishops, Priests, Deacons, 
eacons, Acolytes, Exorcists, Readers, Door- 
a, Confessors, Virgins, Widows, and for all 
ily people of God.] 


» Let us pray. Deacon. Let us kneel down. 

m. Stand up again. 

üghty and Eternal God, by whose spirit 

whole body of the Church is sanctified aud 
Bb 


290 QOOD FRIDAY. 


governed ; hear our prayers for all orders und de 
thereof: that by the assistance of thy 

thou mayest be served by every rank and 

Thro’. R. Amen. 


[Let us pray also for JV. JV. that the Lord God my 
reduce to his obedience all barbarous nations fW 
our perpetual peace.] 

Priest. Let us prey. Deacon. Let us kneel dows 

Subdeacon. Stand up again. 

Almighty and Eternal God, in whose band 

are the power and right of all kingdom: 
graciously look down on the empire JV. JV. that thom 
nations who confide in their own haughtiness asd 
strength may be reduced by the power of thy rigtt 
hand. Thro’ R. Amen. 


[Let us pray also for our Catechumens, that of 
Lord God may open for them the ears of thet 
hearts, and the gates of mercy; that havisg re. 
ceived the remission of sin by the laver of T 
ration, they may also belong to our Lord 
Christ.] 


Noe Let us pray. Deacon. Let us kneel dows 

é n. Stand up again. 

O Almighty and Eternal God, who continui 
makest the Church fruitful in new childrei 

increase the faith and understanding of our Catecitt 

mens, that, being again born at the font of 

they may be joined to thy acopted children. 

R. Amen. 


[Let us pray, most dearly beloved brethren 10 Gal — 
the Father Almighty, that he would purge 8 — 
world of all errors, cure diseases, drivo & & 
mine, open prisons, break chains, tam 
turn to travellers, health to the sick, and a seu 
barbour to such as are at sea.] 

Priest. Let us pray. Deacon. Let us kneel do® 

Subdeacon. Stand up again. 


MASS OP THU PRESANCTIFIED. ME d 


and External God, the comfort of the 
1, and the strength of those that labour; 
rers of all such as call upon thee in tri- 
ome to thee ; that all with joy, may find 
df thy mercy in their necessities, ‘Thru’. 


ay also for all heretics and schismatics, 

rd God would be pleased to deliver 
m all their, errors, and call them back to 
y Mother the Catholic and Apostolic 


| 
et us pray. Deacon. Let us kneel down. 
Stand up again. 
bty and Eternal God, who savest all and 
dst have none to perish; look down on 
. that are seduced by the deceits of the 
the hearts of all those who err, laying 
retical malice, may repent and returu to 
fthe truth. Thro’. AR. men. 
ay also for the perfidious Jews; that the 
xd would withdraw the veil from their 
iat they also may acknowledge our Lord 
irist thy Son.] 
unus genua ts here omitted, in abhorrence of 
t offered by the Jews to our Saviour, when 
't before him in derision, in the hall of 
aalace. 
rhty and Eternal God, who deniest not 
jercy even to the perfidious Jews; hear 
3 which we pour forth for the blindness of 
'$ that by acknowledging the light of thy 
th is the Christ, they may be brought out 
rkness. ‘Thro’. Jt. men. 
ty also for the Pagans, that Almighty God 
emove all iniquity from their hearts; that 
their idols, they inay be converted to the 
| living God, and his only Son, Jesus 
ur Lord.] 

Bb2 


2000 GOOD FRIDAY. tne 


Priest. Let us pray. Deacon. Let us kneel dom. 
Subdeacon. Stand up again. 


Almighty and Eternal God, who seekest not the 
death of sinners, but that they should live; 
mercifully hear our prayers, and deliver them from 
their idolatry: and, to the praise and glory of 
name, admit them into thy holy Church. 
Jesus Christ our Lord, who livest. JH. fmen. 


Here the Priest takes down the cross, and uncovering 
the top of il, says, 
Jinth. Behold the wood of the cross, on which 
hung the Salvation of the World. 


Then the Clergy, and all the people, on their bended 


ees, answer : 


R. Come let us adore*. — Venite adoremus. 


*,* This Anth. and R. being repeated twice more, til 
the whole Cross 1s uncovered, the Priest lays & down 
in a proper place, and all kneeling thrice on beth 
knees, reverenily approach to, and devoutly kiss the 
feet of the crucyiz. During this ceremony, two 
chanters in the middle of the choir sing al 
the versicles called the Reproaches, because they are 
tn the name of Christ reproaching the Jewish 
with ingratitude, for the manifold blessings and 
favours he had conferred on them. 

V.: My people, what V. Popule meus, qui 
have I done to thee ? Or fect hbi? ort in pa 
in what have I grieved contristamn te ? 
thee ? Answer me. mihi. 


* The intention of the Church, in exposing the crow 
to our veneration on this day, is, that we might the 
more effectually raise up our hearts to HIM who er- 

ired thereon for our redemption. Whenever, there 
fore, we kneel or prostrate ourselves before a crucifix, 
it is JESUS CHRIST only whom we adore, and it s 
in him alone that our respects terminate. — - 


One, have mer- 


cy on us. 


sping the foregoing praises of God in 
"Latis (formerly the tivo most universal 
, t6. shew the union between all the 
two of the second chow proceed with the 
"Tu 


6 I was thy guide through the desert for 
snd fed thee with manna, and brought 
1 excellent land, thou hast pre a 
' Saviour. 

o Theos, &c. is repeated alternately as 
fter which two of the first chow sing : 
more should 1 have done to thee, and 
ne? I have planted thee for my most 
ieyard : ‘and thou hast proved very bittér 
in my thirst thou givest me vinegar to 
piercedst the side of thy Saviour with a 


o Theos, &c. is repeated as above. 

y sake I scourged Egypt with her first- 
hou hast delivered me up to be scourged. 
le Choir.]] My people, what have I 
>? orin what have I grieved thee? An- 


Bb3 


204 GOOD FRIDAY. . 


Two of I. Choir] P. I led thee out of E. 
having drowned Pharaoh in the Red Sea; and 
hast delivered me up to the chief priests, 

The whole Choir. My people, &c. 

Two of II. Choir.] P.I opened the sea beire 
thee; and thou hast opened my side with a spew. 

The whole Choir. My people, Sc, 

Two of I. Choir.] P.I went before thee in a pillar 
of cloud; and thou hast brought me to the court of 
Pilate. 

The whole Choir. My people, &c. 

Two of II. Choir.] V. I fed thee with manna 
in the desert; and thou hast beaten me with buffets 
and stripes. 

The whole Choir. My people, &c. 

Two of I. Choir.] P. I gave thee wholesome 
water to drink out of the rock, and thou hast given 
me for my drink gall and vinegar. 

The whole Choir. My people, &c. 

Two of II. Choir.] V. For thy sake I smote the 
king of Canaan; and thou hast smote my head will 
n cane. 

The whole Choir. My people, &c. 

Two of I. Choir.] V. I gave thee a royal sceptre; 

and thou hast given me a crown of thorns. 
The whole Choir. My people, &c. 

Two of II. Choir.] V. By great might I raised 
thee on high; and thou bast'hanged me on the 
gibbet of the cross. 

The whole Choir. My people, &c. and the 

AwTHEM. We adore thy cross, O Lord, and we 
praise and glorify thy holy resurrection, for by the 
wood of the cross the whole earth is filled with joy. 


Ps. May God have mercy on us .and bless us; 
may his countenance shine upon us, and may he have 
mercy on us. 


Ant. We adore thee, &c. to Ps. 


| 


"o o.. m D _ " 


MASS OF SO PARSAMCTIFIED. 206 


ne Ti lg cross! with the 
m», 9n the following manner : 


Produce leaves, such fruit such flow’rs. 
“Sweet are the nails, and sweet the wood, 
That bears a weight, s0 sweet so good. 


ING, O devout! 
tongue, devoutly sin 
SS Tbe gloriDus lenrels of our King 


f our King: 
fing i the triumphant 
dad on the cross high ; 
Where man's Redeemer ields his is breath, 


- AD bful crews, &ce &c. is wis repeated (o*. 


With pity our Creator saw 
His noblest work transgrees his law, 
our first parents rashly ate 
The fatal tree’s forbidden meat ; 
He then resolv’d the cross's wood 
Should make that tree's sad damage good. 
Sweet are the nails, &c. Jrom*. 
By this wise method God d "d 
From sin and death to save mankind ; 
r art with love combines, 
And arts of Satan countermines: 
And where the traitor gave the wound, 
There healing remedies are found. 
O faithful] cross, &c. to*. 
When the full time decreed above 
&s come to shew this work of love, 
Th’ Eternal Father sends his Son, 
The world's Creator from his throne! 
0 on our earth, this vale of tears, 
'd with a virgin's flesh appears, ^ 
Sweet are the nails, &c. frem*. 


206 GOOD PniDiY. - 


Thus God made man, an infant lies, 
And in the manger weeping cries; 
His sacred limba by Mary bound, 
The poorest tatter’d rags surround ; 
And God’s incarnate feet and hands 
Are closely hound with swathing bands. 

O faithful cross, &c. to*. 

Full thirty years were fully spent 
In this our mortal banishment ; 

And then the Son of Man decreed 
For the lost sons of men to bleed ; 
Aud on the cross a victim laid, 
The solemn expiation made. 

Sweet are the nails, &c. from*. 


Gall was his drink ; his flesh they tear 
With thorns and nails; a cruel spear 
Pierces his side, from whence a flood 
Streams forth, of water mix'd with blood; 
With what a tide are wash'd again 
The sinful earth, the stars the main! 

O faithful cross, &c. to*. 


Bend tow’ring tree, thy branches bend, 
Thy native stubbornness suspend: 
Let not stiff nature use its force, 
To weaker saps have now recourse; 
With softest arms receive thy load, 
And gently bear our dying God. 
Sweet are the nails, &c. from*. 
On thee alone the Lamb was slain 
That reconcil'd the world again; 
And when on raging seas was tost 
The shipwreck 'd world and mankind lost, 
Besprinkled with his sacred gore, 
Thou safely brought them to the shore. 
O faithful cross, &c. to*. 
All glory to the sacred Three, 
One undivided Deity : 


'sther Holy Ghost and Son, 


iso and 


D whole 


homage done: 


le universe proolaim 


ne and Three the 


&c. from*. 


doration, &c. the Candles | 


Cross 


8 the end [ the Adoretic 

Aer ers ghd, being placed 

n, the Priest, with his Attendants, go to feteh 
lare d sas 


e following Hira is sung. 


rucis mysterium; 
& mortem pertu- 


le vitam protulit. 
vulnerata lanceze 
e diro, criminum 
averet sordibus, 
‘unda et sanguine. 
sta sunt, quee con- 
it 

ideli carmine, 
nationibus: 

it a ligno Deus. 

r decora et fulgi- 


regis purpura! 


m the place 
the Procession is re- 


Electa digno stipite 
Tam eancts weabrn tan- 


gere! 

Beata, cujus brachiis 
Pretium pependit sesculi, 
Statera facta corporis, . 
Tulitque preedam tartari 

O crux, ave spes uni- 

ca 
Ho: passionis tempore! 
Piis adauge i 
Reigque dele crimina. 
Te fons salutis, Trini; 


tas, 
Collaudet omnis Spiritus; 
Quibus crucis victoriam 


Largiris, adde preemium. 


— 


placed the Sacred Host on the Jar, he 
rV on his knees, and lays tt on the corporal : 
ler receiving the Chalice with wine and water 
the Deacon, he censes both Host and Chalice, 


ge 

Y this incense, which hath been blessed by 
thee, O Lord, ascend to thee, and may thy 
descend upon us. 


208 GOOD FRIDAY. 


At the censing of the Altar. ° 
ET my prayer, O Lord, ascend like incense ir 
thy sight; and let the lifting up of my hands 
be like the evening sacrifice. Place, O a 
uard upon my mouth, and a gate of prudence be- 
ore my lips, that my heart may not wander after 
words of 1nalice, to seek excuses in sin. 
On returning the Censer to the Deacon he says: 
AY the Lord kindle in us the fire of his love, 
X. end the flame of everlasting charity. 
Then he washes his fingers without saying any thisg; 
afterwards he bows down at the middle of the aliat, 


and says : 
CCEPT us, O Lord, coming to thee in the 
spirit of humility, and with a contrite heat; 
and grant that the sacrifice of this day may be © 
celebrated by us as to be well pleasing to thee, 0 
Lon our God. 1 Jes he 
en turning aboul towards the people, : 
Pr. DDRETHREN, pray that this ra sacrifice md 
yours may be acceptable to the Father 
Almighty. 
R. May the Lord receive this sacrifice from thy 
hands to the praise and glory of his own name, 9 
our benefit, and that of all his holy Church. 


Let us pray. 
Pr. IN STRUCTED by thy saving precepts, a 
+ following thy divine directions, we presume 

to say: Our Father, &c. p. xxix. 

R. Deliver us from all evil. 

Having answered Amen in silence, hethen ony n 
Deliver us, we beseech thee, O Lord, on 
p. xl. ' 
Having elevated the Sacred Host, and divided # 
into three parts, he puts one of them into the Chalkt 
8 : 
LET ho the participation of thy body, O Lond 
Jesus Christ, which I, though unworthy, f 


- io 8 


MOLY SATURDAY. 200 


mame to receive, turn to my judginent and con- 
dmnation ; but let it, through thy mercy, become 
&efe-guard and remedy both to soul and body: 
Who with God the Father, in unity with the Holy 
Ghost, livest and reignest, one God, world without 
md. Amen. 
Taking up the Sacred Host on the Paten, he says : 
WILL receive the bread of heaven, and call on 
the name of the Lord. 
Then he strikes his breast, repeating thrice: 
ORD, I am not worthy thou shouldst enter under 
my roof; speak therefore but the word, and my 
oul shall be healed. 
When he recewes the Sacred Host, he says : 
M^Y the body of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve 
my soul to everlasting life. Amen. 
Having received the Chalice, and taken the Ablution, 
bowing down, he says: 
RANT, O Lord, that what we have taken with 
our mouths, we may receive with a pure heart; 
hat as we now receive it in this mortal life, it may 
yocure us that which is eternal. 
VESPERS. 
AnruEems and Psaums, as yesterday, p. 275. except 
the ANT. At the Magni a 
Ant. Cum accepisset acetum dixil ; consummatum 
tal: et inclinato capile, emisit Spiritum. 
V. Christus factus est pro nobis obediens usque ad 
mortem, mortem autem crucis. 
Our Father being said in secret, the office concludes 
with the Ps. Miserere, p. 279, and the Prayer Res- 
pice, p. 270. 


HOLY SATURDAY. 


JX the first ages of the Church there was no Mass 
. celebrated either on this day or yesterday. The 
faithful silent'y adored Jesus Christ in the sepulchre till 
towards evening, when they assembled in the Church, 





300 OFFICE BEFORE MASS 


end occupied themselves in praying, reading less 
from the holy Scriptures, singing , baptiaing aad 
confirming catechumens, &c. &c. unti] about midni 
when the Mass of the Resurrection be 

in order to perpetuate the remembrance of the fervent 
piety of her first children, the Church still retains te 
word night in the Office of this day. 


The BLESSING of the FIRE, 
The Lord be with you. A. And with thy spiri. 
Let us pray. Deus, qui. 

O GOD, who by thy only Son, the chief corper 

stone of thy Church, hast bestowed on tbe 
faithful the fire of thy divine love: bless of this new 
fire produced from a flint for our use: and 
that during this paschal solemnity. we may bem 
inflamed with heavenly desires, that with purity of 
mind, we may come to those festivals, w we 
may enjoy a light which will never end. Thro’ the 
same. Amen. 

Let us pray. Domine, Deus. 

O LORD God, Almighty Father, never-fiilisg 

light, who art the Creator of all the light} 
bless »f« this light, which hath been before 
end sanctified by thee, who hast enlightened tt 
whole world ; that we may be inflamed by that same 
light, and enlightened by the fire of chy brigiee: 
and as thou didst enlighten Moses when he west 
out of Egypt, so enlig our hearts and sents 
that we may obtain that light and life which wil 
have noend. Thro’ Christ our Lord. R. Amey 


Let us pray: Domine sancte. 

HOLY Lord, Almighty Father, Eternal God, 

vouchsafe to assist us, while we bless this fire 
in thy name, and in that of thy only Son Jes 
Christ, our Lord and God, and the Holy Ghett: 
assist us against the fiery darts of the enemy tx 
enligliten us with thy heavenly grace. Who 
and reignest with the same, &c. R. men. 


ON HOLY SATURDAY. 301 


JING of the five Grains of INCENSE. 
JULLY pour forth, we beseech thee, O 
God, thy »f« bleasing on this incense 
invisible regenerator, the brightness 
>3 that not only the sacrifice which is 
light may shine by the sacred mixture of 
wit also, that into whatever place any 
ied by these mystical prayers shall be 
» by the power of thy majesty, all the 
tifices of the devil may be defeated 
our Lord. A. Amen. 
lyte has put some of the blessed Fire nie 
» the Priest adds tncense saying : “ May 
eased ef by him, in whose honour thou 
burnt" Here he sprinkles the Grains 
nd the Fire thrice saying: “ Sprinkle 
p. xiii. Then having fwned them thrice 
nae, he takes the Cane with the three 
the entrance of the Church, where one 
yan Acolyte with a candle from the new 
the Deacon sings alone: “ Behold the 
Christ,” £o which, all kneeling, add: 
iks be to God.” 
repeated at lighting the second tn the 
the Church, and the third at the foot of 
after which the Deacon says: “ Pray, 
ne your blessing.” Zo which the Priest 
May the Lord be in your heart and 
‘ou may worthily and fitly proclaim hie 
'aise: in the name of the Father, and of 
«e &c. BR. Amen. 


BLESSING of the PASCHAL CAN 
DLE, all stand up. 
' the heavenly troop of angels rejoice 
' divine mysteries be joyfully celebrated : 
heavenly trumpet publish the victory of 
ing, and let the earth also triumph, bo- 
x] with such resplendent beams; and let 
Ce 


Ld OFFICE BEFORE MASS. 


the people. And therefore I beseech you, dear 
brethren, who behold the wonderful brightness of 
this holy light, to join with mein invoking the 

of Almighty God; that he who hath been 
without any merit on my side, to admit me into 
the number of bis Levites, may by the effusion of 
light upon me, enable me to go tbrough with the 
encomium of this taper. Through our Lord Jesus 
Christ his Son, who with him and the Holy Ghost 
liveth and reigneth one God world without end. 
R. Amen. 

V. The Lord be with you. A. And with th 
spirit. V. Raise up your hearts on high. .R. We 
have them raised up to the Lord. V. Let us give 
thanks to the Lord our God. AR. It is meet and 
just. 


'T is truly meet and just to proclaim with all the 

affection of heart and soul, and sound of voice, 
the invisible God, the Father Almighty, and hi 
only Son our Lord Jesus Christ: who paid for usto 
his eternal Father the debt of Adam; and, hy he 
sacred blood, cancelled the guilt of the original of 
fence. For this is the Paschal solemnity, in which 


the true Lamb was slain, by whose blood the door 


of the faithful are consecrated. This is the night, in 
which thou formerly didst bring forth our forefathers, 
the children of Israel, out of Egypt, leading them 
dry-foot through the Red-Sea. This also is that 
night which dissipated the darkness of sin by the 
light of a pillar of fire. This is the night which, 
withdrawing all those who, through the whole world, 
believe in Christ, from the vices of the world, and 
the darkness of sin, restores them to grace, 


ON HOLY SATURDAY. 303 


gies them a fellowship with the saints. This is 
the night in which Christ broke the chains of death, 
and ascended victorious from the grave. For it 
would have availed us nothing to have been born, 
unless we had also the advantage of being redeemed. 
0 the wondcrs of thy mercy towards us! O the 
westimable excess of thy love. Thou didst deliver 
upthy Son to redeem a slave! O truly necessary 
an of Adam, which bath been blotted out by the 
death of Christ! O happy fault, which deserved 
much and so great a Redeemer! O truly blessed 
hight, which alone wast privileged to know the hour 
ibd moment when Christ rose again from the dead! 
is is the night of which it is written: * And the 
tight shall be as light as day: and the night shineth 
ipon me in my pleasures.” The sacredness there- 
bre of this night puts crimes to flight, washes away 
i, and restores innocence to the fallen, and joy to 
in sorrow. It banishes enmities, produces 
mcord, and makes potentates bow. 

ere the Deacon fires the five Grains of Incense in 

he Candle in the form of a Cross, and then goes on: 
Y ECEIV E, therefore, O Holy Father, on this sa- 
' cred night, the evening sacrifice of this incense, 
ch thy holy Church, by the hands of her minis- 
presents to thee in the solemn oblation of this 
candle, made out of the labour of bees. But 
we know the mncaning of the encomiums of this 
lighted from this sparkling fire to the honour of 
(Here he lights the Paschal Candle.) Which 
hough now divided, suffers no loss from the 
unication of its light, whilst it feeds on the 
1 wax produced by the bec to make this taper. 
the lamps are lighted.) O truly blessed night, 
pluudered the Egyptiaus, and enriched the 
ws! O night, in which heaven is united to 

and God to man! We beseech thee, there 
¥ Lord, that this taper, consecrated to the 

Cc2 


304 OFFICE BEFORE MASS 


honour of thy: name, may continue burning to dimi- 
pate the darkness of this night; and being accepted 
hy thee as a sweet odour, it may be joined to the 
lights of heaven. Let the morning star find it burs 
ing: that morning star, 1 mean, which never sets; 
who, returning from the grave, darted forth his be 
nign rays upon mankind. We beseech thee, there- 
fore, O Lord, to grant us peace during this Pesehil 
soleinnity, and with thine uninterrupted protection 
to rule, govern, and preserve us thy servants, and 
all the clergy and devout laity; together with oar 
holy father Pope N. and our Bishop N. Look dom ' 
also on our pious King N. and since thou knowest 
O God, the desires of his heart, grant, by the ineff 
ble grace of thy goodness and mercy, that he may 
enjoy with all his people, an uninterrupted pesce 
and heavenly victory. Thro’. &. Amen. 
Then are read the Lessons called Prophecies for iM 
Instruction of the Catechumens. 


I. PROPHECY. Gen. i. ii.—In the beginning 
God created heaven and earth. And the earth was 
void and empty, and darkness was upon the face 
the deep; and the Spirit of God moved over the 
waters, And God said: be light made, And light 
was made. And God saw the light that X ww. 
good: and he divided the light from the darkness 
And he called the light day, and the darkness night; 
and there was evening and morning one day. A 
God said: Let there be a firmament made ami 
the waters: and let it divide the waters from thé 
waters. And God made a firmament, and divi 
the waters that were under the firmament from tho® 
that were above the firmament. And it was 9 
And God called the firmament, Heaven: and the 
evening and morning were the second day. 
also said: Let the waters that are under the hear® 
be gathered together into one place: and le 
dry land appear. And it was so done, And 





306 OFFICE BEFORE- MASS. 


earth according to their kinds, and catt and ov 
thing that creepeth on the earth after its kind. 
God saw that it was good. And he said: Lew 
make man to our image and likeness, and let him 
have dominion over the fishes of the sea, and the 
fowls of the air, and the beasts, and the whole earth, 
and every creeping creature that moveth upon the 
earth. And God created man to his own i : 
the iinage of God he created him: male and 
he created them. And God blessed them, mig: 
Increase and multiply, and fill the earth, and 
due it, and rule over the fishes of the sea, and tbs 
fowls of the air, and all living creatures that mote . 
upon the earth, And God said: Behold I have 
given you every herb bearing seed upon the earth, 
and all trees that have in themselves seed of 
own kind, to be your meat: and to all beasts of the 
earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to all thet 
move upon the earth, and wherein there is life, tha 
you may have to feed upon. And it was so dont. 
And God saw all the things that he had made, and 
they were very good. And the evening and 
were the sixthday. (Chap ii.) So the heavens 
earth were finished, and all the furniture of them 
And on the seventh day God ended his work w 
he had made: and he rested on the seventh day fros 
all his work which he liad done. 

Pr. Let us pray. Deac. Let us kneel dows. 

Subd. Stand up again. 


PRAYER. Deus, qui.—O God, who didst wonde 
fully create man, and redeem him by a stil] great? 
wonder: grant us, we beseech thee, such 
of mind and reason against all the allurements of 
sin, that we may deserve to obtain eternal Wy* 
Thro’. R. Amen. 

IL. PROPHECY. Gen. v. 31. vi. vii. viii 18 
—Aud Noe, when he was five hundred years 
begot Sem, Cham, and Japheth. (Chap. vi.) And 


' “Q' MOLT FATURSAT. wer 


\ 
thet. men began: to be multiplied 

8, eal daughters were born to them. The oom 
Ted: sccing 


the daughters of men, that they were 
"wok to themselves wives of all, which they 
f& And God said: My spirit shall not remain 
rele pepo Rea in 

one twenty years. Now giants 
wwpon the earth in those da For after the 


ak the thought of their heart was bent upon 

imes, it him that he had made 
kon the earth. And being touched inwardly 
keorrow of heart, he said: I will destroy man, 
in ‘I have created, from the face of the earth, 
i‘man even to beasts, from the creeping thing 
1to the fowls of the air, for it repenteth me that 
wemade them. But Noe found grace before the 
& These are the generations of Noe: Noo was 
wand perfect man in his generation, be walked 
Y God. And he begot three sons, Sem, Cham, 
Japheth. And the earth was corrupted before 
land was filled with iniquity. And when God 
seen that the earth was corrupted (for all flesh 
corrupted its way upon the earth) he said to 
» the end of all flesh is came before me, and 
earth is filled with iniquity through them, and I 
| destroy them with tlie earth. Make thee an 
of timber planks: thou shalt make little rooms 
the ark, and thou sbalt pitch it within and with- 
. And thus shalt thou make it. The length of 
terk shall be three hundred cubits: the breadth 
& fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits. 
ou shalt make-a window in the ark, and in a 
bit shalt thou finish the top of it: and the door 
the ark shalt thou set in the side: with lower, 


308 OFFICE BEFORE MASS. ' 


middle chambers, and third stories shalt thou make 
it. Behold I will bring the waters of a great flood 
upon the earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is the 
breath of life, under heaven. All things that aren 
the earth shall be consumed. And I will establish 
my covenant with thee: And thou shalt enter ino | 
the ark, thou and thy sons, and thy wife, and the 
wives of thy sons with thee. And of every living 
creature of all flesh, thou shalt bring two of a sett 
into the ark, that they may live with thee; of the  ' 
male sex, and the female. Of fowls according to | 
their kind, and of beasts in their kind, and of every 
thing that creepeth on the earth according to &, 
kind: two of every sort shall go in with thee, thet 
they may live. Thou shalt take unto thee of al 
food, that may be eaten, and thou shalt lay it up 
with thee: and it shall be food for thee and thes 
And Noe did all things which God commanded his. 
(Chap. vii.) And he was six hundred years old, 
when the waters of the flood overflowed the earth 
All the fountains of the great deep were broken 
and the flood-gates of heaven were opened. 
the rain fell upon the earth forty days. and pi 
nights. In the self-same day Noe, and Sem, 
Cham, and Japheth, his sons: his wife, and the 
three wives of his sons with them, went into the ark: 
they and every beast according to its kind, and sl 
the cattle in their kind, and every thing that m 
upon tbe earth according to its kind, and every 
according to its kind, all birds, and all that fly. 
And the ark was carried upon the waters 

the waters prevailed beyond measure upon the esrth: 
and all the high mountains under the whole hear® 
was covered. The water was fiftcen cubits hi 
than the mountains, which it covered. And all 

was destroyed that moved upon the earth, both. 
fowl, and of cattle, and of beasts, and of all creepifé 
things that creep upon the earth: and Noe «bl 


4 





310 OFFICE BEFORE MASS. 


ark. And Noe built an altar unto the Lord: and 
taking of all cattle and fowls that were clean, offered 
holocausts upon the altar. And the Lord smelleds 
sweet savour. 
Pr. Let us pray. Deac. Let us kneel down. 
Subd. Stand up again. 

PRAYER. Deus incommutabiis.—O God, whose 
power is unchangeable, and whose light never fai- 
eth, mercifully regard the wonderful sacrament of 
thy whole Church, and by an effect of thy perpetual 
providence, accomplish in peace the work of human 
salvation: and let the whole world experience and 
see, that what was now fallen, is raised u agen: 
what was old, is become new; and that al ings 
are again settled by him who gave them their fis 
being, our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son. Who liveth. 
KR. Amen. 

II. PROPHECY. Gen. xxii.—In those days: 
God tempted Abraham, and said to him: Abrabam, 
Abraham. Aad he answered: Here I am. He said 
to him: ‘Take thy only begotten Son Isaac, whom 
thou lovest, and go into the land of vision: and there 
thou shalt offer him for an holocaust upon one of 
the mountains which I will shew thee. So Abraham 
rising up in the night, saddled his ass; and took with 
him two young men, and Isaac his son; and whea 
he had cut wood for the holocaust, he went his wy 
to the place which God had commanded him. 
on the third day, lifting up his eyes, he saw te 
place afar off. And he said to his young men: 5 
you here with the ass: I and the boy will go w1 
speed as far as yonder, and after we have worship 
ped, willreturn to you. And he took the wood 
the holocaust, and laid it upon Isaac his son; 
he himself carried in his hands fire and a sworn 
And as they two went on together, Isaac said to 
father: My father. And he answered: What wit 
thou, son: Behold, saith he, fire and wood: 


32 OFFICE BEFORE MASS. 


ham, according to thy oath, the father of al prs 
by this paschal sacrainent; grant that thy 

may worthily receive the grace of thy vocatio. 
Thro’. R. Amen. 

IV. PROPHECY. Exod. xiv. 24.—Jn those days: 
It came to pass in the morning watch, and behold 
the Lord looking upon the Egyptian army through 
the pillar of fire, and of the cloud, slew their bot: 
and overthrew the wheels of the c epi 
they were carried into the deep. And the 
tiaus said: Let us flee from Israel: for the 
fighteth for them against us. And the Lord sid 
Moses : Stretch forth thine hand over the sea, thet 

e waters may come again upon the Egyptian 
upon their chariots and horsemen. And RD Mo 
ses had stretched forth his hand towards the st, 
it returned at he first break of day to the furit 
place: and as the ptians were fleeihg away, 
waters came upon them, and the Lord shut them up 
in the middle of the waves. And the waves retum- 
ed, and covered the chariots and the horsemen 
all the army of Pharao, who had come into the ste 
after them, neither did there so much as one 
thein remain. But the children of Israel matches 
through the midst of the sea upon dry 
waters were to them as a wall on the ri ht band and 
on the left: and the Lord delivered Israel in the 
day out of the hands of the Egyptians. And 
saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea-shore, and & 
mighty hand that the Lord had used egaines thes? 
and the people feared the Lord, and oy, belt 
the Lord, and Moses his servant. Then Moses as 
the children of Israel sung this canticle to the 
and said : 

TRACT. Exod. xv.—Let us sing to the Lord: & 
he is gloriously magnified; the horse and the ride 
he hath thrown into the sea. He hath been my 
and my protector and Saviour. V. He is my 





HIE! OFFICE BEFORE MASS. 


God: for he is bountiful to forgive. For my thoughts 
are not your thoughts, nor your ways iny ways, 
saith the Lord. For as the heavens are 

the earth, so are my ways exalted above your v 
and my thoughts above your thoughts And as 
rain and the snow come down from heaven and re- 
turn no more thither, but soak the earth, ahd water 
it, and make it to spring, and give seed to the sower, 
and bread to the eater: so shall my word be, which 
shall go forth from my mouth: it shall not retum 
to me void, but it shall do whatever I please, and 
shall prosper in the things for which I sent it, seil 
the Lord Almighty. 


Pr. Let us pray. Deac. Let us kneel down 
Subd. Stand up again. 


PRAYER. Omnipotens.—O almighty and ete 
nal God, multiply, for the honour of thy name, 


what thou didst promise to the faith of our fore — 


fathers: and increase, by thy sacred adoption, the 
children of that promise: and what the ancient 
saints doubted not would come to pass, thy church 
may now find in great part accomplished. "Thro. 
R. Amen. 


VI. PROPHECY. Baruch iii. 9.—Hear, O Isred, 
the commandments of life: give ear, that 
mayest learn wisdom. How happeneth it, O Isree) 
that thou art in thy enemies’ land? Thou art 
old in a strange country, thou art defiled with the 
dead: thou art counted with them that go down 
into hell. Thou hast forsaken the fountain of wi 
dom: for if thou hadst walked in the way of God, 
thou surely hadst dwelt in peace for ever. Lesm 
where is wisdom, where is strength, where is under- 
standing: that thou mayest know also where 3 
length of days and life, where is the light of the 
eyes, and peace. Who hath found out her place: 
and who hath gone in to her treasures? Where are 





316 OFFICE BEFORE MASS. 


And the stars have given light in their watcher, ead 
rejoiced : they were called, and they said: Here we 
are: and with cheerfulness they have shined forth to 
him that made them. This is our God, and there 
shall no other be accounted of in comparison of 
him. He found out all the ways of knowledge, and 
gave it to Jacob his servant, and to Israel his belor- 
ed. Afterwards he was seen upon earth, and coe- 
versed with men. 

Pr. Let us pray. Deac. Let us kneel down. 

: Subd. Stand up again. 

'"RAYER. Deus, qui.—O God, who continually 
multipliest thy church by the vocation of the Gentiles: 
mercifully grant thy perpetual protection to those 
whom thou washest with the water of baptia. 
Thro’. R. Amen. 

VII. PROPHECY. Ezech. xxxvii.— In those days: 
The hand of the Lord was upon me, and brought 
me forth in the spirit of the Lord: and set me down ' 
in the midst of a plain that was full of bones. And 
he led me about through them on every side: now 
they were very many upon the face of the plain, and 
they were exceeding dry. And he said to me: 
Son of man, dost thou think these bones shall live? 
And I answered : O Lord God, thou knowest, And 
he said to me: Prophesy concerning these bones: 
und say to them: Ye dry bones, hear the word of 
the Lord. "'Pl'hus saith the Lord God to these bones: 
Behold, I will send spirit into you, and you shall 
live, and I will lay sinews upon you, and will cause 
flesh to grow over you, and will cover you with 
skin: and I will give you spirit, and you shall li 
and you shall know that I am the Lord. And 
prophesied as he had commanded me: and as J 
phesied there was a noise, and behold a commotion: 
and the bones came together, each one to its joint 
And I saw, and behold the sinews and the 
came up upon them: and the skin wes stretched 


OU: HOLT, SATURDAY. . Sa 
i: but sherp was no spirit in them. 
me: Prophesy to the spirit, pro 
and say to.the spirit : Thus mth 
spirit, from the four winds, and 
rene alain, and Jet them live again. And 
-& he bad commanded me: and the, 
es m and they lived; and they 
r: an exceeding great army.— 
to-me: Son of man, all these bones are 
Israel: they say: Our bones are dried 
epe is lost, and we arecut off. There- 
Mele Yom pata md iig 
open yoür graves, and 
ur sepulebres, O my people; and wi 
i». the land of Israel. And you shall 
um tbe Lord, when I shall have 
reg, and shall have brought you out 
O my people, and shall have put. my 
, end you shall live, and I shall make 
m your own lend, saith the Lord JH- 


8 pray. Jac. Let us kneel down. 

Subd. Stand up again. ' 

Deus, qui nos.—O God, who by the 
both testaments teathest us to celebrate 
acrament: give us such a sense of thy 
by receiving thy present favo we 
m hope of thy future blessings. “Thro”: 


)PHECY. Is. iv.—In that day seven 
take hold of one man, saying: We 
wn bread, and wear our own apparel :. 
called by thy name, take away our re- 
bat day the bud of the Lord shall be , 
ce and glory, and the fruit of the earth 
, and a great LU to them thet have 
'*&el. And it shall come to pass, that 
t shall be PU Sion, and that shall re- 


318 OFFICE BEFORE MASS. 


main in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, every me 
that is written in life in Jerusalem. the Lord 
shall wash away the filth of the daughters of 8 
and shall wash away the blood of Jerusalem out 
the midst thereof, by the spirit of judgment, and by 
the spirit of burning. And the Lord wil ereste 
upon every place of mount Sion, and where he is 
called upon, a cloud by day, and a smoke and the 
brightness cf a flaming fire in the night : for over al 
the glory shall be a protection. And there shall be 
a tabernacle for a shade in the day time from the 
heat, and for a security, and covert from the whit 
wind, and from rain. " 

TRACT. Js. v.—My beloved had a vineyard m 
a hill in a fruitful place. V. He fenced it in, end 
digged it about, and planted it with the choieest 
vines and built a tower in the midst thereof 
V. And set up a wine press therein, for the vineyard 
of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel. 

Pr. Let us pray. Deac. Let us kneel down. 
Subd. Stand up again. 

PRAYER. Deus, qui.—O God, who by the mouths 
of the holy prophets hast declared, that through the 
whole extent of thy empire it is thou that sowest the 
good seed, and improvest the choicest branches thel 
are found in all the children of thy church: grest 
to thy people, who are called by the names of vine- 
yards and corn, that they may root out all thor 
and briers, and bring forth good fruit in plenty. 
"l'hro. R. Amen. 

IX. PROPHECY. Exod. xi—In those day: 
'The Lord said to Moses and Aaron, &c. as in tk 
IT. Lesson of the Mass of the presanctified, p. 381 

Pr. Let us pray. Deac. Let us kneel down. 
Subd. Stand up again. 

PRAYER. Omnipotens.—O Almighty and Eter- 

nal God, who art wonderful in the performance of 


‘ON HOLY SATURDAY. 319 


thy works; let thy servants whom thou hast re- 
med, understand, that the creation of tlie world 
the beginning was not a more excellent work, 
1 the sacrificing of Christ our passover atthe end 
he world. Who with thee, &c. R. Amen. 

« PROPHECY. Jonas iii.—In those days : The 
d of the Lord came to Jonas, &c. as in the Lea- 
on Monday in Passion Week. p. 212. 


Pr. Let us pray. Deac. Let us kneel down. 
ubd. Stand up again. 


RAYER. Deus, qui.—O God, who has united 
several nations of the Gentiles in the profession 
hy name: give us both a will and a power to 
|j thy commands: that all thy people, who are 
xl to eternity, may have the same faith in their 
ds, and piety in their actions. Thro’. R. Amén. 


I. PROPHECY. Deut. xxxi. 22.—Jn those days : 
es wrote a canticle, and taught it the children 
sarael. And the Lord commanded Josue, the 
of Nun, and said: ‘Take courage, and be val- 
: for thou shalt bring the children of Israel into 
land, which I have promised, and I will be with 
. Therefore after Moses had wrote the words 
iis law in a volume, and finished it: he com- 
ded the Levites who carried the ark of the 
nant of the Lord, saying: "Take this book and 
itin the side of the ark of the covenant of the 
1 your God: that it may be there for a testi- 
yagainst thee. For I know thy obstinacy, and 
most stiff neck. While I am yet living, and 
gin with you, yon have always been rebellious 
nst the Lord: how much more when I shall be 
I? Gather unto me all the ancients of your 
'» and your doctors, and I will speak these 
ds in their hearing, and will call heaven and 
h to witness against them. For I know 

r my death, you will do wickedly, and wi 


320. OFFICE BEFORE MASS. 


quickly turn aside from the way that I have eon- 
manded you: and evils shall come upon you in the 
latter times, when you shall do evil in the sight of 
the Lord, to provoke him by the works of your 
Moses therefore spoke, in the hearin of the whole 
assembly of Israel, the words of this canticle, and 
finished it even to the end. 


TRACT. Deut. xxxii—Hear, O ye heavens, aad 
T will speak: let the earth give ear to the words of 
my mouth. V. Let what I say be looked for like 
rain : and let my words drop down like dew. JV. Like 
the shower upon the grass, and the snow" upon the 
dry herb: for I will call upon the name of the Lord. 
V. Publish the greatness of our God: he is God; 
his works are perfect, and all his ways are juste. 
V. God is faithful, in whom there is no iniquity: the 
Lord is just and holy. 

Pr. Let us pray. Deac. Let us kneel down. 
Subd. Stand up again. 


PRAYER. Deus celsiludo.—O God, who, reist 
the humble, and givest strength to the righteout 
and who by thy holy servant Moses, wast 
80 to instruct thy people by the singing of the secred 
canticle, that the repetition of the law might be ale 
our direction: shew thy power to all the multitude 
of Gentiles justified by thee, and, by mitigating thy 
terrors, grant them joy: that all their sins 
pardoned by thee, the threatened ven ce may 
contribute to their salvation. ‘Thro’. Amen. 

XII. PROPHECY. Dan. iii.—In those day 
King Nabuchodonosor made a statue of gold, of 
sixty cubits high, and six cubits broad, and he set X 
up in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babyle 

hen Nabuchodonosor the king sent to call 
ther the nobles, the magistrates, and the judges, 
captains, the rulers, and governors, and all 
chief men of the provinces, Xo. came to the dedito 


Am 


ON HOLY SATURDAY. 221 


ien of the statue which king Nabuchodonosor had 
&up. Then the nobles, the magistrates, and the 
'adges, the captains, and rulers, and the great men 
hat were placed in authority, and all the princes of 
he provinces, were gathered together to come to 
he dedication of the statue which king Nabucho- 
onosor had set up. And they stood before the 
tatue which king Nabuchodonosor had set up.— 
"ben a herald cried with a strong voice: To you it 
! commanded, O nations, tribes, and languages: 
wat jn the hour that you shall bear the sound of the 
umpet, and of the flute, and of the harp, of the 
wkbut, and of the psaltery, and of the symphony, 
ad of all kiud of music; ye fall down and adore the 
olden statue which king Nabuchodonosor hath set 
p. Butifany man should not fall down and adore, 
6 shall the same hour be cast into a furnace of 
urning fire. Upon this, therefore, at the time 
hen all the people heard the sound of the trumpet, 
ie flute and the harp, of the sackbut, and the 
saltery, of the symphony, and of all kind of music; 
I the nations, tribes and languages, fell down and 
lored the golden statue, which king Nabucho- 
mosor had set up. Aud presently, at that very 
ne some Chaldeans came and accused the Jews: 
id said to king Nabuchodonosor: O king, live 
r ever: Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that 
‘ery man that shall hear the sound of the trumpet, 
e flute, and the harp. of the sackbut, and the 
ialtery, of the symphony, and of all kind of music, 
tall prostrate himself, and adore the golden statue: 
id that if any man shall not fall down and adore, he 
iould be cast into a furnace of burning fire. Now 
iere are certain Jews, whom thou hast set over the 
orks of the province of Babylon, Sidrach, Misach, 
ad Abednago: these men, O king, have slighted 
ty decree: they worship uot thy gods nor do they 
lore the golden statue which thou hast set up.— 


399 OFFICE BEFORE MASS. 


Then Nabuchodonosor, in fury, and in wrata, com 
manded that Sidrach, Misach, and Abednago, should 
be brought; who immediately were brought before 
the king. And Nabuchodonosor the king spoke to 
them, and said: Is it true, O Sidrach, Misach, and 
Abednago, that you do not worship my gods, nor 
adore the golden statue that I have set up? Now 
therefore if you be ready, at what hour soever you 
shall hear the sound of the trumpet, flute, barp, 
sackhut, and psaltery, and symphony, and of all kind 
of music, prostrate yourselves, and adore the sjatue 
which I have made: but if you do not adore, you 
shall be cast in the same hour into the furnace of 
burning fire: and who is the God that shall deliver 
you out of my hand?  Sidrach, Misach, and Abed- 
nago answered and said to king Nabuchodonosor: 
We have no occasion to answer thee concerning 
this matter. For behold our God, whom we wot- 
ship, is able to'save us from the furnace of burning 
fire, and to deliver us out of thy hands, O kiag. 
But if he will not, be it known to thee, O king, tbst 
we will not worship thy gods, nor adore the goldea 
statue which thou hast set up. ‘Then was Nabuche- 
donosor filled with fury: and the countenance of his 
face was changed against Sidrach, Misach, ead 
Abednago, and he commanded that the furnace 
should be heated seven times more than it had bees 
accustomed to be heated. And he commanded the 
strongest men that were in his army, to bind the 
feet of Sidrach, Misach, and Abednago, and to cast 
them into the fürnace of burning fire. And iu 
mediately these 1nen were bound and were cast into 
the furnace of burning fire, with their coats and that 
caps, and their shoes, and their garments. For te 
king’s commandment was urgent, and the furnece 
was heated exceedingly. And the flame of the fire 
slew those men thet hed cost in Sidrach, Mi 
and Abednago. But these three men, os e S: 


ON HOLY SATURDAY. 323 


ligach, and Abednago, fell down bound in the midst 
F the furnace of burning fire. And they walked in 
ne midst of the flame praising God, and blessing the 


Let us pray. Omnipotens. 
() Almighty and eternal God, the only hope of 
the world, who, by the voice of thy prophets, 
ls manifested the mysteries of this present time: 
geciously increase the desires of thy people ; since 
mne of the faithful can advance in any virtue with- 
eatthy inspiration. Thro’. R. Amen. 
"The BLESSING of the FONT. 
When the Celebrant goes towards the Font, is said the 
TRACT. As the hart panteth after the fountains 
of water; so my soul panteth after thee, O God. 
V. My soul hath thirsted after the living God : when 
sal I come and appear before the face of God? 
F. My tears have been my bread day and night, 
me they say to me every day: Whore is now thy 


The Lord be with you. K. And with thy spirit. 
Let us pray. | Concede. ' 
RANT, we beseech thee, O Almighty God, 
that we, who celebrate the gift of the Holy 
Ghost, may, by the inspiration of heaven, earnestly 
thirst after the fountain of life. "Thro'...in unity 
of the same. 
When the Priest comes to the Font. 

The Lord be with you. R. And with thy spirit. 
() Almighty and eternal God, be present at these 
mysteries, be present at these sacraments of 
great goodness: and send forth the spirit of thy 
ion to regenerate the new people, whom the 
fmt of baptism bringeth forth: that what is to be 
done by the ministry of us thy servants, may ‘be 
Romplished by the effect of thy power. Thro’ 


£F The Lord be with you, R. And with thy 


39A OFFICE BEFONE mass 


spirit. V. Raise up your heartson high. f. We 
have them raised up to the Lord. FV. Let us ge 
thanks to the Lord our God. R. It ia meet and 
ig is truly meet and just, right and available to 
salvation, to give thee thanks always, and in ail 
places, O holy Lord, almighty Father, and etermi 
God: who, by thy invisible power, dost wonde- 
fully produce the effects of thy sacraments: esi, 
though we are unworthy to administer such 
mysteries, yet, as thou dost not abandon the gifts of 
thy grace, so thou inclinest the ears of thy goodness 
even to our prayers. O God, whose spirit in the 
very beginning of the world moved upon the waters; 
that even then the nature of water might receive 
the virtue of sanctification: O God, who. by water 
didst wash away the crimes of a guilt 
by the overflowing of the deluge didst give ws 
figure of regeneration; that one and the same ele 
ment might, in a mystery, be the end of vice, and 
the origin of virtue: look down, O Lord, on thy 
. Church, and multiply in her thy regenerations, who 
by the streams of thy abundant grace, fillest thy city 
with joy, and openest the fonts of baptism all over 
the world for the renewal of the Gentiles ; that by 
the command of thy majesty it may receive the 
ce of thy Son from the Holy Ghost. 
ere the Priest divides the Water in the form of & 


E 


TOSB. 

Who, by a secret mixture of his divine virtue, 
may render this water fruitful for the eration 
of men: to the end that those, who are to be sancti 
fied in the immaculate womb of this divine font, 
and are to be born again new c may: come 
forth a heavenly offspring ; and that however, 
distinguished by age in trme, or sex in body, may 
be brought forth to the same infancy by their 
spiritual mother. Therefore may all unclean spirits, 
by thy command, O Lord, depart from hence: 





OW HOLY SATURDAY. 325 


e€ malice of diebolical wiles be entirely 
may no power of the enemy prevail here 
t fly about to lay his snares: let him not 
r his secret artifices; let him not corrupt 
fection. 
he touches the Water soith his Hand. 
; holy and innocent creature be free from 
of the enemy, and purified by the de- 
: all his malice. May it become a living 
regenerating water, a purifying stream: 
38e, that are to be washed in this saving 
)btain, by the efficacy of the Holy Ghost, 
f a perfect purification. 
1xkes the Sign of the Cross thrice over the 
Font, saying : 
re I bless thee, O creature of water, by 
ee God, by the true »[4 God, by the 
d; by that God, who in the beginnin 
hee by his word from the dry land, an 
t moved upon thee. 


vides the Water with his Hand, and throwe 
ut towards the four quarters of the World.) 


de thee flow from the fountain of para- 
»mmanded thee to water the whole earth 
ur rivers Who changing thy bitterness 
"t into sweetness, made thee fit to drink; 
ed thee out of a rock to quench the thirst 
ale. I of bless thee also by our Lord 
st, his only Son: who, in Cana of Gali- 
d thee into wine, by a wonderful miracle 
er. Who walked upon thee dry-foot, and 
xd in thee by John in the Jordan. Who 
flow out of his side, together with his 
commanded his disciples that such as be- 
ld be baptized in thee, saying: Go, teach 
baptizing them in the name of the Father. 
Jon, and of the Holy Ghost. 
Ee 


396 OFFICE ON HOLY SATURDAF. 


Do thou, O Almighty God, mercifully emat w 
mho oi observe this commandment: do thou gracioully 


Here breathing thrice upon the Water in Form of 8 
"Cross, he says : 

Do thou with tby mouth bless these clear wein; 
that besides their natural virtue of gen tn 
body, they may also prove effectual for 
the soul. 

Then he sinks the Paschal Candle into the Wee 

three different times, saying each time 

May the virtue of the Holy Ghost descend [ino al 
the water of this font. 

Then breathing thrice on the Water, he goss es, 

And make the whole substance of this water frat 
ful, and capable of bringing to a new life. 

Here the Paschal Candle is taken out of the Wem 

and the Priest on, 

h Here sy the stains of al ain be washed <i ed: 

ere may human nature, created to 

reformed. to the honour of its d to thy image 

from the filth of the old man: that all who receiré 

this sacrament of regeneration, may be bor 
new children of rue Innocence. , ead, d r^ 

come to ju e giving e 

word by dre. R. 

Here ihe People are aniakled with the blessed Witt, 
and some is taken a woay by the Ministers, to distri 
to the people for use se in their houses, 

Oil of Nhe Hilieiibele near pure i 

of & Cross, the Priest ect saying : 

Ma this f font be tified and made fruiísl ¥ 
the oil of salvation for such as are are to be born ast 
in it, p^. life ever 

e pours the ie ‘nto & a, 

May jet infusion of the chrism of our 
Christ and of the Holy Ghost the Comforter, be = 
formed in the name of the Holy Trinity. 2. 4* 





398 MAS Se. ON HOLY SATURRAY. 


his mercy is confirmed upon us; and the truth of 

the Lord remaineth for ever. 

GOSPEL. Matt. xxxviii. 1. 7.—In the end of 
the Sabbath, when it began to dawn towards the 
first day of the week, came Mary M. and the 
other Mary to the sepulchre. behold there 
was a great earthquake. For an angel of the Loni 
descended from heaven; and coming, rolled back 
the stone, and sat upon it: and his countenance wa 
as lightning, and his raiment as snow. And for fer 
of him, the were struck with terror, and be- 
came as dead men. And the angel answering, mid 
to the women; fear not you; for I know that you 
seek Jesus who was crucified. He is not for 
he is risen as he said: Come, and see the 
where the Lord was laid. And going quickly, tel 
ye his disciples that he is risen: and behold he wil 
go before you into Galilee: there you shall see him 

I have foretold it to you. 

The Offertory ts omitted ; but Oblations of the 
and Chalice are made, as in the Ordinary, xxii. 
SECRET. Receive, O Lord, we besonc ths 

rayers of thy people, together wi © offering 
these Hosts, that what is Snnsecrated by these paschal 
mysteries, may, by the help of thy grace, avail uste 
eternal life. Thro.’ 

For the Communicantes and Hanc igitur, see p, 331. 
the rest as in the Ordinary. Neither Agnus Des 
Comm, nor P. Comm. are said, bul as soon es iv 
Priest has taken the last Ablution, are begun the 

VESPERS. 
ANTH: “Alleluta, Alleluia, Alleluia. 


$. Cxvi. 
RAISE the Lord, all AUDATE Dominum, 


ye nations; * praise omnes gentes ; * lsu- 
him all ye people. date eum omnes po 
For his imeréy is con- Quoniam 


upon us; *and est super nos miserioo- 





390 EASTER SUNDAY. 


thou hast stretched forth posuisti super me wmm 
thy band to me Allel: (uam, Alcluia mirabiu 
thy knowledge is become facta est scientia tes, &- 
wonderful, . Allel. leluia, Alleluia. 

Ps. Lord, thou hast Ps. Domine, presi 
tried me, and known me: me, et cognovisti me: fy 
thou hast known my sit- cognovisi sessionem mum 
ting down and my up- é resurrectionem mom. 
rising. V. Glory. V. Gloria. 

COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who, on this dy, 
by thy only begotten Son's victory over death, 
open for us @ passage to eternity; grant that our 
prayers, which thy preventing e inspireth, msy 
by thy help become effectual. Thro’ 

EPISTLE. 1 Cor. v. 7. 8.— Brethren: Purge 
out the old leaven, that you may be a new " 
you are unleavened. For Christ, our is 
crificed. Therefore let us feast, not with od | 
leaven, nor with the leaven of malice and wicket | 
nese, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity asd 
truth. 

GRAD. Ps. cxvii.—This ia the day the Lord beth 
made : come let us exult and rejoice thereon. V. Pram — 
the Lord, for he is good: and his mercy d 
for ever: Alleluia, Alleluia. V. Christ himself 3 
become our paschal sacrifice. Alleluia. 

The PROSE. 


ICTIMJE Paschali laudes immolent Chri 
tiani : 
Agnus redemit oves: Christus innocens Patri re 
conciliavit peccatores. 
Mors et vita duello: conflixere mirando: de 
vitre mortuus, regnat vivus. 
Dic nobis, Maria, quid vidisti in via? 
Sepulchrum Christi viventis, et gloriam vidi resu- 


gentis. 
Angelicos testes sudariam et vestes. 


339 EASTER MONDAY. 


vants and of thy whole family, which we offer to 
thee also, for all those thou hast vouchsafed to rege 
nerate, by water and the Holy Ghoat, ing them 
the remission of all their sins. Dispose our days 
peace, &c. as p. xxxv. 

COMM. 1 Cor. v —Christ bimself is become our 
paschal sacrifice, Alleluia: therefore let us feast on 
the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, Alle 
luia, Alleluia, Alleluia. 

P. COMM. § Spiritum nobis.—Pour forth on us, 
O Lord, the spirit of thy love: that those whom 
thou hast filled with the paschal sacrament, may, by 
thy goodness, live in perfect concord. —R 
the unity of the Holy Ghost. 


EASTER MONDAY. 
: INTROIT. Exodus xiii. 


Ó ios Lord hath brought Jntrodurit vos. Dominu 
you into a land flow- tn lerram fluentem le 
ing with milk and honey. et mel, Alleluia: et wt lu 
Alleluia: let then the law Domini semper sil 18 ort 
of the Lord be ever in vestro, Allelus - 
your mouth, Alleluia, 4l- Ps. Confüemin: Domum, 
leluia. Ps. Praise the et invocate nomen qu: 
Lord, and call upon his annuntiale inter Geale 
name: publish his works opera ejus. V. Gloria. 
among the Gentiles. 

V. Glory. ’ 

COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who b the my 
tery of the paschal solemnity, has bestowed rem 
on the world; continue, we beseech thee, ty 
heavenly blessings on thy people, that they may de 
serve to obtain perfect liberty, and advance to 
eternal life. Thro’. 

LESSON. Acts x. 37. 43.—In those days: Pee 
standing up in the midst of the people said: You 
know the word that hath been published through 
all Judea: for it began from Galilee, after the bap- , 


dj 


$ 

$ 

1 

É 
dee 
Fi 
8 
IT 


Ps. cxvii—This is the day the Lord 
; come let us exult and rejoice thereen. 
del now say, that the Lord is 2 that 
endureth for ever. Allelwia; 
gelofthe Lord — V..dngelus Domini des- 
from heaven, cendit de ctelo, et accedens 
gtothe monu- revolvit lapidem, ef sede- 
ad back the batsupereum. —— 
sat upon it. 

xxiv. 13. 85.—J/ that time: 
» disciples of Jesus went the same day toa 
h was sixty furlongs from Jerusalem, nam- 
is, And they talked together of all these 
ch had happened. And it came to 
they talked and reasoned with themselves, 
elf also drawing near, went with them. 
yes were held that they should not know 
. he said to them: What are these dis- 
t you hold one with another as you walk, 
I? And the one of them whose name was 
answering, said to him: Art thou only 
in Jerusalem, and hast not known the 


99A EASTER MONDAY. 


things that have been done there in these deys? To 
whom he said: What things? And they said: Con- 
cerning Jesus of Nazareth, who was a prophet, 
mighty in work and word before God the 
ple. And how our chief priests and princes de- 

fivered him to be condemned to death, and crucified 
him. But we hoped that it was he that shooM 
have redeemed Israel: and now besides al) this, w- 
day is the third day since these things were done 
Yea and certain women also of our company, af 
frighted us, who before it was light were st the 
sepulchre. And not finding his body, came, - 
ing that they had also seen a vision of angels, 
say that he is alive. And some of our people went 
to the sepulchre: and found it so as the women had 
said, but him they found not. Then he said to them: 
O foolish, and slow of heart to believe in all things 
which the prophets have spoken. Ought not Chrat 
to have suffered these things, and so to enter into his 
glory? And beginning at Moses and all the pro 
phets, he expounded to them in all the pego 
the things that were concerning him. they 
drew nigh to the town whither they were going: 

he made as though he would go farther. But 
constrained him, saying: Stay with us, because i 
is towards evening, and the day is now far spent. 
And he went in with them. And it came to pas, 
whilst he was at table with them, he took bread; 
and blessed and brake, and gave to them. And 
their eyes were opened, and they knew him: and 
he vanished out of their sight. And they said one to 
the other: Was not our hearts burning within us 
whilst he spoke in the way, and opened to us the 
scriptures? And rising up the same hour they went 
back to Jerusalem: and they found the eleven ge 
thered together, and those that were with them. 
Saying, the Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared 
to Simon. And they told what things were done in 


M. Luke xxiv.—The Lord hath risen and 
Feo Peter. .diiehwe - QM 





| " shall, not. be 
over, 

T : and -call 
- the Gen- 
BOT Deus, qui—O -O God, who by a new 

d » > - 

does continually eni Chureh; great 
pervants may a feat da. (oic lives the se- 
have received with faith. Thro’. |. 
JON. ° Acts xiii. 26. 33.—1m thope i 


winding up, and with his hand - 

said ; My brethren, children of the | stock 
and whosoever am God, to 

word of this salvation is sant. For me that 

1 Jerusalem, and the rulers res not 





WEDNESDAY IN EASTER WEE. ag? 


BECRET. Receive, O Lord, we beseech thee, 
he preyere of the faithful, together with these obla- 
us: that by these duties of piety they may obtain 
ternal life. Thro’. 

COMM. Colos. iii.—If you be risen with Christ, 
tek the things that are above, where Christ is 
iting at the right hand of God, Alleluia : mind the 
ings that are above, /ileluia. 

P. COMM.  Concede.—Grant, we beseech thee, 

Almighty God, that the virtue of the Paschal sa- 
ament, which we have received, may always re- 
ain in our souls. Thro’. 


WEDNESDAY IN EASTER WEEK. 


INTROIT. Matt. xxv.—Come, ye blessed of m 
Kher, possess the kingdom, .4Heluia: which ha 
en prepered for you from the beginning of the 
orld, uta, Alleluin, Alleluia. Ps. Sing to the 
wd a new song; sing to the Lord all the earth. 
. Glory. 

L COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who by the 
riy solemnity of the resurrection of our Lord, 
lest us with joy: mercifully grant, that, by these 
mporal festivals which we celebrate, we may at 
& come to the possession of those joys that are 
eral Thro’. 


Ve II. Collect tl Saturday next is, either Ecclesie 
er Deus omnium, with their respective Secrets and 
P. Comms. pp. 50, &c. 

LESSON. Acts ii. 13. 19.— Fn those days : Peter 
pening his mouth, said: You men of Israel, and 
ou who fear God, give ear. The God of Abraham, 
ad the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and the 
lod of our Fathers hath glorified his Son Jesus, 
bom you indeed delivered up and denied him be- 
re the face of Pilate, when he judged he should 
'released. But you denied thy Holy One and the 


338 WEDNESDAY IN EASTER WEEK. 


Just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto you. 

But the Author of life you killed, whom God hath re- 

sed from the dead, of which we are witnesses. 

the faith of his name, this man whom you have aeen 
. and know, hath his name strengthened; and tbe 
faith which is by him, hath given this perfect sound- 
ness in the sight of you all. And now, brethren] 
know that you did it through ignorance, as did alo 
your rulers. Butthose things which God before had 
shewed by the mouth of all the prophets, that bs 
Christ should suffer, he hath so fulfilled. Repent 
therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be 
blotted out. 

GRAD. Ps. cxvii.—This is the day which t 
Lord, hath made: come let us be glad and rejokt 
therein. V. The right hand of the Lord hath wrougit 
strength ; the right hand of the Lord hath exalted 
me, Alleluia, Alleluia. V. The Lord is certainly 
risen, and hath appeared to Peter. 


GOSPEL. John xxi. 1. 14.—At that time : Jani 
shewed himself again to the disciples at the sea 
Tiberias. And heshewed himself after this manae. 
There were together Simon Peter, and ‘Thomas wh 
is called Didymus, and Nathaniel, who was of Cam 
in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two othe 
of his disciples. Simon Peter saith to them: I got 
fishing. They say to him: We also come with 
And they went forth and entered into the ship; sé 
that night they caught nothing. But when t 
morning was come, Jesus stood on the shore: yó 
the disciples knew not that it was Jesus, Jes 
therefore said to them: Children, have you any met: 
They answered him: No. He saith to them: Cs 
the net on the right side of the ship: and you 
find. They cast therefore: and now they are 00 
able to draw it for the multitude of fishes. Tb 
disciple therefore whom 3esus loved said to Pes: 
It is the Lord. Simon Peter when he beast wit 





340 THURSDAY IN EASTER WEEK. 


wisdom hath opened the mouth of the dumb, wi 
made the tongues of infants eloquent, Alleluia fle 
luia. Ps. xxix. Sing to the Lord a new song, ft 
he hath done wonders. V. Glory. 


COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who hast united 
various nations in the confession of thy name: gram 
that they who have been born again by the water 
of baptism, may have the same faith in their hearts, 
and the same piety in their actions. Thro’. 

LESSON. Acts viii. 26. 40. — In those days: 

An angel of the Lord spoke to Philip, ssyisg: 
Arise, go towards the south, to the way Lat poe 
down from Jerusalem to Gaza; this is desert. And 
rising up he went. And behold a man of Ethiops, 
an eunuch of great authority under Candace Queen 
of the Ethiopians, who had charge over all her tree 
sures, had come to Jerusalem to adore. And le 
was returning sitting in his chariot, and reading . 
|saias the prophet. And the spirit said to Philip: 
Go near, and join thyself to his chariot. And 
Philip returning thither, heard him reading the 
prophet Isaias, and he said: Thinkest thou thst 
thou understandest what thou readest? Who said: 
And how can I, unless some man shew me? ad 
he desired Philip that he vould come up and st 
with him. And the place of the scripture 
he was reading was this: “He was led as a sheep 
to the slaughter: and like a lamb without vo 
before his shearer, so openeth he not his mouth, Ia 
humility his judgment was taken away. His gener 
ation who shall declare, for his life shall be take 
from the earth ?” And the eunuch answering P 
said: I beseech thee, of whom doth the prophet 
this? of himself, or of some other man? . 
‘Philip opening his mouth, and beginning at tbi 
scripture, preached unto him Jesus. And es they 
went on their wey, they came to a certain waif: 
ind the eunuch said: ‘here Và water SRM, 


THURSDAY IN EASTER WEEK. 941 


tder me from being baptized? And Philip said: 
thou believest with all thy heart, thou mayest. 
xl he answering, said: I believe that Jesus Christ 
the Son of God. And he commanded the chariot 
stand still: and they went down into the water, 
h Philip and the eunuch, and he baptized him. 
d when they were come up out of the water, the 
rit of the Lord took away Philip, and the eunuch 
yr him no more. And he went 9n his way re- 
"ng. But Philip was found in Azotus, and pase- 
through, he preached the gospel to all the cities 
he came to Cesarea. 
iRAD. JPs.cxvii—This is the day which the 
rd hath made, come let us be glad and rejoice 
rein. V. The stone which the builders reject- 
the same is become the head of the corner 
ne: this is the Lord's doing and it is wonderful 
our eyes, Alleluia, Alleluia. V. Christ is risen, 
o created all things, and hath shewn mercy to 
ind. 
iOSPEL. ‘John xx. 11. 18.——Al that time: 
ry stood at the sepulchre without, weeping. 
w as she was weeping, she stooped down, and 
ked into the sepulchre: and she saw two angels 
white, sitting, one at the head, and one at the 
t, where the body of Jesus had been laid. They 
‘to her: Woman, why weepest thou? She saith 
them: Because they have taken away my Lord, 
1 I know not where they have laid him. When 
» had thus said, she turned herself back, and 
v Jesus standing; and she knew not that it was 
sus. Jesus said to her: Woman, why weepest 
1? whom seekest thou? She thinking that it was 
' gardener, saith to him: Sir, if thou hast taken 
n hence, tell me where thou hast laid him: and I 
ll take him away. Jesus saith to her: Mary. She 
"ing, saith to him: Rabboni (which is to say, 
wer.) Jesus saith to her: Do not touch me, for 
Ff3 


342 FRIDAY IN EASTER WEEK. 


I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my 
brethren, and say to them, I ascend to my F 
and to your Father, to my God and your 
Mary Magdalen cometh and telleth the discipks. 
I have seen the Lord, and these things he said to m$ 
CREDO. 

OFFERT. Exod. xiii.—In the days of your sole 
nity, saith the Lord, I will bring you into & 
flowing with milk and honey, Alleluia. 

SECRET. —Graciously accept, we beseech thee, 
O Lord, the offerings of thy people: that being 1e 
newed by the confession of thy name and by 
tism, they may obtain everlasting bliss. Thro’. 

COMM. 1 Peter ii.—You, who are a p 
people, publish his might, Alleluia: t is he wh 
hath called you from darkness to his wonderful light 
Allelura. 

P. COMM. Exaudt.—Graciously hear a our din 
O Lord, that by frequenting these sacred 
of our redeynption, we may obtain the E 
helps of this life, and endless Toya of the next. 


FRIDAY IN EASTER WEEK. 


INTROIT. Ps. Ixxvii.—The Lord path 
them forth in hope, Alleluia; and the ses 
covered their enemies, Alleluia, Alleluta, 

Ps. Attend, O my people, to my pM ia you 
ears to the words of my mouth. P. 

COLLECT. Omnipotens.—O Almight ty and Eur 
* nal God, who hast instituted this Paschial my 
in the covenant of the reconciliation of man 
assist us with thy holy grace, that what we profi 
this solemnit m we may practise in our lives. 

EPISTLE. 1 Peter iii. 18. 22.—Dear Brett: 
Christ died once for our sins, the just for the unjati 
that he might offer us to God, being put to 
indeed in the flesh, but enlivened in the spirit 
which also coming, “he preached to Those wits 


ipsis WEEK. LE 


dirt pats omis 

the patience in 
oe, Via d was a building : wherein 
“is, eight, souls were saved by MUR 

being of the. like form, no 
ee the punting, away of the filth of 
the but the examination of a good conscience 
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, who 
‘Bon the hand of God, 
* is is the ay weh. the Lord hath 
+ Jet us exult and rejoice therein. P. Blessed 
‘that cometh in the name of the Lord. The 
E and he hath shone upon us, Alleluia, 
Tan it among the Gentiles, That 
ied from the cross. 
"Matt xxviii. 16. 20.—/t that time : 
into Galilee unto the 
V appointed them. And 
Curs adored: but some doubted. And 
spoke to them, : Pind A 


power. 

i ue ues heaven and in earth. Going there- 

teach ye ail nations: repeats ig them in the name 

sie Fates doris s Son and of the Holy Ghost 
‘Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever 1 

nded you; and behold I am with you 

even to the consummation of the world. 


ERT. USE Tied dale rm 
e leluia, Yor ita 
Ped ea the Lord rn oa all your. 
everlasting stated solemnity. Al 
-Mercifülly accept this sacrifice, we 
thee; O Lord, which we offer for the remis-- 
t vele wt are fen op 
lily the help o! e. Thro, 
POMA aris LAM Dor given to me 
rand in earth, Alleluia: Go teach al\ nations, 
ag them in the name of the Father, e^ 
Holy Ghost, Jlleluia, Alleluia. 
Fg s P pu A 





344 SATURDAY IN EASTER WEEK. 


P.COMM. Respice.—Look down, we beseeth 
thee, O Lord, upon thy people: and since thou hat 
vouchsafed to give them a new life by these 
mysteries, grant them also pardon of their temporsl 
offences, Thro’. 





SATURDAY IN EASTER WEEK. 
INTROIT. Ps. civ.—The Lord hath led forth . 
his people in gladness, Alleluia: and his chosen ones 
in joy, Alleluia, Alleluia. Ps. Praise the Lord and 
call upon his name: publish his works among the 
Gentiles. V. Glory. 

COLLECT. Concede.—Grant, we beseech thes, 
O Almighty God, that we, who with reverence have 
celebrated this solemnity of Easter, may happily 
arrive at everlasting joys. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. 1 Peter ii—Dear Brethren: Laying 
away all malice, and all guile and dissimulasom 
and envies, and all detractions, as new-born 
desire the rational milk without guile; that thee 
by you may grow into salvation: if so be yo 
have tasted that the Lord is sweet, unto whom cot 
ing, as to a living stone, rejected indeed by me 
but chosen and made honourable by God: be you 
also as living stones built up, a spiritual house & 
holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, & 
ceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Wherefore & 9 
said in the scripture: “ Behold I lay in Sion a 
corner-stone, elect, precious: and he that shall 
lieve in him, shall not be confounded.” To you thet 
fore that believe, honour; but to them that believe 
not, “the stone which the builders rejected, tbe 
same is made the head of the corner:” and a s008 
of stumbling and a rock of scandal, to them wie 
stumble at the word, neither do believe, whereun? 
ulso they are set. But you are a chosen general 
a kingly priesthood, a holy nation, a purchased 
ple: that you may declgre his virtues, who 


« 


SATUROAY lj EASTER WEEK. 945 


you out of darkness into his marvellous light. 
in time past were not a people: but are 
e people of God. Who had not obtained 
but now have obtained mercy.” 
aa, Alleluia. V. This is the day which the 
ath made: let us exult and rejoice therein, 
. V. Praise the Lord, ye his servants, praise 
1e of the Lord. 
PEL. John xx. 1. 9.—.4t that time: The 
r of the week, Mary Magdalen cometh early, 
was yet dark, to the sepulchre : and she saw 
ie taken away from the sepulchre. She ran, 
e, and cometh to Simon Peter, and to the other 
whom Jesus loved, and saith to them: They 
cen away the Lord out of the sepulchre, and 
iw not where they have laid him. Peter 
€ went out, and that other disciple, and they 
' the sepulchre. And they both ran together, 
t other disciple did overrun Peter, and came 
‘he sepulchre. And when he stooped down, 
the linen cloths lying: but yet he went not 
ien cometh Simon Peter, following him, and 
ito the sepulchre, and saw the linen cloths 
ind the napkin, that had been about his head, 
g with the linen cloths, but apart wrapt up 
3 place. Then that other disciple also went 
came first to the sepulchre: and he saw, and 
1; for as yet they knew not the scripture, that 
t rise again from the dead. Crepo. 
ERT. Ps. cxvii.—Blessed be he that cometh 
iame of the Lord: we have blessed you out 
ouse of the Lord: the Lord is God, and he 
one upon us, Alleluia, Alleluia. 
RET.—Grant, we beseech thee, O Lord, that 
y always gratefully solemnize the Paschal 
ies, and that the continual celebration of the 
ent of our redemption may be to us a subject 
etual joy. Thro’. 


346 LOW SUNDAY. 


COMM. Gal. iii—All you that have been bap 
tized in Christ, have put on Christ, Alleluia. 

P. COMM. Redemplionis.—Being strengthened, 
O Lord, by the sacrament of our redenaption, grex 
that through this help to eternal salvation, a true 
faith may always be increased in us. Thro’. 


QUASIMODO, or LOW SUNDAY. 


IP called in the Roman Missal, Dominica, in albis, be- 
cause those who were baptized on Holy Saturday 
laid aside the white garments wherewith they were yer 
terday clothed, and began this day to be no | 
distinguished in dress from the rest of the fai 

It is to the newly baptized, however, and those whe 
have recovered their innocence by thie sacrament of 
penance, that the Church addresses herself, exhorüaf 
them, like new-born children, earnestly to desire the 
spiritual milk of the word of God, which alone eu 
maintain in them that life of grace which they ham 
just recovered. 


INTROIT. 1 Peter ii. Ps. lxxx. 


S new born babes, .4i- U.ASIMODO, geh 
lel. desire the rational infantes, Jill. re 
milk without guile, Allel. tionabile sine dolo lacet 
Allel. Allel. Ps. Rejoice  cupiscite, Alleluia, 
to God our helper: sing “Alte. Ps. Exultate De 
aloud tothe God of Jacob. adjutori nostro: jubilee 
V. Glory. : Deo Jacob. V. Gloria. 


COLLECT. Presta.—Grant, we beseech the 
O Almighty God, that we, who have celebrated th 
solemnity of Easter, may, by the assistance of ty 
divine grace, ever make the effects thereof manife 
in our lives and actions. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. 1 John v. 4. 9.—Dearly bdo: 
Whatsoever is born of God, overcometh the word: 
and this is the victory which overcometh the 
our faith. Who is he that overcometh the ? 
but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God! 





meam an a 


LOW SUNDAY. 9047 


that came by water and blood, Jesus 

; by water only, but by water and blood. 
ie spirit which testifieth, that Christ is the 
d there are three who give testimony in 
> Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost. 
three are onc. And there are three that 
ony on earth: the spirit, the water, and 
and these three are one. If we receive 
1y of men, the testimony of God is greater. 
the testimony of God which is ter, 
bath testified of his Son. He that be- 
he ‘Son of God, hath the testimony of 
self. 


Allel. V. On the day of my resurrection 
ord, I will go before you into Galilee. 


' eight days, —— V. Post dies octo,januis 
2ing shut, Je- clausis, stetit Jesus in me- 
. the midst of dio discipulorum suorum, 
:S, and said: et dizit: Pax vobis. Allel. 
ith you. JAllel. 


» John xx. 19. 31.—Al that time: 
as late that same day, being the same 
week, and the doors were shut, where 
3 were gathered together for fear of the 
came and stood in the midst, and said 
ace be to you. And when he had said 
ved them his hands and his side. The 
erefore were glad when they saw the 
said therefore to them again: Peace be 
the Father hath sent me, I also send you. 
1ad said this, he breathed on them; and 
1em: Receive ye the Holy Ghost: whose 
all forgive, they are forgiven them: and 
you shail retain, they are retained. Now 
e of the twelve, who is called Didyinus, 
th them whe: Jesus came. The other 


94g | LOW SUNDAY: 


disciples therefore said to him: We have seen the 
Lord. But he said to them: Except I shall see t 
his hands the print of the nails and put my tinet 
into the place of the nails, and put my hands Wi 
his side, I will not believe. And after eight dij 
again his disciples were within, and 'T'bomes wi 
them. Jesus cometh, the doors being shut, and steed 
in the midst, and said: Peace be to you. Then 
said to Thomas: Put in thy fingers hither, and st 
‘my hands, and bring hither thy hand, and put it ist 
my side; and be not faithless, but believing. Thom 
answered, and said to him: My Lord and my Geil 
Jesus saith to him: because thou hast seen m4 
Thomas, thou hast believed: blessed are they thi 
have not seen, and have believed.* Many oth 
signs also did Jesus in the sight of his diciply 
which are not written in this book. But these at 
written that you may believe that Jesus is the Chim 
the Son of God: and that believing you may bs" 
life in his name.  CaEpo. 


OFFERT. Matt. xxviii.—An angel of the Led 
came down from heaven, and said to the wom! 
He whom you seek is risen, as he told you, fille. 

SECRET.—Receive, we beseech thee, O Lar, 
the offerings of thy joyful Church: and as thou bet 
given occasion to this great joy, grant she may re 
ceive the fruits of that joy, which will never 
Thro’. . 

COMM. John xx.—Put forth thy hand, and rt 
mark the place of the nails, Alleluia : and be not & 
credulous, but believe, Alleluta, Alleluia, — 

P. COMM. Quasumus.— Grant, we beseech i 
O Lord our God, that the sacred mysteries thou bi 
given us to preserve the grace of our red 
may be our present and future remedy. Thro. 


* What follows is omitted on the Feast of St. Tbos9* 
List of December. 


Hep 





350 Ill. SUNDAY AFTER EASTER. 


sheep, 'and my sheep - meas, ei me 
know me, Alleluia. mec, Alleluia. 

GOSPEL. John x. 11. 16.—.4E that time: Jesus 
said to the Pharisees: I am the good shepherd. The 
good shepherd giveth his life for his Butthe 

ireling aud he that is not the shepherd, whose ova 
the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming and leaveth 
the sheep, and flieth, and the wolf catcheth, and 
scattereth the sheep: and the hireling flieth, because 
he is a hireling ; and he hath no care for the sheep. 
I am the good shepherd: and I know mine, ad 
mine know ine. As the Father knoweth me, aad! 
know the father: and I lay down my life for my 
sheep. And other sheep I have, that are not of ths 
fold: t'.em also I must bring, and they ehall beer 
my voice, and there shall be one fold, and one sbep- 
herd. Crepo. 

OFFERT. Ps. Ixii. —O my God, my God, to thee 
do I watch at break of day: and in thy name I will 
lift up my hands. Alleluia. 

SECRET.—May this holy oblation, O Lord, draw 
down upon us thy saving blessing ; and icd d 
duce in us the effect of what is represented in 
sacred mysteries. Thro’. 

COMM. John x.—I am the good shepherd, Ail 
éuia: and I know my sheep, and my sheep know 
me. Alleluia, Alleluia. 

P. COMM. Prasta.—Grant, we beseech thet, 
O Almighty God, that, receiving from thee the 
of life, we may always glory in thy gift. Thro. 





IIL: SUNDAY after EASTER. 
INTROIT. Ps. Ixv. 


SjHOUT with joy to UBILATE Deo omnis 
God all the earth, terra, Alleluia: psl- 
Allel.: sing yea psalm to mum dicite nomini qus 
his name, /lleluia. Give Alleluia, Date gloriam 


393 III. SUNDAY AFTER EASTER. 


GOSPEL. John xvi. 16. 22. —— 4t that bm: 
Jesus said to his disciples :—A little while, and now 
you shall not see me: and again a little while, and 
you shallsee me: because I goto the Father. Thea 
some of his disciples said one to another: What B 
this that he saith to us: A little while, and you shell 
not see me: and again a little while, and you shell 
see me, and, because I go to the Father? T 
said therefore: What is this that he saith: A li 
while? we know not what he speaketh. And Jesus 
knew that they had a mind to ask him; and he said 
to them: Of this do you inquire among yourselves, 
because I said: A little while, and you shall not ses 
me: and again a little while and you shall see ma 
Amen, amen,I say to you, that you shall lamest 
and weep, but the world shall rejoice : and you shall 
be made sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be tumed 
into joy. A woman, when she is in labour, hath 
sorrow, because her hour is come: but when se 
hath brought forth the child, she remembereth no 
more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the 
world. So also you now indeed have sorrow, bet 
I will see you again, and your heart s H 
and your joy no man shall take from you. Cassa 

OFFERT. Ps. cxi.—Praise the Lord, O my sos 
I will praise the Lord, while I live: I will sing 8 
psalm to my God, while I have a being. us 

SECRET.—May these sacred mysteries, O Lord 
diminish in us the love of the things of this 
and increase the love of such as are eternal. ‘ 

COMM.—A little while, and you shall not seem 
Alleluia : again a little while and you shall see st: 
because I go to the Father. Allel. Allel. 

P. COMM.—May the sacrament we have reteif* 
ed, O Lord, supply us with the spiritual tuod of be 
soul, and all necessary helps of the body. . 


TUN? qug j . ve 


CT. Deus, qui.—O God, who makest the: 
be of one mind: grant tliat thy 

what thou commandest, and destre w 
isest: that, amidst the uncertainties of 
we may place our affections where there 


4E. James i. 17. 21.— FA beloved : 
gift, and every perfect fim is from above, 
wn from the Father of ights, with whom 
change, nor shadow of alteration. For 
will hath he begotten us by the word of 
we might be some beginning of his crea- 
u know, my dearest brethren. And let 
be swift to hear, but slow to speak, and 
ger. For the anger of man worketh not 
of God. Wherefore casting away all.un- 
ind abundance of naughtiness, with meek- 
e the ingrafted word, avhich is able to save 


3 


Alleluia. V. The right hand of the Lord 

syed his power: the right hand of the 

raised me up, Alleluia. 

wt rising from V. Christus resurgens 

lieth no more: ex mortuis, jam non mo- 
g3 


354 IV. SUNDAY AFTER EASTER. 


death shallnolongerhave ritur: mors div 
power over him, Allel. domingbiur, Alle 


GOSPEL. John xvi. 5. 15.—.4t that tim 
said to his disciples : 1 go to him that sent t 
none of you asketh me: Whither goest tho 
because I have spoken these things to you 
hath filled your heart. But Itell you the 
is expedient to you that I go: for if I P 
Paraclete will not come to you: but if I g 
send him to you. And when he is come 
convince the world of sin, and of justi 
judgment. Of sin: because they belie 
me. And of justice: because I go to the 
and you shall see me no longer. And of ju 
because the prince of this world is already 
I have yet many things to say to you: but) 
not bear them now. But when he, the § 
truth, is come, he will teach you all truth, 
shall not speak of himself; but what thin 
he shall hear, he shall speak: and the thi 
are to come he shall shew you. He shall 
me: because he shall receive of mine, and sh 
it you. CnEDo. 


OFFERT. Ps. lxv.—Sing to the Lord 
earth, sing a psalm to his name: come, & 
and I will relate to you, all you who fe 
what great things the Lord hath done for } 
Allelura. 


SECRET.—O God, who madest us part 
the one Supreme Diviuity, by the frequent 
tion and participation of this holy sacrifice: g 
bescech thee, that as we know thy truth, so 
live up to it by a worthy conduct of life. T 

COMM. John xvi—When the Comfoi 
Spirit of truth shall come, he will convi 
world of sin and of justice and of judgme! 
lduic, Alliluia. 





3356 Yvw. SUNDAY AFTER EASTER. 


tribulation: and to keep one’s self unspotted from 
the world. 

Alleluia, Alleluia. V. Christ is risen, and beh 
shone upon us, whom he hath redeemed with ii 
blood. ! 


uta. 


V. Ycame forth from V. Exivi a Pared 
the Father, andI camein- vent in mundum : deren 
to the world: I leave the relinquo mundum, et suh 
world again, and go to ad Patrem. Alleluia. 
the Father. Alleluia. 

GOSPEL. John xvi. 23. 30. — At that tim: 
Jesus said to his disciples: Amen, amen, I say 8 

ou: if you ask the Father any thing in my aed 

e will give it you. Hitherto you have not 
any thing in my name. Ask and you shall receive} 
that your joy may be full. These things I be 
spoken to you in proverbs. 'The hour cometh whe 
I will no more speak to you in proverbs, but wil 
shew you plainly of the Father. In that day yo 
shall ask in my name: and I say not to you, ths 
will ask the Father for you. For the Father he 
self loveth you, because you have loved me, and bs 
believed that I came out from God. I came fà 
from the Father, and am come into the world: ssi 
I leave the world, and go to the Father. Hue» 
ciples say to him: Behold now thou speakest plsit 
ly, and speakest no proverb. Now we know ts 

ou knowest all things, and thou needest not thi 
any man should ask thee. By this we believe tif 
thou camest forth from God. Crepo. 

OFFERT. Ps. lxv.—Bless the Lord our Gel: 
Ye Gentiles, and make the voice of his eye 
heard, who hath set my soul to live, and hath * 
suffered my feet tobe moved. Blessed be the Lard 
who hath not turned away my prayer, nor hsm] 
from me. Alleluia. 

SECRET.—Receive, O Lord, we beseech tb 
the prayers of the faithful, together with these air 


~ 


ROGATION DAYS. 2i 


hro'*. 

Ps. xcv.—Sing to the Lord .4lleluia, 
Lord, and bless his name: publish duly, 
that he hath saved us. Alleluia, Alleluia. 
M. TYribue.—Grant, O Lord by the power 
renly nourishment we have received, that 
vhat is right, and obtain our desire. Thro.’ 


ROGATION DAYS. 
the Diocese of Vienne, in the fifth cen 
yeen dreadfally afflicted by incessant e 
arsions of wild beasts, &c. &c. St. Mamertus. 
experienced such happy effects from the 
lications he had appointed for the ceasing 
rible calamities, that the same pious custom 
elf gradually over the whole Western 
d hence it is, that on the three days pre- 
Feast of the Ascension, abstinence from 
joined, and the long Litanies are sung in 
ession in catholic countries: that the wrath 
ig appeased by the abstinence and prayers 
hs, we may avert those punishments which 
ue to our sins. 
[T. Ps. xvii—He heard my voice from 
mple, Alleluia. And my cry before him 
his ears. Alleluia, Allehua. Ps. Y will 
O Lord, my strength: the Lord is my 
my refiige, and my deliverer. V. Glory. 
CT. Presta.—Grant, we beseech thee, 
y God, that we, who in our afflictions rely 
dness, may, under thy protection, be de- 
inst all adversities. Thro’, 


4E. James v. 16. 20.—Most dearly belov- 
i8 your sins one te another; and pray one 
+ that you may be saved, For the conti- 
r of a just man availeth much. Elias was 
sable like unto us: and with prayer he 
t it might not rain upon the earth, and it 


| by these duties of piety we may obtain 


258 ROGATION DAYS. 


rained not for three years and six months. And be 
prayed again and the heaven gave rain, and the 
earth brought forth her fruit. My brethren, if any 
of you err from the truth, and one convert him: he 
must know, that he who caused a sinner to be con- 
verted from the error of his way, shall save his soul 
from death, and shall cover a multitude of sins 

Alleluia. V. Praise the Lord, for he is good, and 
his mercy endureth for ever. 

GOSPEL. Luke xi. 5. 13.—.4t that time: Jesus 
said to his disciples: Which of you shall hayes 
friend, and shall go to him at midnight, and shall 
say to him: Friend, lend me three loaves, because 
friend of mine has come off his journey to me, and 
l have not what to set before him: and he from 
within should answer and say: Trouble me not, the 
door is now shut, and my children are with me in 
bed; I cannot rise and give thee. Yet if he shall 
contiaue knocking, I say to you, although he wil 
not rise and give him, because he is his friend; yet 
because of his importunity he will rise, and give him 
as many as he needeth. And I say to you, Ask, and 
it shall be given to you: seek, and you shall find: 
knock, and it shall be opened to you. For everyone 
that asketh, receiveth: and he that seeketh, findeth: 
and to him that knocketh, it shall be opened. And 
which of you, if he ask his father bread, will he give 
him a stone? or a fish, will he for a fish give him 
serpent? Or if he ask an egg will he reach hima 
scorpion? If you then being evil, know how to give 
goud gifts to your children, how much more 
your Father from heaven give the good Spirit t» 
them that ask him? 

OFFERT. Ps. cviii.—I will give great thanks 
the Lord with my mouth, and in the midst of many: 
I will praise him, because he hath stood at the right- 
hand of the poor to save my soul from persecutors 
Alleluia. 

SECRET.—May these offerings, O Lord, loosed 


v 
339 


our wickedness, and obtain for us the 
ercy. Thro’. 

uke xi.—Ask, and it shall be given you: 
shall find: knock, and it shall be open- 
For every one that asketh, receiveth: 
»eketh, findeth : and to him that knock- 
» opened. Alleluta. 

Vota nostra.—We beseech thee, O 
illy receive our prayers; that while we 
y gifts in our affliction, the comfort we 
‘ease our love. Thro’. 


NTHEM before the Litanies. 


»mine, adjuva nos: et libera nos prop- 
ominis tul. Alleluia. 

auribus nostris audivimus; patres nos- 
»runt nobis. V. Gloria. 


THE LITANIES. 


re, &c. to Ps. 
The LITANIES. . 

| thus * are omitted on Holy Saturday. 
yon. Christe Sancte Michael, ora. 

Kyrie elei- Sancte Gabriel ora. 
ie audinos. Sancte Raphael, Ora. 
li nos. Omnes sancti Angeli et 
is Deus, Mi- Archangeli, orate, 
8. Omnes sancti beatorum 
»tor mundi _ spirituum Ordinea, orate 
rere nobis, pro nobis. 


te Deus, mi- 
8. 

as unus De- 
e nobis, 

a, Ora pro 


Sancte J. Baptiste, ora. 

*Sancte Joseph, ora. 

Omnes sancti Patriarches 
et Prophet, ^ orate. 

Sancte Petre, ora pro 
nobis. 


renitrix, ora Sancte Paule, Ora. 

Sancte Andrea, ora. 
) Virginum, *Sancte Jacobo, ora, 
bis. Sancte Joannes, ora. 


*Sancte Thoma, ora. 
*Sancte Jacobe, ora. 
*Sancte Philippe, ora. 
*SanctePartholommeora. 
*Sancte Matthee, — ora. 
*Sancte Simon, ora. 
*Sancte Thaddee, ora. 
*Sancte Matthia, ora. 
*Sancte Barnaba, ora. 
*Sancte Luca, ora. 


*Sancte Marce, ora. 
Omnes sancti Apostoli et 
Evangelist, ^ orate. 
Omnes Sancti Discipuli 
Domini, orate. 
*Omnes sancti Innocen- 
tes, orate. 
Sancte Stephane, _ ora. 
Sancte Laurenti, — ora. 
Sancte Vincenti, Ora. 
*Sancti Fabiane et Sebas- 
tiane, orate pro nobis. 
*Sancti Joannes et Paule, 
orate pro nobis. 
*Sancti Cosma et Dami- 
ane, orate. 
*Sancte Gervasi et Pro- 
tasi, orate. 
Omnes sancti Martyres, 
orate. 
ora. 
Ora. 


Sancte Sylvester, 
Sancte Gregori, 

*Sancte Ambrosi, ors. 
. Sancte Augustine, ora. 
. *Sancte Hieronyine, ora. 
*Sancte Martine, _ ora. 
' *Sancte Nicolae, ora. 
Omnes sancti Pontifices 


THE LITANTES. 


et Confesson 
pro nobis, 
Omnes sancti . 


Propitius esto, 1 
bis Domine. 
Propitius esto, 

nos Domine. 
Ab omni mak 
nos Domine. 
Ab omni peces 
nos Domine. 
*Ab ira tua, li 
Domine. 
* A subitanea et. 


sa morte, libet 


THE LITANIES. 


dits diaboli, libe- 
Domine. 
, odio, et omni 
roluntate, libera 
mine, 
itu fornicationis, 
nos Domine. 
re et tem 
nos Domine, 
perpetua, libera 
omine. 
Xerium Sancte 
ationis tue, li- 
os Domine. 
sntum tuum, li- 
os Domine. 
ritatem tuam, li- 
108 Domine. 
ismüm et sanc- 
jjunium tuum, 
nos Domine. 
em et passionem 
libera, &c. 
tem et sepultu- 
iam, libera, &c. 
tam resurrectio- 
uam, libera, &c. 
irabilem ascensi- 
tuam, libera, &c. 
entum Spiritus 
Paracliti, libera 
»mine. 
dicii, libera, &c. 
es, te rogamus 
08. 
parcas, te roga- 
tdi nos. 
indulgeas, te 
audi nos. 


te, 


Hh 


301 


*Ut ad veram ponitenti- 
am nos perducere dig- 
neris, te rogamus, &c. 

Ut Ecclesiam tuam sanc- 
tam regere et conser- 
vare digneris te roga- 
mus audi nos. 

Ut domnum Apostolicum 
et omnes Ecclesiasticos 
Ordines in sancta re- 
ligione conservare dig- 
neris, te rogamus audi 
nos. 

Ut inimicos sancte Ec- 
clesi; humiliare dig- 
neris, te rogamus, &c. 

Ut Regibus et Principi- 
bus Christianis pacem 
et veram concordiam 
donare digneris, te ro- 
gamus audi nos, 

*Ut cuncto populo Chris- 
tiano pacem et unita- 
tem largiri digneris, te 
rogamus audi nos. 

Ut nosmetipsos in tuo 
sancto servitio confor- 
tare et conservare dig- 
neris, te rogamus, &c. 

*Ut mentes nostras ad 
celestia desideria eri- 
gas, te rogamus, &c. 

Ut omnibus benefactori- 
bus uostris sempiterna 
bona retribuas, te ro- 
gamus auli nos. 

*Ut animas nostros, {ra- 

trum, propinquorum, 
et benefactorum not*- 


qu 


THE LITANIES. 


trorum ab ceterna dam- Agnus Dei, qui tc 
natione eripias, te ro- cata mundi, 
gamus audi nos. nos Domine. 

Ut fructus terree dare et Agnus Dei, quit 
conservare digneris te — cata mundi, | 
rogamus audi nos. nobis, 

Ut omnibus fidelibus de- Christe audi nos 
functis requiem eter- — exaudi nos[. 
nam donare digneris cleigon. Chri 
te rogamus audi nos. son. Kyrie 

Ut nos exaudire digneris, ^ Pater noster, ü 
te rogamus audi nos. V. Et ne nos 

*Fili Dei, te rogamus, &c. in tentationem 

Agnus Dei,quitollispec- — libera nos. 
cata mundi, Parce no- 
bis Domine. 

Ps. lxx. 
DE in adjutorium 6. Ego veros 
meum intende; * pauper sum; * 
Domine ad adjuvandum  juva me. 
me festina. 7. Adjutor me 


2. Confundantur et re- 
vereantur, * qui querunt 
animam meam. 

3. Avertantur retror- 
suin, et erubescant, * qui 
volunt mihi mala. 

4. Avertantur statim 
erubescentes, * qui di- 
cunt mihi, Euge, Euge. 

5. Exultent et letentur 
in te ornnes qui querunt 
te, * et dicant semper; 


magnificetur Dominus, 
qui diligunt — salutere 
tuum. 


i] 


berator meus es 
Domine ne mon 
Gloria Patri, é 
V. Salvos fa 
tuos R. Deu 
sperantes in te. 
nobis Domine t 
titudinis. R. 
inimici. V. Nih 
ciat inimicus i 
R. Et filius Ip 
non apponat DO 
bis. PF. Domine 
cundum peccati 


facias nobis, ER 


af + Here the Mass on Holy Saturday begins, am 
follows is then entirely omitted. 


THE LITANIES. 


eecundum iniquitates no-. 
stras retribuas nobis. JV. 
Oremus pro Pontifice 
wotro N. P. Dominus 
conservet eum, et vivi- 
fet eum, et beatum fa- 
e eum in terra, et 
pon tradat eum in ani- 
mem inimicorum ejus. 
V. Oremus pro benefac- 
tribus nostris. R. Re- 
tribuere dignare Domine 
omnibus nobis bona fa- 
Gentibus, propter nomen 
tuum, vitam seternam. V. 
Oremus. 


363 


Oremus pro fidelibus de- 
functis. R. Requiem eter- 
nam dona eis Domine, et 
lux perpetua luceat eis. 
V. Requiescant in pace. 
R. Amen. V. Pro fra- 
tribus nostris absentibus. 
R. Salvos fac servos tuos, 
Deus meus sperantes in 
te. V. Mitte eis Domine 
auxilium de sancto, R&R. 
Et de Sion tuere eos : 
V. Doinine exaudi ora- 
tionem meam. R. Et cla- 
mor meus ad te veniat. 


Let us pray. 


() SOD, whose property it is always to have 
mercy and to spare, receive our petitions; that 
we, and all thy servants, who are bound by the 
chain of sin, may, by the compassion of thy good- 


Dem, mereifully 
EAR, we 


be absolved. 
eseech thee, O Lord, the prayers of 


thy suppliants, and pardon us our sins, who 
them to thee; that of thy bounty, thou may- 


us 


0 


rdon and peace. 
of thy clemency, O Lord, shew us tly un- 
speakable mercy; that so thou mayest both 


aequit us of our sins, and deliver us from the punish- 


ment we deserve for them. 


GOD, who by sin art offended, and by penance 
pacified, mercifully regard the prayers of thy 
people, who make supplications to thee; and turn 
away the scourges of thy anger, which we deserve 


our sins. 


ALMIGHTY and Eternal God, have mercy 


— on thy servant N, our chicf Bishop, and direct 
2 according to thy clemency, in the way of ever- 
aalvdtion ; that, by thy grace, he my desire 
h 2 


301 THE LITANTES. 


the things that are agreeable to thy will, and per- 
form them with all his strength. 
O GOD, from whom are all holy desires, righteous 
counsels, and just works, give to thy Bervests 
that peace which the world cannot give; that our 
, hearts being disposed to keep thy commandments, 
and the fear of enemies taken away, the times, by 
thy protection, may be peaceable. 

NFLAME, O Lord, our reins and hearts with thi 

fire of thy holy spirit; to the end we may sem 
thee with a chaste body, and please thee with 1 
elean heart. 

O GOD, the Creator and Redeemer of all ti 
faithful, give to the souls of thy servants de 
parted the remission of' all their sins; that, by pios 
supplications they may obtain the pardon they haw 
always desired. 
pREVEN T, we beseech thee, O Lord, our actiow! 
by thy holy inspirations, and carry them on 
thy gracious assistance ; that every prayer and 
of ours may always begin from thee, and by thec s 
happily ended. 
ALMIGHTY and Eternal God, who hast de- 
minion over the living and the dead, and att 
merciful to all, whoin thou knowest will be thine ly 
faith and good works: we humbly beseech thee thi 
they, for whom we have purposed to’ offer our 
ers, whether the present world still retains then ® 
the flesh, or the uext world hath already reci 
them divested of their bodies, may by the clementy 
of thine own goodness, and the intercession of ty 
saints, obtain pardon and full remission of ther sss 
Thro’. AR. Amen. 

V. he Lord be with you. R. And with Of 
spirit P. May the almighty and merciful 
graciously hear us. R. men. V. And may? 
souls of the faithful departed, through the mercy 
God, rest in peace. R. Amen. 


[ 365 ] 
EVE of the ASCENSION. 


8 on the Fifth Sunday after EASTER, p. 355. 

ing a Commem. of the Rogation day, p. 357, 

l B. V. Mary, by the Collect, Concede, 
erred to p. 349,) except 


ISTLE. Ephes. iv. 7. 13.—Brethren: To every 
f us is given grace, according to the measure 
‘giving of Christ. Wherefore he saith: “ As- 
ng on high he led captivity captive: he gave 
o men.” Now that he ascended, what is it, 
ecause he also descended first into the lower 
of the earth? He that descended, is the same 
hat ascended above all the heavens, that he 
.fill all things. And he gave some apostle 
me prophets, and other some evangelists, an 
some pastors and doctors, for the perfecting of 
ints, for the work of the ministry, for tho edi- 
of the body of Christ: until we all meet into 
lity of faith, and of the knowledge of the Son 
d unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the 
"the fulness of Christ. 


SPEL. John xvii. 1. 11.— At that time: 
lifting up his eyes to licaven, said: Iather, the 
is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son may 
'thee. As thou hast given him power over 
ih, that he may give eternal life to all, whom 
iast given him. Now this is eternal life; that 
nay know thee, the only true God, and Jesus 
, whom thou hast sent. I have glorified thee 
‘earth: I have finished the work which thou 
‘me to do: and now glorify thou me, O Fa- 
vith thyself with the glory which I had, before 
orld was, with thee. I have manifested thy 
to the men whom thou hast given me out of 
orld. Thine they were, and to me thou gavest 
: and they have kept thy word. Now they 
tnown that all things which thou hast given ine 
Hho 


- 


366 ASCENSION DAY. 


are from thee : because the words which thou gavest 
me, I have given to them: and they have received 
them, and have known in very deed that I came 
out from thee, and they have believed that thou didst 
send me. I pray for them: 1 pray not for the world, 
but for them whom thou hast given me, 

they are thine: and all my things are thine, and 
thine are mine, and I am glorified in them. AM , 
now I am not in the world, and these are in the 
world, and I come to thee. 


ASCENSION DAY. 


NSTITUTED in commemoration of Jesus Christ's 
ascension into heaven, where, seated at the rig 
hand of his Father, he continually intercedes for us, am 
invites us to the place he is there preparing for us, e 
which we shall certainly be one day put in possesses, 
rovided we follow his example. But although thew 
many mansions in heaven, yet there is only one wj 
to gothither. Our Head arrived there, only b de ri 
of sufferings; let us never then flatter ourselves 
the thought of obtaining eternal happiness on any ott 
condition. 





INTROIT. Acts i. 

YE men of Galilee, RI Galilei, god &&- 
why look you with miramini aspi 
surprise up to heaven? in Calum? Allel. Qui 
Allel. As you haveseen admodum vidistis eunt 
him ascending to heaven, cendentem in calum, 9! 

yo shall he again return. veniet. Allcluia, 
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Alleluia. 

Ps.Clap yourhands,all ^ Ps. Omnes Gentes 
ye nations: shout unto dile manibus: jw 
God with the voice of joy. Deo in voce 

V. Glory. V. Gloria. 

COLLECT. Concede.—Grant, we beseech the 
O Almighty God, that we, who believe that Y 
only Son, our Redeemer, ascended this day 99 


ASCENSION Dar. 367 
'0 have our hearts always fixed on 
-'Phro! the same. r 
(Acta 3. 1. TH—The- former treatise, I 
fid of all things which Jesus 
il on which, gi 


the Father, which you have heard 
mouth: for John indeed baptized 


Shall be: wit- 
and Ba- 


IMEIciia, V. God asteniled in triumph; 
at the sound of the trumpet. AUleuia. 
SIE LISTE CURAR 
P aed." Md dea S 





368 ASCENSION’ DAY. 


ing on high, hath led cap- tum captivum duni ap 
tivity captive. Alleluia. tivitatem. Alleluia 

GOSPEL. Mark xvi. 14. 20.—At that tim: 
Jesus appeared to the eleven as they were at table} 
and he upbraided them. with their incredulity sad 
hardness of heart, because they did not believe them 
who had seen him after he was risen again. And be 
said to them: Go ye into the whole world, and prese 
the gospel to every creature. He that belli and 
is baptized, shall be saved : but he that helieveth nt 
shall be condemned. And these signs shall follow 
them that believe: In my name they shall cast ow 
devils: they shall speak with new tongues: 
take up serpents: and if they shall drink any 
thing, it shall not hurt them: they shall lay thew 
hands upon thé sick and they shall recover. Amd 
the Lord Jesus, after he had spoken to was 
taken up into heaven, and sitteth on the ri 
of God. But they going preached every where! 
the Lord working withal, and confirming the wot 
with signs that followed. Crepo. 

OFFERT. Ps. xlvi.—God is ascended with jubiltt 
and the Lord with the sound of the trumpet. id. 

SECRET.—Receive, O Lord, the offerings vt 
make in memory of the glorious ascension 
Son: and mercifully grant, that we may be 
delivered from present danger, and arrive at ert 
lasting life. Thro’ the same. 

COMMUNICANTES.—Being united in coms 
nion, and celebrating the most sacred day on 
our Lord, thy only begotten Son, placed the ssi 
stance of our frail nature, which he had taken upti 
himself, on the right hand of thy glory, and hono 
ing the memory in the first place, &c. as in the Ort 
nary, p. xxxiv. 

COMM. Ps. Ixvii—Sing to the Lord, who Mt 
aerended towards the east, above all the hesrese 

uta. 


a 


SUNDAY WITHIN THE OCTAVE. 


369 


P. COMM. Presta.—Grant, we beseech thee, 
Oalmighty and most merciful God, that we may 
obtain the invisible effects of the visible mysteries 


we have received. Thro’. 


SUNDAY within the OCTAVE of 
The ASCENSION. 


INTROIT. 

HEAR O Lord, my 
voice, with which I 
have cried out to thee. 
Aldwa. My heart hath 
mid to thee: I have 
sought thy face: I will 
wek thy face, O Lord: 
tum not thy face from 
me. Jilel. l. Ps. The 
Lord is my light and my 
vation: whoin shall I 


Psalm xxvi. 
XAUDI, Domine, vo- 
cem meam, qua ela- 
mavi ad te. Allel. Tih 
diril cor meum: Quesivt 
vullum | luam: vultum 
iuam, Domine, requiram > 
ne avertas faciem luam a 
me. Alleluia, Alleluia. 
Ps. Dominus illumina- 
lio mea el salus mea : quem 
timebo ? 
V. Gloria. 


far? V. Glory. 
COLLECT. Omnipotens —O almighty and eter- 
nal God, inspire thy servants with true devotion, and 
grant that we may serve thy divine Majesty with 
aDcere hearts. ‘Thro’. 
Commem. of the Ascension, p. 366, by the Collect, 
ecret, and P. Comm. thereof. 


EPISTLE. 1 Peter iv. 7.—JMost dearly beloved : 

8 prudent, and watch in prayers. But before all 
things have a constant mutual charity among your- 
selves: for charity covereth a multitude of sins. 

sing hospitality one towards another without mur- 
turing, As every man hath received grace, mini- 
ering the same one tc another: as good stewards 
of the manifold grace of God. If any man speak, 
let him speak as the words of God. Ifany man wi- 
“mer, Jet him do it as of the power which God at- 

"Malstereth; that in all things God may be honoured. 


370 SUNDAY WITHIN THE OCTAVE. 


though Jesus Christ: to whom is glory and empire 
for ever and ever. Amen. ! 

Alleluia, Alleluia. V. The Lord hath extended bis 
empire over all nations: God sitteth on his 
throne. .Zleluia. 


V. Y will not leave you V. Non «os reingum 
orphans: I am going, orphanos: vado, di wem 
but I will come to you vos, ef gaudelil cr 
again, and your hearts vestrum. Alleluia. 
shall rejoice. Alleluia. 

GOSPEL. John xv. 96. xvi. 1. 4.—Al that fine: 
Jesus suid to his disciples: When the Paraclete cometh 
whom I will send you from the Father, the Spirt of 
truth, who proceedeth from the - Father, he 
give testimony of me: and you shall give testimony, 
because you are with me from the beginning. Thes 
things have I spoken to you, that you may not 
scandalized. They will put you out of the syot 
gogues: yea the hour cometh, that whosoever ki 
you, will think that he doth a service to 
these things will they do to you, becanse they bare 
not kuown the Father, nor me. But these thing 
have told you: that when the hour shall come, yo 
may remember that I told you of them. Crepo 

OFFERT. Ps. xlvi—God ascended in triumph 
aud the Lord at the sound of the trumpet. Ald. — 

SECRET.— May these unspotted sacrifices put] 
us, O Lord! and strengthen our souls with hea 
grace. Thro’. 

COMM. John xvii.—Father, when I was with 
them, I kept those, whom thou gavest me. 
now I return to thee: I do not pray that tliou Len 

take them out of the world, but that thou 
keep them from evil. Alleluia, Allelura. 

P. COMM. Repleti.—Grant, we beseech the 
O Lori, that we may be always thankful for the * 
cred gifts with which we have been filled. Thr: 





[ 371 ] 


WHITSUN-EVE. 
TRE Vigil of Pentecost, like that of Easter, has 
always been consecrated in a particular manner 
to fasting and prayer. The primitive Christians, after 
the us rayers of the day, spent the greatest part 
of the night in the Church, and hence originates the 
word Vigil or Wake. 

The Mass, like that of Holy Saturday, is preceded 
by several Lessons and Tracts out of the Old Testament, 
and Y the Blessing of the Font. 

L PROPHECY. — In those days: God tempted 

p. 310. 
Let us pray. Deus,qut. . 
GOD, who by this action of thy servent Abra- 
ham hast given.to mankind an excellent exam- 
ple of obedience; grant us, both to break our per- 
T wills, and to fulfil thy righteous commands. 


. IL PROPHECY.—In those days: It came to pass 
i1 the morning watch and TRACT, Let us sing to 
the Lord, p. 312. 

' Let us pray. Deus, qui primis. 
GOD, who, by the light of the New Testament, 
hast expounded, the miracles wrought in the 
first ages of the world; so that the Red Sea was a 
figure of the sacred font, and the deliverance of the 
people out of Egypt did represent the Christian sa- 
craments: grant that all nations who have now ob- 
tained the privilege of Israelites by the merit of faith, 
may be born again by the participation of thy spirit. 
‘Lhro’.—in unity of the same. . 
III. PROPHECY.—Jn those days: Moses wrote, 
Pp. 919, and TRACT, Hear, O ye, p. 320. 
Let us pray. Deus glorificatio. . 
GOD, the glory of the faithful and the life of 
the righteous, who hast instructed us also by 
canticle of thy servant Moses: grant thy mercy 
# all nations, by giving them happiness and diw- 
may" s their frights, that the revenge threatened 
¥ turn to their eterna] salvation. ‘Thro. 


372 WHITSUN-EVE. 


IV. PROPHECY.—In that day seven women, s 
317, and TRACT, My beloved had, p. 318. 
Let us pray. Omnipotens. 
O ALMIGHTY and Eternal God, who, by thy 
only Son, hast shewn the care thou takes 
thy Church; mercifully cultivate every branch whieh 
bringeth forth fruit in that same Christ, who is the 
true vine, that it may be more fruitful: and let not 
the thorns of sin prevail against thy faithful, whom 
thou hast brought out of Egypt by th : 
font; but protect them by thy holy spirit, thet they 
may be continually enriched by the fruits of good 
works. Thro’ the same—in unity, &c. 


V. PROPHECY. Hear, O Iareel, p. 314. 
Let us pray. Deus, qui nobis. 
GOD, who hast commanded us, by thy PO. 
to relinquish the things of this world, and to 
hasten to those that are eternal; grant, that by the 
heavenly iuspiration we may comply with what we 
know thou hast commanded. Thro’. 

VI. PROPHECY. In those days: The handof 

the Lord, p. 316. 
Let us pe . Domine Deus. 

LORD God o Hosts, who raisest up what is 

fallen, and keepest up what is raised; increase 
the number of those wiio are to be renewed by thy 
holy name: that all who receive holy baptism, may 
always be governed by thy holy inspirations, Thro’. 
While the Celebrant goes towards the Font is seid the 

TRACT, As the hart panteth, as on Holy Satur’ 

day, p. 323; but $f there be no blessing of the Font 

then 15 sung the Litany, p. 359. 

MASS on WHITSUN-EVE. 
INTROIT. Ezech. xxxvi. 

When I shall be acknowledged the Holy Ose 
amongst you, I will gather you from ull aeta of the 
world; and 1 will pour upon you clean waste 

you shall be cleansed from eX your emu: 


WHITSUN-EVE. 973 


) you a new spirit, Alleluia, Alleluia. Pes. 
will for ever bless the Lord: his praise shall 
ein my mouth. V. Glory. 
e Introit is only said at Private Masses, when 
he Prophecies, &c. have been omyted. 
QJECT. Presta, quesumus.—Grant, we be- 
ee, O Almighty God, that the rays of thy 
as may shine upon us; and that the light of 
: may, by the power of the Holy Spirit, 
3n the hearts of those who bave been born 
thy grace. Thro’ in unity, &c. 
ON. Acts xix. 1. 8.— In those days: It 
pass while Apollo was at Corinth, that Paul 
massed through the upper coasts came to 
, and found certain disciples : and he said to 
[ave you received the Holy Ghost since you 
P But they said to him: We have not so 
heard whether there bea Holy Ghost. And 
In what then were you baptized ? Who 
o John's baptism. Then Paul said: John 
the people with the baptism of penance, 
That they should believe in him who was 
after him, that is to say, in Jesus. Having 
ese things, they were baptized in the name 
ord Jesus. And when Paul had imposed 
8 on them, the Holy Ghost came upon them, 
spoke with tongues and prophesied. And 
jen were about twelve. And entering into 
zogue, he spoke boldly for the space of three 
disputing and persuading concerning the 
i of God. 
a. V. Praise the Lord, for he is good ; and 
y endureth for ever. 
\CT. Ps. cxvi.—Praise the Lord, as p. 327. 
'EL. John xiv. 15.—.4t that time: Jesus 
is disciples: If you love me keep my com- 
mts. And I will ask the Father, and he 
e you another Paraclete, that he may abide 


Ti 


374 | WHIT SUNDAY. 


with you for ever, the Spirit of truth, whom the 
world cannot receive, because it seeth him not ne 
knoweth him: but you shall know him: because » 
shall abide with you, and shall be in you, I wil 
not leave ypu orphans: I will come to you. Yes 
little while, and the world seeth me no more. 

you see me; because I live, and you shall live. I 
that day you shall know that I am in my Father, 


and you in me, and I in you. He that hath my | 


commandments, and keepeth them, he it is tht 
loveth me. And he that loveth me, shall be loved 
of my Father: and I will love him, and will mat 
fest myself to him. 

OFFERT. Ps. ciii.—Send forth thy Spirit, asd 
they will be created ; and thou wilt renew the fee 


=a. 


of the earth; let the glory of the Lord be for eve: | 


more. Alleluia. 
The Preface, as in the Ordinary, p. xxxii. 
Secret and Communicantes, as to-morrow, p. dii. 
The Hanc Igitur, as on Easter Sunday, p. dul. 
COMM. John vii—The last day of the fes 
Jesus said : Whoever believeth in me, rivers of I 
water shall flow from his heart: and this he mil 
the spirit, which those were to receive who 
believe in him, Alleluia, Alleluia. 
P. COMM. (Sancti Spiritus) as to-morrow, p. 98 
a nae 


WHIT SUNDAY. 


OOK its name from the circumstances of the »® 
ly baptized among our ancestors assisting at 

in the white garments they yesterday received at the 
tismal font. Tts ecclesiastical name Pentecost signi 
Jiftieth, because the mystery which it celebrates wu * 
complished on the fiftieth day after Christ's resurrectt®- 
The object of this great festival is, to return than 
God for the visible descent of the Holy Ghost oa # 
apostles,—the establishment of the new law, and sey 
gation of our holy religion. 


WHIT SUNDAY. 375 


INTROIT. Wisd. i. 
"| EE spirit of the Lord PIRITUS Domin re- 
hath filled the whole JJ plevit orbem terrarum, 
earth, .lleluia: and the Alleluia: et hoc quod con- 
whole universe hath heard tinet omnia, scientiam ha- 
his voice,-Wleluia, Alleluia. pet vocis, Alleluia,Alleluia. 

Ps. Let God arise, and Ps, Exurgat Deus, et 
his enemies be dispersed: dissipentur inimici ejus: 
let them who hate him, ef fugianl, qui oderunt 
fly before his face. eum, a facie ejus. 

VF. Glory V. Gloria. 

COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who, by the 
light of the Holy Ghost, didst this day instruct the 
hearts of the faithful: grant, by the direction of the 
same Holy Spirit, that we may relish what is right, 
and always enjoy his consolation. Thro’—in the 
unity of the same, &c. , 

LESSON. Acts ii. 1. 11.—When the days of 
Pentecost were accomplished, they were all together 
in one place: and suddenly there came a sound 
from heaven, as of a mighty wind coming, and it 
filled the whole house where they weresitting. And 
there appeared to them parted tongues as it were of 
fire, and it sat upon every one of them: and they 
were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they began 
to speak with divers tongues according as the Hol 
Ghost gave them to speak. Now there were dwell- 
ing at Jerusalem Jows, devout men out of every na- 
tion under heaven. And when this was noiscd 
abroad, the multitude came together, and were 
confounded in mind, because that every man heard 
them speak in his own tongue. And they were all 
amazed and wondered, saying: Behold, are not all 
these, that speak, Galileans, and how have we heard, 
every man our own tongue wherein we were born? 
Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and inhabitants 
of Mesopotamia, Judea, and Cappadocia, Pontus 
and Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphilia, Egypt and the 

Li2 


376 WHIT SUNDAY. 


parts of Lybia about Cyrene, and strangers of Rom, “ 
Jews also and Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians: we 
have heard them speak in our own tongues the wet 
derful works of God. Alleluta, Allelua. 

V. Send forth thy spirit, — V. Ps. ciii Emills ar 
and they shall be created: rifum tuum e crie 
and thou wilt renew the tur: e£. renovabis fecun 
face of the earth, Alleluia. terra, Alleluia. 

V.* Come, O Holy V. * Veni, Sande Sw 
Ghost, fill the hearts of ritus, reple tuorum ars 
thy faithful, and kindle in fidelium, ef tui amont & 
them the fire of thy love. eis ignem accende. 

The PROSE. 
VENI Sancte Spiritus, et emitte coelitus hei 
ture radium. 

Veni Pater pauperum, veni dator rmunerem 
veni lumen cordium. 

Consolator optime, dulcis hospes anime, doe 
refrigerium. 

In labore requies, in sestu temperies, in flet s 
latium. 

; O lux beatissima, reple cordis intima tuorum i 
ium. 

Sine tuo numine, nihil est in homine, nihil ef 
innoxium. 

Lava quod est sordidum, riga quod est ardt 
sana quod est saucium. 

Flecte quod est rigidum, fove quod est frig 
rege quod est devium. 

a tuis fidelibus, in te confitentibus, sacrum 9f 
tenarium. da al às 

a virtutis meritum, da salutis exitum, da peres 
gaudium. Amen. Alleluia. . 

GOSPEL. John xiv. 23. 31.—At that ümt 
Jesus said to his disciples: If any one love me 9 
will keep my word, and my Father will love luf 


At this V. * all kneel down at every Mass till Susi] 
pext. 


WHIT SUNDAY. 977 


| we will come to him, and will make our abode 
h him: he that loveth me not, keepeth not my 
rds. And the word which you have heard, is not 
16: but the Father's who sent me. These things 
€ I spoken to you, abiding with you. But the 
aclete, the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will 
d in my name, he will teach you all things, and 
ig all things to your mind, whatsoever Y shall 
esaid to you. PeaceI leave with you, my peace 
ive to you: not as the world giveth, do 1 give 
o you. Let not your heart be troubled, nor let 
e afraid. You have heard that I have said to 
i: I go away and I come again to you. If you 
ed me, you would indeed be glad, because I go 
he Father: for the Father is greater than I. And 
v I have told you before it coine to pass: that 
en it shall come to pass, you may believe. I will 
now speak many things with you. For the 
nce of this world cometh, and in me he hath not 
thing. But that the world may know that I ‘ovo 
‘Father: and as the Father hath given me com- 
ndment, so do I. Crepo. 


JFFERT. Ps. lxvii.—Confirm, O God, what 
a hast wrought in us, from thy holy temple, 
ich is in Jerusalem: kings shall offer presents to 
€ Alleluia. 
JECRET.—Sanctify, we beseech thee, O Lord, 
se oblations, and purify our hearts by the light of 
Holy Ghost. Thro’—in the unity of, &c. 
JOMMUNICANTES. Being united in communion, 
I celebrating the sacred day of Pentecost, on which 
Holy Ghost appeared to the apostles under the 
m of innumerable tonguea: and honouring the 
mory, &c. as in the Ordinary, page xxxiv. 
gitur, as on Easter Sunday, p. 331. 
20MM. Acts ii.—Suddenly there came a noise 
m heaven, as of a strong rushing wind, where 
y were sitting, Allein: und they were all filled 
i 


378 WHIT MONDAY. 


with the Holy Ghost, and published the wonderful 
works of God. villeluia. . 

P. COMM. Sanct Spirtus.—May the pouring 
forth of the Holy Ghost into our hearts cleanse them, 
O Lord, and render them fruitful by the inward dew 
of his grace. ‘Thro’ our Lord—in the unity of the 
same, &c. 





WHIT MONDAY. 


INTROIT. Ps. lxxx. 
E fed them with the IB.AV IT eos ex ahy 
fat of wheat, Alle- Srumenti, Allelua: 
luia : and filled them with et de petra melle salut 
honey out of the rock. vit eos. Allel. Allel 
elllel. Allel. Ps. Rejoice Ps. Ezultate Deaf 
to God, our helper: sing tort nostro: jubuale 
aloud to the God of Jacob. Jacob. 
V. Glory. V. Gloria. 
COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who dids give 
the Holy Ghost to thy apostles, hear the prayers of 


thy people, that they may enjoy a happy peace, why 
by thy grace, have received the gift of true faith. 
LESSON. Acts x. 49. 48.—In those days: Pde 
opening his mouth, said: Brethren, the Lord cot 
manded us to preach to the people, and to 
that it is he who was appointed by God to le 
judge of the living and of the dead. To bim all tht 
prophets give testimony, that through his name a 
receive remission of sins, who believe in hin, W 
Peter was yet speaking these words, the Holy Ghot 
fell on all them that heard the word. ‘Ad the 
faithful of the circumcision, who came with Petth 
were astonished, for that the grace of the H 
Ghost was poured out upon the Gentiles also. Fo 
they heard them speaking with tongues, and mage 
fying God. Then Peter answered: Can any m9 
forbid water, that these men should not be bept 


ee a I ———— MÀ MM P 


————— e P ota 


WHIT MONDAY. 970 


eceived the Holy Ghost as well as we; 
amanded them to be baptized in the 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

postles pub- — Alleluia, Alleluia. V. 
vers tongues  Loquebantur variis linguis 
ul works of | apostoh magnalia. i. 
ua. Alleluia. 

, O Holy Ghost, with the. Prose, Veni 
iritus, as in the Mass of Yesterday, p. 376. 
. John iii. 16.—At that time: Jesus said 
s: God so loved the world, as to give 
stten Son; that whosoever believeth in 
t perish, but may have life everlasting. 
nt not his Son into the world, to judge 
it that the world may be saved by him. 
eveth in him, is not judged. But he 
Xt believe is already judge : because he 
t in the name of the only begotten Son 
id this is the judgment: because the 
' into the world, and men loved darkness 
the light: for their works were evil. 
ne that doth evil hateth the light, and 
to the light, that his works mdy not be 
Jut he that doth truth, cometh to the 
s works may be made manifest, because 
ein God. Crepo. 

^. Ps. xvii.—The Lord thundered from 
the highest gave his voice: then the 
waters appeared. Alleluia. ‘ 
'—Mercifully sanctify, we beseech thee, 
se offerings, and having accepted the 
our spiritual victim, make ourselves an 
sing tothee. Thro’. 

John xiv.—The Holy Ghost shall teach 
, whatever I shall say to you. Allelura, 


{. Adesto.—Help, we beseech thee, O 
‘ople, and defend from the fury of their 


380 WHIT TUESDAY. 


enemies, those whom thou hast fed with thy sacred 
mysterivs. ‘Thro’. 


i WHIT TUESDAY. 


INTROIT.—Receive your glory with joy, Ale 
luia: giving thanks to God, .Alleluia, who hath call- 
ed you to a heavenly kingdom. lel. .3llel. .1dd. 
Ps. Attend, O my people, to my law: incline your 
ears to the words of my mouth. V. Glory. 

COLLECT. Adsit.—Assist us, O Lord, we be 
scech thee, with the power of thv holy spirit, thet 
our hearts may be purified, according to thy mercy, 
and we defended from all adversities, Thro’. 

LESSON. ets viii. 14. 17. In those days: 
When the apostles who were in Jerusalem, had heard 
that Samaria had received the word of God: they 
sent to them Peter and John. Who when they were 
come, prayed for them, that they might receive the 
Holy Ghost. For he was not as vet come upon ay 
of them: but they were only baptized in the name 
the Lord Jesus. Then they laid their hands upon 
them, and thev received the Holy Ghost. 

Alleluia, Alleluia. V. The Holy Ghost shall teach 
vou whatever I shall say to you. Alleluia. 
V. * Come, O Holy Ghost, with the Prose, Vem 

Sancte Spiritus, as on Sunday, p. 376. 

GOSPEL. John x. 1. 10. — At that time : Jes 
said to the Pharisees: Amen, amen, I say to yo: 
he that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold 
but climbeth up another way, the same is a thi 
and a robber. But he that entereth in hy the dott 
is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the porter 
openeth ; and the sheep hear his voice: and he ct 
etn his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out 
And when he hath let out his own sheep, he g 
before them: and the sheep follow him: bee 
they know his voice. But a stranger they follow 1 


but fly from him, because they know not the voK? 











NBER WEDNESDAT. 381 


GP sirangers. "Phis proverb Jesus spoke to them. 
But they understood not what he spoke to them. 
Jesus therefore said.to them again: Amen, amen, I 
say to you, I am the door of the sheep. All 
iy as have come, are thieves and robbers: an 
sheep heard them not. I am the door. By me 
‘any man enter in, he shall be saved: and he shall 
goin, and go out, and shall find pastures, The thief 
cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to de- 
‘Stroy. I am come that they inay-have life, and may 
luve it more abundantly. ‘Caxpo. . 
DFFERT. Ps.lxxvii.— The Lord opened for 
them the gates of heaven, and rained down manna 
for them to eat: he gaye them the bread of heaven, 
‘men eat the bread of angels, Alleluia, 
JBSECRET.—May the oblation of this seerifice pu- 
tify us, O Lord, we beseech thee, and make us wor- 
thy to partake thereof, ‘Thro’. 
COMM. John xv.—The Spirit who proceedeth 
from the Father, Alleluia: shall glorify me. Alle- 
Vs clcluia. 


R.OOMM. Mentes—Grant, we beseech thee, 

Q Lord, thet the Holy Ghost may renew our souls 
‘these divine mysteries, since he is the remission 
is. Thro'—in the unity of the sume. 


EMBER WEDNESDAY. 
Viri i the igit of hy peopl ning a way for 
ie sight ing a 
end dwelling in the midst of | them, Ailelwia, the 
éerth shook, and the heavens di dew, luia, 
Alldwia, Ps. Let God arise, t his enemies be 
seattered: jet thenr that hate him flee before bis 





. Holy 
Ghost, who proceedeth from thee, enlighten, We 
beseech thee, O Lord, our hearts, and gue ws wo 


382 EMBER WEDNESDAY. 


all truth according to the promise of thy Son. Whe 
—in unity of the same. 


I. LESSON. Acts ii. 14. 21.— In those day: 
Peter standing up with the eleven, lifted up hi 
voice and spoke to them: Ye men of Judes, and 
all you that dwell in Jerusalem, be this known & 
you and with your ears receive my words Foe 
these are not drunk, as you suppose, seeing it is but 
the third hour of the day: But this is that whi 
was spoken of by the prophet Joel: “And it sbsl 
come to pass in the last days (saith the Lord) I will 
pour out my spirit upon all flesh: and your soa 
and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young 
men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream 
dreams. And upon my servants indeed, and upon 
iny handmaids, will I pour out in those days of my 
spirit, and they shall prophesy. And I will shew 
wonders in the heaven above, and signs on the earth 
beneath; blood, and fire, and vapour of smoke 
The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moo 
into blood, before the great and manifest day of th 
Lord come. And it shall come to that whom- 
ever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be 
saved.” 

Jlleluia. V. Ps. xxxii.—By the word of the Lon 
the heavens were established : and all the power a 
them by the spirit of his mouth. 


II. COLLECT. . Presta us.—Grant, We 
beseech thee, O almighty and most merciful 
that thy holy spirit may defend and dwell in of 
souls, and so thoroughly purify us, that we nay & 
length become the temple of his glory. Thro’. 


From this day to Saturday next inclusively, after B 
Collect of the day, either the Collect, Ecclesie we 
or Deus omnium 15 said, together with their resp 
tive Secrets and P. Comm. as on the first Sundiy 
of Advent, p. 50, &c. 


EMBER WEDNESDAY. 9388 


ION. Acts v. 12. 16.—1n those days: A 
signs and wonders wrought among the 
id they were all with one accord in Sol- 
:h. But of the rest no man durst join 
1 them; but the people magnified them. 
Ititude of men and women that believed 
| was more increased: insomuch that 
t forth the sick into the streets, and laid 
ds and couches, that when Peter came, 
at least might overshadow any of them. 
ight be delivered from their infirmities. 
ame also together to Jerusalem a multi- 
the neighbouring cities, bringing sick 
| such as were troubled with unclean 
were all healed. 
Weluia. V.* Come, O Holy Ghost, with 
before, p. 376. 
» John vi, 44. 52.—At that time: Jesus 
ullitude of the Jews: No man can come 
Xt the Father, who hath sent me, draw 
will raise him up at the last day. It is 
he pro hets: *And they shall all be 
od.’ Every one that hath heard of the 
hath learned, cometh to me, Not that 
hseen the Father, but he who is of God, 
| the Father. Amen, Amen I say unto 
iat believeth in me hath everlasting life. 
ad of life. Your fathers did eat manna 
and are dead. This is the bread which 
n from heaven: that if any man eat of 
1ot die. l am the living bread which 
from heaven. If any man eat of this 
all live for ever: and the bread that I 
ny flesh for the life of the world. 
‘. Ps. xviii. — I will meditate on thy 
mts, which I have loved very much; 
it in practice thy commandments, which 
|, Alleluia. 


384 THURSDAY IN WHITSUN WEEK. 


SECRET.—Receive, we beseech thee, O Led, 
this offering, and grant that we may celebrate with 
piety these sacred mysteries. Thro’. 


COMM. John xiv. I leave you peace, Mldwis 
] give you my peace, Alleluia, uta. 

P. COMM. Sumentes.——Having, partakea, O 
Lord, of thy heavenly sacraments, we beseech 
clemency that we may enjoy the effects of the m 
teriew we celebrate in time, in an eternity of 
Thro’. 


THURSDAY IN WHITSUN WEEK. 
All as on Whit Sunday, p. 375, except. 


LESSON. Acts viii. 5. 9.— An those : Philp 
going down to the city of Samaria, preached Cars 
to them. And the people with one accord were & 
tentive to those things, which were said 
hearing and seeing the miracles which he did. Fer 
many of them who had unclean spirits, crying with 
a loud voice went out. And many taken with the 
palsy, that were lame, were healed. And there wes 
therefore great joy in that city. 

GOSPEL. Luke ix. 1. 6.——.t that time: Jem 
calling together the twelve apostles, he gave them 
power and authority over all devils, and to cure di 
eases, And he sent them to preach the kingdom of 
God, and to heal the sick. And he said to them: 
Take nothing for your journey, neither staff, net 
scrips nor bread, nor money, neither have two cous 
And whatsoever house you shall enter into, abide 
there, and depart not from thence. And whosoeve 
will not receive you: when you go out of that eff, 
shake off even the dust of your feet for a testimony 
against them. And going out they went about 
through the towns preaching the youpel und editt, 
every where. Cnrepo. 





etait BBS . j. | neg. 


 EMBER FRIDAY. 


mort Ps. Ixx.—Let my mouth be filled 
operis de I may eng llena : 
to thee, 
P. E. thes Oo p I boped, let me 
y. put to confusion: Deliver me in thy justice 
me, VF. Glory. 







beginning: And the floors shell 
ad with wheat, and the presses shall overflow 
wine and oil. And I will restoro to you the 
‘which the locust, and the bruchus, and the 
and the palmer-worm hath eaten: my 
which I have sent upon you. And you 
eat in ty and shall be filled: and you 

name of the Lord your God, who 
6 wonders With you, and my people shall 
b confounded for ever. And you shall know 
am in the midst of Israel: and I am the Lard 


God, and there is none besides: and 
tall not be confounded for ever, saith the Lou 


My 
din i V. O how goed and sweet i 


PEL. Luke v. 17. 96.—t that time: It 
to pass on a certain day, that Jesus sat teach- 
Kk 


386 EMBER FRIDAY. 


ing. And there were Pharisees and doctors of the 
law sitting by, that were come out of every town of 
Galilee and Judea and Jerusalein ; and the power 


i 


- 
É» 
- 


- 


of the Lord was to heal them. And behold mea & 


brought in a bed, a man who had the palsy: and 
they sought means to bring him in, and to lay him 
before him. And when they could not find hy what 
way they might bring lim in, because of the mult- 
tude, they went up upon the roof, and let him 
down through the tiles with his bed into the mids, 
before Jesus. And when he saw their faith, he seil: 
Man, thy sins are forgiven thee. And the Seriba 
and the Pharisees began to think, saying: Who 


this who speaketh blasphernies? Who can forgive |* 


sins, but God alone? And when Jesus knew thar 
thoughts, answering, he said to them: What s 
you think in your hearts? Which is easier to my? 
Thy sins are forgiven thee; or to say: arise 
walk? But that you may know that the Son of Mss 
hath power on earth to forgive sins, (he saith to the 
sick of the palsy) I say to thee, arise, take up thy 
bed and go into thy house. And immediately rismg 
up before them, he took up the bed on which hely; 
and he went away to his own house, glorifying 
And all were astonished ; and they glorifi 

And they were filled with fear, saying: We hee 
seen wonderful things to-day. 

OFFERT. Ps. cxlv.—Praise the Lord, O sf 
soul; whilst I live I will praise the Lord: I wil 
sing praises to my God, while I have a being. # 
leluia. 





SECRET.—May the sacrifice offered in thy prt - 


sence, O Lord, be consumed by the same diri 


fire, by which the Holy Ghost inflamed the heo. 
of the disciples of Christ thy Son. Thro’ the sam — 


—in unity of the same. 
COMM. John xiv.—{ will not leave you orphas: 


EMBEB SATURDAY. 387 


[ will come to you again, Alleluia : and your hearts 
hall be glad. Alleluia. 

P. COMM. Sumpsimus.—Having received, O 
Lord, these sacred mystic gifts, we humbly beg, 
that what thou hast ordered us to do in remem- 
prance of thee, may becoine a help to our weakness. 


EMBER SATURDAY. 


INTROIT. Rom. v.—The love of God is poured 
into your hearts, Alleluia, by his spirit that dwelieth 
in us, Alleluia, Alleluia. Ps. cii. Bless the Lord, O 
my soul: aud let all that is within me, praise his 
holy name. — P. Glory. 

I. COLLECT.—Enrich, O Lord, our hearts by a 
plentiful effusion of thy Holy Spirit by whose wis- 

1 we were created, and by whose providence we 
we governed. Thro’—in unity of the same. 


ILLESSON. Joel ii. 28. 32.—T hus saith the Lord 
Ged: I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh: and 
your sons and your daughters shall prophesy: your 
old men shall dream dreams, and your young men 

see visions. Moreover upon my servants and 
handmaids in those days I will pour forth my spirit. 
And I will shew wonders in heaven: and in earth, 

, and fire, and vapour of smoke. The sun 
Sha] be turned into darkness, and the moon into 
blood; before the great and dreadful day of the 
Lord doth come. And it shall come to pass, that 
every one that shall call upon the name of the Lord, 

be saved. Alleluia. 

V. John vi. It 4s the spirit that giveth life: but 
the flesh availeth nothing. 

Il. COLLECT. Jio nos.—Let thy holy spirit, O 
ord, we beseech thee, kindle in our breasts that 
Gre, which our Lord Jesus Christ brought on earth, 
ad earnestly desired it should burn. Who liveth. 

2 


388 EMBER SATURDAY. 


II. LESSON. Lev. xxiii. 9. 21.—Jn those days: 
The Lord spoxe to Moses, saving: Speak to the 
children of Jsrae!, and thou shalt say to them: 
When you shall have entered into the land, which 
| will give you, and shall reap your corn, you 
bring sheaves of cars, the first-fruits of your harvest, 
to the priest: who shall lift up the sheaf’ before the 
Lord, the next day after the Sabbath, that it may 
he acceptable for you, and shall sanctify it. You 
shall count therefore from the morrow after the 
Sabbath, wherein you offered the sheaf of the firt- 
fruit, seven full weeks, even unto the morrow 
after the seventh week be expired, that is to say, 
fifty days, and so you shall offer a new sacrifice 
to the Lord. Out of all your dwellings, two loaves 
of the first-fruits, of two tenths of flour leaven- 
ed, which you shall bake for the first-fruits of the 
Lord. And vou shall call this day most aolemn, 
most holy. You shall do no servile work there 
It shall be an everlasting ordinance in oll your dwel- 
ings and generations, saith the Lord vilmighty. Ail. 

V. Job xxvi. His spirit hath adorned the lieavens 

III. COLLECT. Deus.—O God, who, for the 
healing our souls, commanded us to mortify our 
bodies by fasting: mercifully grant that we mst 
faithfully serve thee both with body and soul. Thre. 


IIT. LESSON. Ded. xxvi. 1. 11.—Jn those ding: 
Moses said to the children of Israel: Hear, O sra, 
tchat I command you this day: When thou art com 
into the land which the Lord thy God will give thee 
to possess, and hast conquercd jt, and dwellest init: 
thou shalt take the first of all thy traits, and pi 
them in a basket, and shalt co to the place which the 
Lord thy God shall choose, that his name may be 
invocated there: and thou ehalt go to the priest thst 
shall be in those days, and say to him: 1 pro 
this day before the Lord thy God, who beard us 
and looked down upon our afll:ction, and labour 


a Cutoditiodi Pe * 


EMBER SATURDAY. 339 


ress; and brought us out of Egypt witha 
iand, and a stretched out arm, with great 
rith signs and wonders: and brought us into 
e, and gave us this land, flowing with milk 
ey. And therefore now I offer the first- 
' the land which the Lord hath given me. 
u shalt leave them in the sight of the Lord 
I, adoring the Lord thy God. And thou 
st in all the good things which the Lord thy 
h given thee. Alleluia. 
ts ii. When the days of Pentecost were 
ad, they were all sitting together. . 
OLLECT. Presta, quesumus.—Grant, we 
thee, O Almighty God, that, being instructed 
holy fasts, we may avoid all vice, and more 
tain thy mercy. ‘Thro’. 
ESSON. Lev. xxvi. 3. 12.—In those days: - 
said lo Moses: Speak to the children of 
nd say to them: If you walk in my precepts 
p my commandments, and do them. I will 
train in due season. And the ground shall 
rth its increase, and the trees shall be filled 
üt. The threshing of your harvest shall 
ito the vintage, and the vintage shall reach 
‘sowing time; and you shall eat your bread 
ill, and dwell in your land without fear. I 
' peace in your coasts: you shall sleep, and 
all be none to make vou afraid. I will take 
vil beasts: and the sword shall not pass 
your quarters. You shall pursue your cne- 
id they shall fall before you. Five of yours 
rsue a hundred others, and a hundred of vou 
sand: your enemies shall fall before you by 
rd. J will look on you, and make you in- 
you shall be multiplied, and I will establish 
nant with you. You shall eat the oldest of 
store, and new coming on, you shall cast 
eold. 1 will set my tabernacle in the midst 


. Kk3 


390 EMBER SATURDAY. 


of you, and my soul shall fiot cast you off. I wil 
walk among you, and will be your God, and you 
shall be my people, saith the Lord Almighty, Alle. 

V. * Come, O Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of thy 
faithful, and kindle in them the fire of thy love. 

V. COLLECT. Prasta quesumus.—Grant, We 
beseech thee, O Almighty God, that whilst we fet 
from meat, we may likewise fast from all those vices 
to which we are prone. Thro’. 

V. LESSON. Dan. iii. 49.—In those days: The 
angel of the Lord went down with Azarias and lii 


companions into the furnace: and he drove the flame — 


of the fire out of the furnace, and made the midst of 
the furnace like the blowing of a wind bringing de®, 
and the fire touched them not at all, nor trou 
them, nor did them any harm. Then these three,# 
with one mouth, praised, and glorified, and bl 
God in the furnace, saying: Alleluta. 

V. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the God of our far 
fathers, and worthy of praise for ever. 

VI. COLLECT. Deus, qui tribus.—O God, who, 
in the behalf of the three young men, didst rende 
harmless the flames of fire: mercifully grant, tbi 
we, thy servants may not be burnt by the flanesdf 
vice. Thro’. 

Here is said, either the Collect, Eccl. tuee, or Dew 
oinnium, p. 50. 
_ EPISTLE. Rom. v. 1. 5.— Brethren: 
justitied by faith, let us have peace with God, th 
our Lord Jesus Christ. By whom also we ber 
access through faith, into this grace wherein we 
and glory in the hope of the glory of the sons of God. 
And not only so: but we glory also in tribulatiods 
knowing that tribulation worketh patience; 
patience trial; and trial hope. And hope conto 
eth not; because the charity of God is pou 
forth in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, who is give? 
to us, 


, 


EMRER SATURDAY. 391 


Ps. cxvi.—Praise the Lord, as p. 327. 
ii Sancte Spiritus, as before, p. 376. 


Luke iv. 38. 44.—At that time: Jesus 
of the synagogue, went into Simon’s 
Simon's wife's nother was taken with 
r: and they besought him for her.— 
g over her he commanded the fever, 
t. And immediately rising, she minis- 
n. And when the sun was down, ali 
any sick with divers diseases, brought 

But he laying his hands on every one 
led them. And devils went out from 
‘out and sayiug: Thou art the Son of 
1e rebuking them suffered them not to 
they knew that he was Christ. And 
day, going out he went into a desart 
the multitudes sought him, and came 
ud they stayed him that he should not 
hem. To whom he said: to other citics 

preach the kingdom of God: for 
I sent. And he was preaching in the 
f Galilee. Crepo. 

Ps. \xxxvii.—O Lord God of my sal- 
» cried out to thee day and night: let 
' Lord, come before thee. Alleluia. 
—To the end that our fasts may be 
thee, O Lord, grant us, we bescech 
thee a heart purified by the efficacy of 
it. Thro’. 
ohn iiii—The spirit breatheth where he 
hear his voice, Alleluia, Alleluia: but 
ot when he cometh, nor whither he 
a, Alleluia, Alleluia. 
. Prebeant.—May thy sacred mysteries 
us divine fervour, that we may joyfully 
them and their effects. ‘Thro’. 


[ 392 ] 


TRINITY SUNDAY. 


SINCE without a belief of the existence of Three 
adorable Persons in the Godhead, we cannot be 
Christians, let us this day beseech Almighty God to 
strengthen our faith in the mystery of the ever blessed 
Trinity, and teach us implicitly to submit to whatever 
other dogma the Church proposes to our belief. Le , 
us also pray for those, who, taking weak reason for 
their guide in matters of relig.on, refuse to believe 
what God himself has revealed concerning his own 
tncomprehensible Majesty. 


INTROIT. 
jJ]. ESSED bethe holy ENEDICTA sil sande 
Trinity and undivid- Trinitas, alque ind- 


ed Unity. We will praise visa Unitas. —Confich- 
it, because it hath shewn mur ei, quia fecil nobu- 
his mercy to us. cum misericordiam suum. 

Ps. O Lord, our God, — Ps. Domine, Dommus 
how wonderful is thy nosler, quam  admirallt 
name over the utmost est nomen luum tn unite 
boundaries of the earth. sa terra. 

F. Glory. ' V. Gloria. 

COLLECT. Omnipotens.—O almighty and ever- 
lasting God who has granted thy servants, in the 
confession of the true faith to acknowledge the glory 
of an Eterual Trinity, and in the power of majest; 
to adore an Unity: we beseech thee that, by the 
strength of this faith, we 1nay be defended from 
adversity. Thro’. 

COLLECT. (Deus, tn te,) of the I. Sund. after Pet- 
tecost.—O God, the strength of such as hope in thet: - 
mercifully hear us calling on thee: and since mo 
weakness can do nothing without thee, grant us 
assistance of thy grace; that in observing thy col: 
mandments, we may please thee both in will 
action. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. Rom. xi. 33. 36.—O the depth of the 
riches of the wisdom and of the knowledge of Got: 
How incomprehensible are his judgments, and bo" 


TRINITY SUNDAY. 399 


thable his ways! For who hath known 
id of the Lord? Or who hath been his coun- 

Or who hath first given to him, and recom- 
ihall be made him? For of him, and by him, 
him are all things: to him be glory for ever. 


JD. Dan. iii.—Blessed art thou, O Lord, who 
:t the deep, and sittest on the cherubim. 
wed art thou, O Lord, in the firmament of 
‘ven, and worthy of praise for ever. Alleluia. 


L 
lessed art thou, O V. Benedictus es Do- 
the God of our mine, Deus Patrum nos- 
» and worthy of (rorum, ef laudabdis in 
for ever. Alleluta. secula. Alleluia. 
IPEL. Matt. xxviii. 18. 20.—Jt that time: 
aid to his disciples: All power is given to me 
ven afd in earth. Going, therefore, teach 
ions: BaPTisING THEM IN THE NAME OF 
|THER, AND OF THE Son, AND OF THE llorr 
, Teaching them to observe all things what- 
I have commanded you: and behold I am 
yu all days, even to the consummation of the 
CREDO. 
'ERT.—Blessed be God the Father, and the 
egotten Son of God, as likewise the Holy 
for he has shewn his mercy to us. 
RET.—Sanctify, we beseech thee, O Lord, 
xl, by the invocation of thy holy name, the 
of this oblation : and by it make us an eternal 
rto thee. Thro’. 
RET of the I. Sunday after Pentecost. 
ifully receive, we beseech thee, O Lord, the 
e we offer thee, and grant that it may be a 
al help to us. Thro’. 
IM.—We bless the God of heaven, and we 
lise him in the sight of all the living : because 
i shewn us bis mercy, 


394 CORPUS CHRISTY. 


P. COMM. Profictal.—May the receiving of this 
sacrament, O Lord our God, avail us to the salve 
tiou of body and soul: together with the confession 
of an everlasting Holy Trinity, and of the undivided 

‘unity thereof. ‘Thro’. 

P. COMM. Tantis of the 1. Sund. after Pentecost 
Grant, we beseech thee, O Lord, that the great se 
crifice we have partaken of, may avail us to salve- 
tion, and make us never cease praising thee. Thro’. 

GOSPEL. of the I. Sund. after Pentecost. Take 
vi. 30. 41.—.4t that time : Jesus said to his disciples: 
Be ye merciful, as your Father also is merciful 
Judge not, and you shall not be judged. Condemn 
not, and you shall not be condemned. Forgive, 
and you shall be forgiven. Give, and it shall be 
given to you; good measure and pressed down and 
shaken together and running over shall be given into 
your bosoin. For with. the same measure that you 
shall mete withal it shall be measured to you again. 
And he spoke also to them a similitude: Can the 
blind lead the blind ? do they not both fall into the 
ditch ? The disciple is not above his master: but 
every one shall be perfect, if he be as his master. 
And why seest thou the mote in thy brother's eye; 
but the beam that is in thy own eye thou considerest 
not? or how canst thou say to thy brother: Bro- 
ther, let me pull the mote out of thy eye, when 
thou thyself seest not the beam in thy own eye? 
Hypocrite, cast first the beam out of thine own eye, 
and then thou shalt see clearly to take out the mote 
from thy brother’s eye. Deo gratias. 


CORPUS CHRISTI. 
"| 85 Festival (instituted about the middle of the 
thirteenth century by a Bull of Urban IV.) was 
received and confirmed by the General Council of 
Vienne, anno 1311, in opposition Xo the errors af some, 
who then, as well as now, preferred & fhe SWMSARQUS 
to the belief of all Christians in the preceding ages. 


i 


ee Al ‘Atel, Alle 


Exultate D 


Passion ; | I us, we 
the: em 


thee, so 

sacred mysteries of thy body. and 

that in our souls we may always be sensible 

n x redemption thou. hast purchased. 
ho livest. - 





396 
drink of the chalice. 


CORPUS CHRISTI. 


For he that eateth and drinketh 


unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgment to him 
self, not discerning the body of the Lord. 

GRAD. Ps. cxliv.—The eyes of all hope in thee, 
O Lord, and thou givest them food in due sesso 
; V. Thou openest thy hand, and fillest with thy ble 


sing every living creature. 


My flesh is truly 
meat, and my blood is 
truly drink ; he that eat- 
eth my flesh, and driuk- 
eth my blood, remaineth 
in ne, and I in him. 


Alleluia. .Alleluia. 

V. Caro mea vere et 
cibus, ed sanguis mew 
vere est polus: qui sii 
ducat meam carnem, d 
bibit meum. sanguinem 8 


me manet, ef ego in eo. 


The PROSE. 


AUDA, Sion Salvato- 

rem; Lauda Ducem 
et Pastorem: In hymnis 
et canticis. 
. 2. Quantum potes, tan- 
tum aude; quia major 
omni laude: nec laudare 
sufficis. 

3. Laudis thema speci- 
alis: panis vivus et vita- 
lis: hodie proponitur. 

4. Quem in sacree men- 
sa coene ; turbee fratrum 
duodenee : datum non am- 
bigitur. 

Sit laus plena, sit 
sonora: sit jucunda, sit 
decora : mentis jubilatio. 

6. Dies enim solemnis 
. agitur, in qua mense 
. prima  recoltur hujus 
' Institutio. 


NU 7. In hsec mensa novi 
i 


Regis, novum Paschs 
novee legis, phase ves 
terminat. 
8. Vetustatem novi, 
umbram fugat venim, 
noctem lux elimmet. | 
9. Quod in cena Chr 
tus gessit, i 
hoc expressit in sui me 
moriam. . 
10. Docti sacris a 
tutis, em, vinum 
salutis consecramus bor 
tiam. 
11. Dogma datur Cla 
tianis, quod in care 
transit panis, et viP! 
in sanguinem. 
12. Quod non cspé 
quod non vides, animof 
firmat fides, preter I 
rum ordinem. 
13, Sub diversis ^ 


CORPUS 


is tantum, et 
latent res 


cibus, san- 
manet tamen 
us, sub utra- 


amente non 
n confractus, 
, integer ac- 


mus, sumunt 
tum isti, tan- 
rec sumptus 


mt boni, su- 
sorte tamen 
yo vel interi- 


est malis, vita 
peris sump- 
a sit dispar 


» demum sa- 
ne vacilles, 
oto, tantum 
mento, quan- 
itur. 

» John vi. 
the multitude 


CÉRISTI. 207 

20. Nulla rei fit scis- 
sura: signi tantum fit 
fractura : qua nec status, 
nec statura signati mi- 
nuitur. 

21. Ecce panisangelo- 
rum, factus cibus vie- 
torum: vere panis filio- 
rum, non mittendus ca- 
nibus. 

22. In figuris pressigna- 
tur, cum Isaac imimo- 
latur: Agnus Pasche de- 

utatur; datur Manna 

tribus, 

23. Bone pastor, pa- 
nis vere, Jesu nostri mi- 
Serere: tu nos pasce, nos 
tuere, tu nos bona fac 
videre in terra viven- 
tium. 

94. Tu qui cuncta 
Scis, et vales qui nos 
pascis hic mortales: tuos 
ibi commensales, cohwre- 
des et sodales, fac sanc- 
torum civium. Amen. 


56. 59.—AE that tme: 
of the Jews: My flesh is 


: and my blood is drink indeed. He 
Y flesh and drinketh my blood, abideth 
in him. As the living Father hath 

| J live by the Father; so he that eateth 


je also 8 


ame down from heaven. 

mt manna and are dead. 

id shall live forever, 
| 


all live by me. This is the 


Not as your 
lie that cat- 
CREDO 


398 ll. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


OFFERT. Lev. xii.—The priests of the Lor 
offer to God incense and loaves: and therefore shall 
they be holy to their God, and shall not defile his 
name. Alleluia. 

SECRET. —Mercifully grant thy Church, O Lord, 
we beseech thee, the gifts of Unity and Peace, which 
are mystically represented in these offerings Thro’. 
On this day, and during the Octave, ts said the Pre- 

face, *Quia per Incarnati, p. xxx. and the samt 

Mass, unless on a Double. 

COMM. 1 Cor. xi.—As often as you shall es 
this bread, and drink the chalice, you shall shew 
the death of the Lord until he come. Whosoever, 
therefore shall eat this bread, or drink the chaliceof 
the Lord’ unworthily, shall be guilty of the body asd 
of the blood of the Lord. Alleluia. 


P.COMM. Fac nos.—Grant us, O Lord, we be 
seech thee, the everlasting possession of thyself, as 
a pledge of which we have received thy body end 
blood. Who livest. 


II. SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 
INTROIT. Psalm xvii. 23 
HE Lord hath become CTUS est Dosis 
my protector, and protector meus, 
set me at large: he has edurit me in lahitubst: 
saved me, because helov- salvum me fecil, 
ed me. Ps. I will love voluit me. Ps. Duigen® 
thee,O Lord,my strength: Domine, virtus mea: Dr ' 
the Lord is my support, minus firmamentum sum 
my refuge, and my de- e£ ;e'ugium meum, dl- , 
liverer. V. Glory. berator meus. V. Get 
COLLECT. Sancti.—Grant us, O Lord, both § 
constant love and fear of thy holy name: since 
never withdrawest thy protection from those, who 
thou solidly groundest in thy love. Thro’. 
Here as toell as at the Secret, and P. Comm. is seh 
a Commem. of Corpus Christi, p. 395. 





IM. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 390 


(STLE. 1 John iii. 13. 18.—Dearly beloved : 
er not if the world hate you. We know that 
ve passed from death to life, because we love 
ethren. He that loveth not, abideth in death. 
oever hateth his brother, is a murderer. And 
sow that no murderer hath eternal life abidin 
self. In this we have known the charity of 
because he hath laid down his life for us: 
e ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.: 
at hath the substance of this world, and shall 
; brother in need, and shut up his bowels from 
how doth the charity of God abide in him? 
We children, let us not love in word, nor in 
» but in deed, and in truth. 


AD. Ps. cxix.—In my troubles I cried to the 
and he heard me. V. O Lord, deliver my 
om wicked lips and a deceitful tongue. lel. 


J Lord my God, in V. Domine Deus meus 
ave I put my trust: £n le speravi: salvum me 
ae from those that fac ex omnibus persequen- 
ute ine, and rescue fibus me, el libera me. 
Alleluia. Alleluia. 


3PEL. Luke xiv. 16. 24.—.A4l that time: Jesus 
"his parable to the Pharisees: A certain man 
a great supper, and invited many, and he 
is servant at the hour of supper to say to 
that were invited, that they should come, for 
| things are ready. And they began all at 
) make excuse. The first said to him: I have 
ta farm, and must needs go out and see it: I 
hee, hold me excused. And another said: I 
ought five yokes of oxen, and I go to try 
I pray thec, liold ine excused. And another 
I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot 
And tlie servant returning told these things 
lord. Then the master of the house being 
said to his servant: Go out quickly into the 
2 


/ 


400 Ill SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


xtreets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the 

poor, and the feeble, and the blind, and the lame— 

And the servant said: Lord it is done as thou hm 

commanded, and yet there is room. And the lod 

suid to the servant: Go out into the high ways sod 

hedges; and compel them to come in, that my hous 

may be filled. But I say unto you, that none ef 

those men that were invited, shall taste of my supper ; 
‘CREDO. 

OFFERT. Ps. vi—Turn again, O Lord, al 
rescue my soul: save ine for thy mercies sake, 

SECRET.—May this sacrifice offered to thy name 
purify us, O Lord: and make us every day advante 
towards a heavenly life. Thro’. 

COMM. Ps. xi.—I will sing to the Lord, whe 
hath bestowed good things on me: and I will saga 
psalm to the name of the Lord, the Most High. 

P. COMM. Sumptis.— Having received, O Lord, 
this sacred oblation, grant, that by frequenting ter 
mysteries we may hasten our salvation. 





III. SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 
INTROIT. Ps. xxiv. 


[99K thou upon me, ESPICE in m, d 
and have mercy on miserere met Dosm 
me, O Lord, for I ain a- quoniam unscus el 

lone and poor: see my sum ego: vide 
abjection and my labour, tem meam, et lsbwe 
andforgive meall mysins, meum, ef dimills e 
O my God. Ps. To thee, nia peccata mea, Dew 
O Lord, have I lifted up meus. Psa, Ad t De 
my soul: In thee, O my mine, levavi animam 9t 
God, I place my trust: am: Deus meus, ind 
let me not be ashamed. confido, non 

V. Glory. V. Gloria. 


COLLECT.  Proteclor.—O God, the protect 


b 


HL SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 401 


who hope in thee, without whose aid no- 
strong, nothing holy: increase thy mercy 
us; that under thy direction and conduct, 
n pass through the blessings of this life, as 
e those which are eternal. Thro’. 

the TI. Collect, &c. see the ORDINARY, p. xx. 
"LE. 1 Peter v. 6. 11.—Dearly beloved: 
humbled under the mighty hand of God, 
may exalt you in the time of visitation. 
il your care upon him, for he hath care of 
sober and watch : because your adversary 
, 88 a roaring lion, goeth about, seeking 
; may devour: whom resist ye, strong in 
owing that the same affliction befalls your 
who are in the world. ‘But the God of all 
ho hath called us into his eternal glory 
Jesus, after you have suffered a little, will 
erfect you, and confirm aud establish you. 
be glory and empire for ever and ever. 


. Ps. liv.—Cast thy care upon the Lord: 
tall sustain thee. 7. When 1 cried out to 
, he heard iny voice against those who were 
pon me. Alleluia, Alleluia. 
lisajust Judge, — V. Deus juder justus 
nd patient: is fortis et patiens : numquid 
y every day? irascitur per singulos dies? 
Alleluia. 
EL. Luke xv. 1. 10——4t that time: 
icans and sinners drew near uuto him to 
And the Pharisees and Scribes murmur- 
r: This man receiveth sinners and eateth 
m. And he spoke to them this parable, 
What man of you that hath a hundred 
od if he shall lose one of them, doth he 
the ninety-nine in the desart, and go after 
h was lost until he find it? And when he 
id it, lay it upon his shoulders rejoicing: 
L13 


402 IV. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECUST. 


and coming home call together his friends and neigh- 
hours, saying to them: Rejoice with ine, becaum 
I have found my shcep that was lost? I say to yea, 
that even so there shall be joy in heaven upon em 
sinner that doth penance, more than upon nimety- 
nine just who need not penance. Or what wome 
having ten groats: if she lose one groat, doth pet 
light a candle, and sweep the house, and seck dil- 
gently until she find it? * And when she hath foe 
it, call together her friends and neighbours, saying: 
Rejoice with me, because I have found.the 
which I had lost? So I say to you, there shell be 
joy before the angels of God upon one sinner doing 
penance. Crepo. 

OFFERT. Ps. ix.—Let them trust in thee, 0 
Lord, who know thy name: for thou hast not fe 
saken them that seek thee. Sing ye to the Lord whe 
dwelleth in Sion: for that be hath not forgottea the 
prayer of the poor. 

SECRET.—Look down, O Lord, on the offering 
of thy suppliant Church ; and grant that thy fii 
ful may always worthily partake thereof in order 
to their salvation. Thro’, 

MM. Luke xv.—I say to you: Theres 
among the angels of God over one sinner dog 
penance. . 

P. COMM. Sancta.—May thy sacred mystenes 
O Lord, which we have received, give us life: as 
cleansing us from our sins, make us worthy of thy 
eternal mercy. Thro’. 


IV. SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 
INTROÍT. Ps. xxvi. . 
"HE Lord is my light OMINUS illuminet 
and my salvation, mea et salus wit, 
whom she 1 fear? Tne pie Salo t Doni 
Lord is the protector ot — defensor REAL 
my life, of whom shall V trepidiabo’? Qua crea 





"'WDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 403 


7 enemies me intmect met, ipsi infir 
me have mati sunt el ceciderunt. 
n weaken- Ps. Si consisiant adver- 
llen. sum me castra; non time- 
s incamp Obit cor meum. 

together — V. Gloria. 
»y heart 

. Glory. . 
—Grant, we beseech thee,O Lo 
with regard to us, may be govern 
providence, and thy Church pay her 
»e in tranquillity. ‘Thro’. 

Rom. vii.'18. 23——Brethren: 1 
e sufferings of this time are not 
ympared with the glory to come, that 
dtous. For the expectation of the 
h for the revelation of thg sons of 
creature was made subject to vanity, 
ut by reason of him that made it 
i6: Because the creature also itself 
ed froin the servitude of corruption, 
of the glory of the children of God. 
1at every creature groaneth, and tra- 
even till now. And not only it, but 
vho have the first fruits of the spirit, 
ves groan within ourselves, waiting 
1 of the sons of God, the redemption 
Christ Jesus our Lord. 

Ixxviii.—Be merciful, O Lord, to our 
1e Gentiles may never say: Where 
od? V. Help us, O Lord, our Sa- 
the honour of thy name deliver us, 
wa, Alleluia. 
ho sittest V. Ps. ix. Deus qua 
ind judg- sedes super thronum et 
refuge to judicas «quitalem, esto 
‘ess. .Ji- refugium pauperum , Ww 
tribulatione. A\\eluis. 
uke v. 1. 11,—At thot time: Vr 


404 1V, SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST, 
came to that when the multi preased 

him to hear the word of God, he stood the bia 
of Genesareth. And he saw two ships ing by the 
lake: but the fishermen were gone out of them and 
were washing their nets. An ing up into one 
of the ships that was Simon's, esired bim # 
draw back a little from the land. And sitting he 
taught the multitudes out of the ship. Now whea 
he had ceased to speak, he said to Simon: Launch 
out into the deep, and let down your nets for 4 
draught. And Simon, an ing, said to him: Mas- 
ter, we have laboured all the night, and have take - 
nothing: but at thy word I will let down then . 
And when they had done this, they enclosed a 
great multitude of fishes and their net broke. 

they beckoned to their partners that were in the 
other ship, that they should come and help thee. 
And they canie and filled both the ships, so the 
they were almost sinking. Which when Simos 
Peter saw, he fell down at Jesus's knees, seying: 
Depart from me, for I ama sinful man, O 

For he was wholly astonished, and all that were 
with him, at the draught of the fishes which they 
had taken. And so were also James and John the 
sons of Zebedee, who were Simon’s partners, And 
Jesus saith to Simon: Fear not: from henceforth 
thou shalt catch men. And having brought ther 
ships to land, leaving all things they followed him, 
CrEDo. , 

OFFERT. Ps. xii—Enlighten my eyes, thet ] 
may never sleep in death; lest the enemy should 
ever say : I have prevailed over him. 

SECRET.—Receive our offerings, we beseech 
thee, O Lord, and be appeased thereby: and mere 
fully compel our wills to yield to thee, even whea 
they rebel. Thro’. 

OMM. Ps. xvi—The Lord Vo wy eosxksto wA 
refuge, my deliverer, my God, wy wwex- 


Y. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 405 


"OMM. JMysleria.—May the mysteries we 
ceived, both purify and defend us, O Lord, 
fficacy of what they contain. Thro’. 


V. SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 
INTROIT. Psalm xxvi. 
R, O Lord, my EX? UDI, Domine, 
ice, with which I .&.4 vocem meam, qua ela- 
ted to thee: be  mavi ad te: adjulor meus 
7 helper; forsake esto: me derehnquas me, 
do not thou de- neque despicias me, Deus, 
& O God, my Sa-  Salularis meus. Ps. Do- 
Ps. The Lord is minus illuminatio et 
it and my salva- salus mea; quem ti 3 
hom shall I fear? — V. Gloria. 
ory. 
LECT. Deus qui.—O God, who hast pre- 
ivisible good things for those that love thee: 
rth into our hearts an affectionate love for 
hat loving thee in all things, and above all 
we may come to the enjoyment of thy pro- 
which are above whatever we can desire. 


ITLE. 1 Peter iii. 8. 15.—Dearly beloved : 
ll of one mind, having compassion one of 
, being lovers of the brotherhood, merciful, 
humble: not rendering evil for evil, or rail- 
railing, but contrariwise blessing: for unto 
are called, that you may inherit a blessing. 
» that will love life, and see good days, let 
‘ain his tongue from evil, and his lips that 
‘ak no guile. Let him decline from evil and 
: let him seek after peace, and pursue it: 
the eves of the Lord are upon the just, and 
unto their prayers: but the countenance of 
l against them that do evil things.” And who 
it can hurt you, if you be jealous of good? 


me 9 - 


so you suff^r any thing for justice sake, 


406 V. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


blessed are ye. And be not afraid of their fear, and 
be not troubled. But sanctify the Lord Chris à 
your hearts, 

GRAD. Ps. lxxxv.—Look down, O God, ow 
protector: look down upon thy servants. 7.0 

rd God of hosts, hear the prayers of thy servants. 
Alleluia, Alleluia. 

V.O Lord,inthy might — V. Ps. xx. Domine à 
shall the king rejoice: virtue tua letabitur rez: 


and in thy salvation shall e£ . salutare tem 
he exult exceedingly. .4l- it vehementer. Al 
leluia. leluia. 


GOSPEL. Matt. v. 20. 24.——J that tim: 
Jesus said to his disciples : Unless your justice ex 
ceed that of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall not 
enter into the kingdom of heaven. You have lied 
that it was said to them of old: Thou shalt not kill 
And whosoever shal] kill, shall-be in danger of the 
judgment. But I say to you, that whosoever 3 
angry with his brother, shall be in danger of the 
judgment, And whosoever shall say to his brother, 
Raca, shall be in danger of the council. And who- 
soever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danzer of 
hell fire. Therefore, if thou bring thy gift to'the 
altar, and there shalt remember that thy brother bath 
any thing against thee; leave there thy gift before 
the altar, and go first to be reconciled to thy brother: 
and then come and offer thy gift. Crepo. 

OFFERT. Ps. xv.—I will bless the Lord who 
hath given us understanding. 

SECRET.—Be appeased, O Lord, by our humble 
prayers, and mercifully receive these offerings 
servants: that what each hath offered to the honour 
of thy name, tnay avail to the salvation of all. 

COMM. Ps. vi.—One thing heave V asked of the 


Lord. and will continue to eek. har X we 
in the house of the Lord all the des eX os ies 


| 


| 


VL-SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 
Coalesti.—Grant, O Lord, we be- 


P.-COMM. Quos 


407 


seech thee: that we, whom thou hast fed with this 

leavenly sacrifice, may be cleansed from our hidden 

e and delivered from the snares of our enemies, 
9 





VI. SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 


INTROIT. 


HE Lord is the 
strength of his peo- 
; the Protector of the 
tion of his anointed. 


Beve, O Lord, thy peo- 


Ps. xxvii. 

Domx US fortitudo 
plebis sue ; et Pro- 

tector salutarium Christi 

surest. Salvum fac po- 


pulum tuum Domine, et 
enedic hereditati tua, et 
rege eos usque wn seculum. 
Ps. Ad te Domine, cla- 
mabo, Deus meus ne si- 
leas a me: ne quando ta- 
ceas a. me, et assimilabor 
let I become like those descendentibus in lacum. 
who descend into the pit. — V. Gloria. 


F. Glory. 

COLLECT. Deus virtutum.—O God of all power, 
to whom entirely belongeth whatever is best: im- 
plant in our hearts the love of thy name, and grant 
Us an increase of religion that thou mayest improve 
in us what is good, and preserve what thou thus 

est tr the practice of piety. Thro’. 
PISTLE. Rom. vi. 3.—Brethren: All we who 
are beptized in Christ Jesus, are baptized in his death. 
For we are buried together with him by baptism 
unto death : that as Christ is risen from the dead by 
the glory of the Father so we also may walk in 
wewness of life. For if we have been planted to- 
in the likeness of his death, we shall also be 
i» the likeness of his resurrection. Knowing this, 
that our old man is crucified with him, that the 
lody of sin may be destroyed, and that we wey 


ple, and bless thy inheri- 
fance, and govern them 
for ever. Ps. To thee, 
O Lord, will I cry out. 
O my God, be not silent: 
refuse not to answer me, 


408 vl. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


serve sin no longer. For he that is dead is justified 
from sin. Now if we be dead with Christ, we be 
lieve that we shall live also together with Chrst 
Knowing that Christ, rising again from the deed, 
dieth now no more, death shall no more have do 
miuion over him. For in that he died to sin, he 
died once: but in that he liveth, he liveth unto 
God. So do you also reckon yourselves to be dead 
indeed to sin, but alive to God in Christ Jesus om 
rd 


GRAD. Ps. lxxxix.—Turn to us a little, O Lord, 
and be appeased with thy servants. V. Lord, thos 
hast been our refuge froin generation to generation 
Allelura, Alleluia. 


V.Ps.Inthee, O Lord, — V. Ps. xxx.—Inte, De 
have I placed my trust, mine, speravi, non confe 
let me never be put to dar in eternum : in juste 
shame: save me by thy tia tua libera me ed ef 
justice, and rescue me: me: inclina ad me aure 
bend thine ear to me: (uam: accelera wl eriptt 
make haste to save me. me. Alleluia. 
Alleluca. 

GOSPEL. Mark viii. 1. 9——At that fimo 
When there was a great multitude with Jesus, sad 
had: nothing to eat: calling his disciples together, he 
saith to them: I have compassion on the mult 
for behold they have now been with me three days 
and have nothing to eat: and if 1 send them awy 
fasting to their own home, they will faint in 
way: for some of them came afar off. And hisd® 
ciples answered him: From whence can any o 
fill them here with bread in the wilderness? Asi 
he asked them: How many loaves have ye? Who 
said: Seven. And he commanded the » 
sit down on the ground: and taking the sew 
loaves, giving thanks he broke, and gave to his d® 
ciples for to set before them, and they eat them be 
fore the people. And they had a few Vie Subs; eh 


VII. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 409 


ed them, and commanded them to be set 
bem. And they did eat and were filled, 
y took up that which was left of the frag- 
even baskets, And they that had eaten 
out four thousand : and he sent them away. 


SRT. Ps. xvi.—Perfect thou my goings in 
i& that my footsteps be not moved: Incline 
unto me and hear my words: Shew forth 
derful mercies ; thou who savest them that 
hee, O Lord. 

.ET.—Be appeased, O Lord, by our hum- 
ers, and mercifully receive the offerings of 
le: and that the vows and prayers of none 
n vain, grant we may effectually obtain what 

ro’. 


M. Ps. xxvi.—I will go up and sacrifice in 
rnacle, a victim of praise: I will sing and 
psalm to the Lord. « 

IMM. Replett.—We are filled, O Lord, with 
: grant, therefore, we beseech thee, that we 
tleansed by their efficacy, and strengthened 
aid. Thro’. 


II. SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 

INTROIT. Ps. xlvi. 
' your hands all 0" ES Gentes plau- 
Gentiles: Shout dile manibus : jubr- 
d with the voice late Deo in voce erulta- 
For the Lord is ttonis. Ps. Quoniam Do- 
th, he is terrible: minus excelsus, terribilis : 
great King over Rex magnus super omnem 
arth. P. Glory. — terram. V. Gloria. 
LECT. Deus cujus.—O God, whose provi- 
s never deceived in wliat it appointeth : we 
beseech thee to remove whntever may be 
ial to us: and grant us whatever may be to 
ntage of our souls. Thro’. . 

Mm 


410 VII. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


EPISTLE. Rom, vi. 19.—Brethren: 1 speaks 
human thing, because of the infirmity of your flesh: 
for as you have yielded your metnbers to serve un- 
cleanness and iniquity unto iniquity ; so now yield 
your members to serve justice, unto ificati 
For when you were the servants of sin, you were free ! 
from justice. What fruit therefore had youthena in 
those things of which you are now ashamed? Fer 
the end of them is death. But now being made free 
from sin, and become servants to God, you have 

our fruit unto sanctification, and the end life ever- 

ing. For the wages of sin is death. But the 
ace of God, life everlasting in Christ Jesus ow 
ord. 

GRAD. Ps. xxxiii—Come, children, hearken te 
me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord. V. Come 
ye to him, and be enlightened: and your faces shall 
not be confounded. eluia, Allelura. 


V. Clap your handsell — V. Omnes Gentes 
ye Gentiles: shout unto dite manibus: j 
God with the voice of joy. Deo in voce exultations. 
Alleluia. Alleluia. 

GOSPEL. Matt. vii. 15. 21.—At that time: 
Jesus said to his disciples: Beware of false prophet, 
who come to you in the clothing of sheep, but ir- 
wardly they are ravening wolves. By their fruits 
you shall know them. Do men gather grapes d 
thorns, or figs of thistles ? Even so every good tree 
bringeth forth good fruit, and the evil tree bringeth 
forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evi 
fruit, neither can an evil tree bring forth good frui. 
Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, shall 
be cut down, and shall be cast into the fire. Where- 
fore by their fruits you shall know them. Not every 
one that saith, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the 
kingdom of heaven. but he that doth the will of my 
Father who is in heaven, he shall emer into Se Va, | 
dom of heaven. Cwx»o. 






VIII. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 411 


-OFFERT. Dan. iii.—As in holocausts of rams 
ind bullocks, and as in thousands of fat sheep, so let 
wur sacrifice be made in thy sight this day, that it 
way please thee: for there is no confusion to them 
hat trust in thee, Ó Lord. 

SECRET.—O God, who in one perfect sacrifice 
wat united all the various sacrifices of the law, ac- 
sept from thy devout servants this sacrifice, and 

ify it by the like blessing as thou didst the 
of Abel: that what each hath offered to 
by divine Majesty, may avail to the salvation of all. 


COMM. Ps. xxx.—Bow down thy ear to me: 
make haste to deliver me. 

P. COMM. Tua nos.—Grant, O Lord, that the 
healing efficacy of these thy mysteries may, through 
thy mercy, free us from all our sins, aud bring us to 
the practice of what is right. Thro’. 


VIII. SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 
INTROIT.* = Ps. xlvii. 


E have received thy 
mercy, O God, in 
the midst of thy temple: 
According to thy name, 
w also is thy praise unto 
the ends of the earth : thy 
pghe hand is full of jus- 
Ps. Great is the 
Lor and exceedingly to 
be praised ; in the city o 
our God, on his holy 
mountain. V. Glory. 


USCEPIMUS Deus 
misericordiam. tuam, 
an medio lempli tui: se- 
cundum nomen tuum, sia 
et laus tua in fines terre: 
Justitia plena est dextera 
tua. Ps. Magnus Do- 
minus et laudabilis nimis: 
an civitate Det nostri, in 
monte sanclo ejus. 
V. Gloria 


COLLECT.  Largire nobis.—Grant us, O Lord, 
we beseech thee, the spirit of thinking and doing 
what is right, that we, who cannot even subsist with- 
ont thee, may live according to thee. Thro’. 

* Introit for Candlemas-Day also. 


M m2 


412 VIII. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


EPISTLE. Rom. viii. 12.—Brethren: We we 
debtors, not to the flesh, to live according to the 
flesh. For if you live according to the flesh, you 
ahall die: but if by the spirit you mortify the deeds 
of the flesh, you shall live. For whosoever are led 
by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. Fer 
vou have not received the spirit of bondage agsi 
in fear: but you have received the spirit of oop 
tion of sons, whereby we cry: A (Father) 
For the Spirit himself giveth testimony to our spirit, 
that we are the sons of God. And if sons, heirs also: 
heirs indeed of God, and joint heirs with Christ. 

GRAD. Ps. xxx.—Be thou unto me a God, a 
protector, and a place of refuge to save me,  F. 0. 
God, on thee have I relied ; let me never, O Lord, be 
put to shame. Alleluia, Alleluia. 

V. Great is the Lord, — V. Magnus Dominu, 
and exceedingly to be et laudabihs: valde, is ait 
praised in the city of our tate Dei nostri, in meme 
God, on his holy moun- sanclo cjus. 
tain. Alleluia. Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. Luke xvi. 1.9.—At that time: Jem 
spoke to his disciples this parable: There wase cet 
‘tain rich man who had a steward: and the sam 
was accused unto him, that he had wasted bs 
. goods. And he called him, and said to him: How 

is it that I hear this of thee? give an account of ty 
stewardship: for now thou canst be steward » 
longer. And the steward said within himself: Wh 
shall I do, because my lord taketh away from me 
the stewardship? To dig I am not able; to beg! 
am ashamed. I know what I will do, that whea I 
shall be removed from the stewardship, they msy 
receive me into their houses. "Therefore calling * 
gether every one of his Lord's debtors he said to ue 
first: How much dost thou owe my lord? But be 
said: A hundred barrels of ot. And be said to bit: 


. JX. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 413 


thy bill and sit down quickly, and write fifty ? 
he said to another: And how much dost thou 
Who said: A hundred quarters of wheat. 
id to him take thy bill, and write eighty. And 
rd commended the unjust steward, forasmuch 
had done wisely : for the children of this world 
ser in their generation, than the children of 
And I say to you: Make unto you friends of 
ammon of iniquity, that when you shall fail, 
may receive you into everlasting dwellings. 
" 
FERT. P5. xvii.—Thou wilt save the humble 
» O Lord: and thou wilt humble the eyes of 
oud, for who is God besides thee, O Lord. 


CRET.—Receive, we beseech thee, O Lord, 

ferings we bring, which are the gifts of thine 

younty: that these most holy mysteries may, 

| power of thy grace, make our conduct in this 

L^ and bring us to those joys that will never 
bro’. 


MM. Ps. xxxiii—Taste, and see, how sweet 
Lord! blessed is the man who putteth his 

n him. 

OMM. Si nobis.—May this heavenly mys- 

J Lord, renew us both in soul and body: that 

ay find in ourselves the effects of what we 

ate. Thro’. 


IX. SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 
INTROIT. Ps. liii. 


HOLD God is my Ecce Deus adjuvat 
elper, and the Lord me : et Dominus sus- 
support of iny soul: ceptor est anime. med: 
out the evils upon averte mala inimicis mets, 
iemies,and cut them — et n verilate tua disperde 
. thy truth, O Lord, dlos protector meus, Do- 
vector. maine. 
Mm3 


Ald rx. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


Ps. Save me,O God, Ps. Deus, in nomine 
hy thy name: and deliver tuo salvum me fac: dia 
me in thy strength. virtute tua libera me. 

V. Glory. V. Gloria. 

COLLECT. Pateant.——May the ears of thy 
mercy, O Lord, be open to the prayers of thy sup- 
pliants : and, that they may succeed in their desires 
make them ask those things that are agreeable to 
thee. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. 1 Cor. x. 6. 13.—Brelhren: Let w 
not covet evil things, as they also coveted. Neither 
become ye idolaters, as some of them: as it is 
written : *'The people sat down to eat and drink, 
and rose up to play." Neither let us commit fornk- 
cation, as some of them committed fornication, asd 
there fell in one day three-and-twenty thousand. 
Neither let us tempt Christ: as some of them 
tempted, and perished by the serpente, Neither do 
you murmur: as some of them murmured, and were 
destroyed by the destroyer. Now all these things 
happened to them in figure: and they are written 
for our correction, upon whom the ends of the 
world are come. Wherefore let him that thinketh 
himself to stand, take heed lest he fall Let m 
temptation take hold on you but such as is liumas. 
And God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be 
tempted above that which you are able: hut will 
make also with temptation issue, that you may be 
able to bear it. 

GRAD. Ps. li.—O Lord, our Lord, how wonder- 
ful is thy name over the whole earth! V. For thy 
majesty is above the heavens. Alleluia, Alleluia. 

Ps. Rescue me, Omy Ps. Eripe me de n 
God, from my enemies: micis mets, Deus meus: 
and from those: thet rise — et ab insurgentibus in 90 
up against me,deliver me. Vera we. Nw. 
Allelwia. | 


X. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 415. 


iPEL. Lake xix. 41 47. — At that time: 
he drew near Jerusalem, seeing the city, he 
rer it, saying: If thou also hadst known, and 
this thy day, the things that are to thy 
but now they are hidden from thy eyes. 
' days shall come uponthee : and thy enemies 
ist a trench about thee, and compass thee 
and straiten thee on every_side, and beat 
t to the ground, and thy children who are in 
nd they shall not leave in thee a stone upon 
: because thou hast not known the time of 
tation. And entering into the temple, he be- 
*ast out them that sold therein, and them that 
Saying to them: It is written: “ My house 
ouse of prayer: but you have made it a den 
res.” And he was teaching daily in the tem- 
'REDO. 
ERT. Ps. xviii.—The Justices of the Lord 
ht, rejoicing hearts: and his precepts are 
' than honey and the honey-comb ; and there- 
th thy servant observe them. ' 
RE'T.—Grant us, O Lord, we beseech thee, 
itly and worthily to celebrate these mysteries : 
nany times as this cominemorative sacrifice is 
ted, so often is the work of our redemption 
red. Thro’. 
IM. John vi.—He that eateth my flesh, and 
n my blood, abideth in me, and I in him, saith 


OMM. Tui nobis.—May the participation of 
, sacrament, O Lord, we beseech thce, both 
us, and unite us. Thro’. 


X. SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 
INTROIT. Js. xlviii. Ps. liv. 


EN I cried out, UM clamarem ad 
the Lord heard Dominum, exaudiwr 


416 X. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


‘my complaint against vocem meam, ab kis q& 
those that were coming appropinquani mn: d 
against ne: and he that humihavit eos, qui el 
was before all ages, and anie secula, et monde 
will be for ever, humbled eternum : jacta cogiüaiua 
them: cast thy care on. (uum in Donino, ei gs 
the Lord, and he will feed te enutried. 
" thee. Ps. Heur, O God, Ps. Exraudi, Deus, er 
my prayer, and despise ionem meam, eb ne d" 
not my petition: look  pereris deprecationem ww 
down upon me, and hear am: intende mihi, el a 
me. P. Glory. . audi me. V. Gloria. 
COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who chiely : 
mauifestest thy Almighty power in pardoning : 
shewing mercy, increase thy goodness to ws: 
that having recourse to thy promises, we may be 
partakers of thy heavenly blessing. Thro’. 


EPISTLE. 1 Cor. xii. 2. 11.—Brethren: You 
know that, when you were heathens, you went t$ 
dumb idols, according as you were led. Whereiee 
I give you to understand, that no man, speaking 8 
the spirit of God, saith anathema to Jesus. Andi 
man can say the Lord Jesus, but by the Holy Ghet 
Now there are diversities of graces, but the sum 
spirit. And there are diversities of ministries, bi 
the same Lord. And there are diversities of oper 
tions, but the same God who worketh all in sk 
And the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every 
man unto profit. To one indeed, by the Spirit, 8 
given the word of wisdom: and to another, t 
word of knowledge, according to the same spi: 
to another, faith in the same spirit: to another, the 
grace of healing in one spirit: to another, the wor 
ing of miracles: to another, prophecy: to a 
the discerning of spirits: to another, divers kinds of 
tongues: to another, interpretation of 8 
But in all these things one and dhe sare egicit 
eth, dividing to every one according ta he wih. 





X. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 417 


GRAD. Ps. xvi.—Guard me, O Lord, as the apple 
of thine eye: and protect me under the shadow of 
thy wings. V. Let my cause be tried in thy pre- 
gence: let my eyes see justice done. Alleluia. 

V. A hymn is due to V. Te decet. hymnus, 
thee, O d, in Sion: - Deus, in Sion: et tin 
and in Jerusalein shall a. reddgtur votum in Jerusa- 
vow be paid tothec. l- lem. Allcluia. 


GOSPEL. Luke xviii. 9. 14.—. that time: 
Jesus spake this parable to some who trusted in 
lves as just, and despised others. Two men 
went up into the temple to pray: the one was a 
Pharisee, and the other a Publican. 'The Pharisee 
standing, prayed thus with himself: O God, I give 
thee thanks that I am not as tho rest of men, extor- 
tioners, unjust, adulterers, as also is this publican. 
I fast twice in the week: I give tithes of all that I 
possess. And the publican standing afar off would 
not s0 much as lift up his eyes towards heaven : but 
struck his breast, saying: O God be merciful to me 
asinner. I say to you, this man went down to his 
house justified rather than the other, because 
every onc that exalteth himself, shall be humbled ; 
aad he that humbleth himself, shall be exalted. 
CaEpo. ! 

OFFERT. Ps. xxiv.—To thee, O Lord, have I 
taised up my soul: my God, I put my trust in thee, 
let me not be put to shame: neither let my enemies 
scoff at me: for none that rely on thee, shall ever be 
confounded. 

SECRET.—May the sacrifice, we offer, O Lord, 
be presented before thee : which thou hast appointed 
to be offered in honour of thy name; and at the 
same time bec^nie a remedy to us. Thro’. 

COMM. Ps. l.—Thou wilt accept a sacrifice of 


righteousnoss, oblations, and whole burnt-offermes 
en thy altar, O Lord. 


418 XI. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


P. COMM. Quesumus.—We beseech thee, 0 
Lord our God, that in thy mercy thou wouldst nevet 
deprive those of thy help, whom thou conti 
strengthenest by these divine mysteries. Thro’. 


XI. SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 
; INTROIT. Ps. xvii. 


(392 in his sanctuary : EUS in loco sence 

God, who maketh - suo: Deus paw 
brethren abide together habitare facil unanunes 
in concord: he will give in domo: ipse dalit or. 
might and strength to tufemet fortitudinem pleh 
hispeople. Ps.Let God sue. 
arise, and his enemies Ps. Ers Deus, d 
shall be dispersed; and  dissipenfur inimici gus: 
let those that hate him, ef fugiant qui oderuat tun 
flee before his face. a face ejus. 

V. Glory. . Gloria. 


COLLECT. Onmnipotens.—O Almighty and eter- 
nal God, who, in the abundance of thy goodnem, 
exceedest both the merits and requests of thy sup- 
pliants; pour forth thy mercy upon us: an 
pardon what our consciences dreadetb, and 
such blessings as we dare not presume to ask. . 

EPISTLE. 1 Cor. xv. 1. 10. Brethren: 1 
make kuown unto you the gospel which I preached 
to you, which also you have received, and wherem 
you stand, by which also you are saved: if you hold 
fast after what manner I preached unto you, unless 
you have believed in vain. For I delivered unto you 
first of all, which I also received : how that Chris 
died for our sins according to the scriptures: u 
that he was buried, and that he rose again the 
day according to the scriptures: and that he was 
seen by Cephas; and after that by the eleven. Thea 
was he seen by more thau five hundred brethren s 
once ; of whom many remain wor Vhs present, 











ee ye 


XI SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 419 


‘tome are fallen asleep. After that he was seen by 
James, then by all the apostles: and las: of all, he 
was seen also by me, as by one born out of due 
time. For I am the least of the apostles, who am 
aec worthy to be called an apostle, because I per- 
seuted the Church of God. But by the grace of 
God 1 am what I am; and his grace in me hath not 
been void. 

GRAD. Ps. xxvii—My heart trusted in God, and 
,| was relieved: and my body hath recovered its 

h: and 1 will praise him with my whole heart. 
P. To thec, O Lord, have I cried out: be not silent, 
0 my God, nor depart from me. Alleluia. 

VW. Ps. Exult in God V. Ps. xix. — Exultate 
our hope: joyfully sing Deo adjutori nostro, jubi- 
to the God of Jacob: late Deo Jacob: sumite 
sing a hymn of joy upon psalmum jucundum cum 
the harp. Alleluia. chara. Alleluia. 

GOSPEL. Mark vii. 13. 37.—At that time: 
Jesus going out of the coast of Tyre, he came by 
Sidon to the sea of Galilee through the midst of the 
eeast of Decapolis. And they bring to him one 
deaf and dumb: and they besought him that he 
would lay his hand upon him. And taking him from 
the multitude apart, he put his fingers into his ears, 
and spitting, he touched his tongue; and looking up 
to heaven, he groaned and said to him:  Ephpheta, 
that is, Be opened. And immediately his ears were 
opened, and the string of his tongue was loosed, 
and he spoke right. And he charged them that 
they should tell no man. But the more he charged 
them so much the more a great deal did they pub- 
lish it. And so much the more did they wonder, 
saying: He hath done all things well; he hath 
made both the deaf to hear and the dumb to speak. 
Caxpo. 

OFFERT. Ps. xxix.—I will extol thee, O Lora, 


420 XII. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


because thou hast upholden me, and hast not grate 
fied the desire of my enemies against me: Lord, 1 
cried out to thee, and thou didst hear me. 

SECRET.—Look down, O Lord, we beseech thee, 
on our homage: that the offerings we make may be 
acceptable to thee, and a help to our weakness 
Thro’. 

COMM. Prov. iiii—Honour the Lord, out of 
substance, and with the first fruits of thy crops: 
thy barns shall be filled abundantly, and thy wine 
presses shall overflow. 


P. COMM. Sentiamus.—May we receive, by the 


"— A 
1 
PW pee al 


participation of these thy mysteries, we bescech thee, ' 


O Lord, help in body and mind: that in tbe salve 
tion of both we may enjoy the full effect of this bes- 
venly remedy. Thro’. 


XII. SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 
INTROIT. Ps. xix. 
(WOME to my assist- DES in adjutertes 
ance, O God: O Lord, meum intende: De 
make haste to help me: mine, ad adjuvandum m 
lt my enemies whoscek — festina: confundantur d 
my soul, be put toshame  revereantur inimici 98 
und confusion. qui querunt  animm 
meam. 

Ps. Let them be put Ps. .vertantur reirer- 
to flight and shame, who sum ef erubescant, q& 
conceive evil against me. cogitant mihi mala. 

V. Glory. . Gloria. 

COLLECT. Omnipotens.—O Almighty and mer 
ciful God, from whose gift it proceedeth that ty 
people worthily serve thee; grant we beseech: thes, 
that we may run on, without stumbling, to the 
taining the effects of thy promises. Thro’. 

EPISTLE, 2 Cor. iii. 4.9.— Brethren: We have 
confidence through Christ towards God. we dt 





- Xil. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 49] 


wwe are sufficient to think uny thing of ourselves as of 
ourselves : but our sufficiency is from God. Who 
also hath made us fit ministers of the New Testa- 
it, not in the letter but in the spirit. For the 
Wetter killeth: but the spirit quickeneth. Now if the 
aminimration of death, engraven with letters upon 
stones, was glorious, so that the children of Israel 
could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses, for the 
Bor of his countenance, which is made void : how 
not the ministration of the Spirit be rather in 
glory? For if the ministration of condemnation be 
,nfuch more the ministration of justice abound- 

eth m glory. 

GRAD. Ps. xxxiii.—I will bless the Lord at all 
times: his praise shall be always in my mouth. 
¥. In the Lord shall my soul be praised: let the 
meek hear and rejoice. Alleluia, Alleluia. 

V. O Lord, the God of V. Domine, Deus sa- 

salvation. I have lutts mee: in die cla- 
enedin the day andinthe mavit, et nocle coram te. 
night before thee. Allel. Alleluia. 

GOSPEL. Luke x. 23. 37.—Al that time: 
Jesus said to his disciples: Blessed ure the eyes that 
wethe things which you see. For l1 say to you, 
thet many prophets and kings have desired to see 
the things that you see, and have not seen them; 
ax to hear the things that you hear, and have not 
heard them. And behold a certain lawyer stood up, 
tempting him: and saying: Master, what must I do 
to possess eternal life? But he said to him: What 
iB written in the law? how readest thou? He an- 
ewering said: “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God 
with thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul, an. 
With all thy strength, and with sl] thy mind: and 
HY neighbour as thyself.” And he said to him: 

u hast answered right: this do and thou shalt 
fve. But he willing to justify himself, said to Jesus. 
4nd who is my neighbour? And Jesus answering, 


Nn 


499 XII. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


said: A certain man went down from Jerml 
to Jericho, and fell among robbers, who had strip 
him, and having wounded him went away len 
him half dead. And it chanced that a certain pt 
went down the same way: and seeing him, pa 
by. In like manuer also a Levite, when he was! 
the place, and saw him, passed by. But a ca 
Gamaritan being on ‘his journey, came near | 
and seeing him, was moved with compassion. 
going up to him, bound up his wounds, pourin 
oil and wine: and setting him upon his own | 
brought him to an inn, and took care of him. 
the next day he took out two pieces, and gavet 
host, and said: Take care of him; and whats 
thou shalt spend over and above, I at my retum 
repay thee. Which of these three in thy opi 
was neighbour to him that fell among robbers: 
he said: He that shewed mercy to him. And. 
said to him: Go, and do thou in like ma 
CREDO. 

OFFERT.  Ezod. xxxii.—Moses prayed # 
presence of the Lord his God, and said; Wi 

rd, art thou angry at thy e: L 
of thy soul: remember A raha, Teane, and P 
to whom thou didst swear to give a land fo 
with milk and honey : and the Lord was appe 
and did not do the mischief he had threatene 
people. 

SECRET.—Mercifully look down, O Lord,o 
offerings we lay. on thy holy altar ; that they m 
to the honour of thy name, by obtaining pardo 
us. Thro’. 

COMM. Ps. ci--The earth, O Lord, sh 
filled with the fruit of thy works: that thou m 
bring forth bread from the earth, and that wine 
cheer the heart of man: that he may make tht 
cheerful with oil, and thet bread may strep, 
man's heart. 


XITI. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


423 


P. COMM. Vivificet.—May the sacred participa- 
tion of these thy mysteries, O Lord, we beseech thee, 


@ive us life 
@ection. Thro’. 


; and be to us both an expiation and pro- 





XIII. SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 


INTROIT. 

AVE regard to th 
covenant, O Lo 

end abandon not the 


thee. Ps. Why, O God, 
best thou cast us off unto 
the’ end: why is thy 


Psalm xxiii. 
R ESPICE, Domine, in 
testamentum tuum, 
el animas pauperum :uo- 
rum ne derehnquas in 
jfinem: exurge, Domine, 
et judica, causam. tuum, et 
ne obliviscaris voces qua- 
rentium te. Ps. Ul quid, 
Deus repulisti in finem: 


tratus est furor luus su- 


wrath kindled against the per oves pascuc tue? 
u^ of thy pasture ? V. Gloria. 
. Glory. 


COLLECT. Omnipotens.—O Almighty and eter- 
nal God, grant us an increase of faith, hope, and 
eharity ; and, that we may deserve what thou promis- 
«t, make us love what thou commandest. Thro’. 


EPISTLE. Gal. ii. 16.22——Brelhren: To 
am were the promises made and to his seed. 
He saith not, and to his seeds as ef many: but as 
ef one, and to thy seed, which is Christ. Now this 
I say, that the testament which was confirmed by 
God, the Jaw which was made after four hundred 
end thirty: years, doth not disannul, or make the 
promise of no effect. For if the inheritance be of 
law, it is no more of promise. But God gave 
to Abraham by promise. Why then wasthe law? 
It was set because of transgressions, until the seed 
abould come, to whom be made the promise, beng, 
ordained by angels in the hand.of a mediator. Now 
n 


424 X11. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


a mediator is not of one: but God is one. Was the 
law then against the promises of God? God fori. 
For if there had been a law given which could e 
life, verily justice should have been by the hw. 
But the scripture hath concluded al] under sin, thet 
the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ might be 
given to them that believe. 

GRAD. Ps. Ixxii.—Look down, O Lord, on thy 
covenant, and forget not forever the souls of thy 

_ poor oues. V. Arise, O Lord, judge thy own caus: 
remcmber how thy servants are upbraided. SAlleus, 
Alleluia. 

V. Thou, O Lord, art V. Domine, refigum 
our refuge from genera- factus es nobis a genre- 
tion to generation. Allel. tione ei progenie. Allel 

GOSPEL. Luke xvii. 11. 19. that time: 
As Jesus was going to Jerusalem, he 
the midst of Samaria and Galilee. And as he es 
tered into a certain town, there met him ten mea 
that were lepers, who stood afar off; and lifted up 
their voice, saying: Jesus, master, have mercy on 
us. Whom when he saw he said:  Go,shew your 
selves to the priests. And it came to pass, that «s 
they went, they were made clean. And one of them 
when he saw that he was made clean, went 
with a loud voice glorifying God. And he fell on 
his face before his feet, giving thanks: and tbi 
was a Samaritan. And Jesus answering sei 
Were not ten made clean, and where are the nine? 
There is no one found to return and give glory t? 
God, but this stranger. And he said to him: Arie, 
go thy way; for thy faith hath made thee whole. 

REDO. 

OFFERT. Ps. xxxv.—In thee have I put my 
trust, O Lord: thou art my God, and my life is 10 
thy hands. 

SECREY.—NPe thou yproprious, Sy Lard te thx 
people: and mercifully recewe Nueve oBernge ee 





, SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 425 


'd thereby, thou mayest grant us par- 
"our requests. Thro’. 

Wied. xvi.—Thou hast given us bread 
O Lord, containing whatever is deli- 


‘et. 

Sumptis.—May these heavenly mys- 
d, whieh. we have received, advance 
demption. Thro’, 


‘UNDAY after PENTECOST. 
INTROIT. Ps. lxxxiii. 


O God, our ROTECTOR noster 
' a 00 ice Deus, et ice 
thy Christ: in faciem Christi fui: uta 
one day in melior est dies una in 
ove thou- atris luis super millia. . 
[ow lovely Ps. Quam diecta taber- . 
macles O  nacula tua, Domine, vir- 
! My soul tutum! Concupiscit, et 
minteth for deficit anima mea in atria 
lie Lord. Domini. 

V. Gloria. 
'. Custodi. — Preserve, O Lord, we 
thy Church by thy constant mercy: 
weak mortality is continually falling 
ssistance, may thy grace withdraw it 
hurtful, and direct it in the ways of 
iro*. 

Gal. v. 16. 24.—Brethren: Walk 
nd you shall not fulfil the lusts of the 
e flesh lusteth against the spirit; and 
nst the flesh: for these are contrary 
': so that you do not the things that 
But if you ard led by the spirit, you 
the law. Now the works of the flesh 
which are fornication, uncleanness, 

n3 


426 XIV. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


immodesty, luxury, idolatry, witchcrafts, enmites, 
contentions, emulations, wraths, quarrels, dimee- 
sions, secta, envy, murders, drunkenness, 

and such like. Of the which I foretell you, aa 
have foretold to you, that they who do suchr thags 
shall not obtain the kingdom of God. But the fruit 
of the Spirit is charity, joy, peace, patience, benign- 
ty, goodness, longanimity, mildness, faith, modesty, 
continency, chastity. Against such there is no law. 
And they that are Christ's, have crucified their fich 
with the vices and concupiscences, 

GRAD. Ps. cxvii.—It is better to trust in the 
Lord, than to trust in man. VJ. It is better to hope 
in the Lord, than to hope in princes. Alleluia. 

VY. Come let us rejoice — V. Vemite, erulemm 
in the Lord; let us joy- Domino; jubtlemus Dee 
fully sing to God our Salutari nostro. Alleluia 
Saviour. Alleluia. 

GOSPEL. Matt. vi. 24. 33.———/ that tme: 
Jesus said to his disciples: No man can serve tWo 
masters. For either he will hate the one, and lore 
the other: or he will sustain the one, and despwe 
the other. You cannot serve God and mammon. 
Therefore I say to you, be not solicitous for your 
life, what you shall eat, nor for your body, wii 
you shall put on. Js not the life more than the 
meat, and the body more than the raiment? Behold 
the birds of the air, for they neither sow, nor do 
they reap, nor gather into barns, and your heavenly 
Father feedeth them. Are not you of much more 
value than they? And which of you, by taking 
thought, can add to his stature ope cubit? And for 
raiment why are yc180licitous? Consider the lilies 
of the field how they grow: they labour not, ner 
ther do they spin. But I say to you, that not even 

Solomon in al his glory was arrayed vs one of thes, 
And if the. grass of the field, which s wo-dng wher | 
Morrow is cast into the oven, God dovh w dae: 


XV. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 4923 


uch more you, O ye of little faith? Be not 
us therefore, saying, what shall we eat, or 
jall we drink, or wherewith shall we be cloth- 
or after all these things do the heathens seek. 
ur Father knoweth that you have need of all 
tings. Seek ye therefore first the kingdom of 
nd his justice, aud all these things shall be 
unto you. Cnzpo. . 


‘ERT. Ps. xxxiii.—The angel of the Lord 
ickinp round about thein that fear him, and 
"liver them: taste and see, that the Lord is 


‘RET.—Grant, we beseech thee, O Lord, 
iis victim of salvation may both cleanse us 
fe sing, and render thy Majesty propitious to 
ro", 

IM. Matt. vi.—Seek first the kingdom of 
ad all these things shall be given to you over 
ove, saith the Lord. 

OMM. Purificent.—May these thy mysteries, 
, continually purify us and strengthen us: 
»cure us eternal salvation. Thro’. 


XV. SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 
INTROI Ps. \xxxv. 


7 down thy ear, NCLINA, Domine, 
4ord,and hear me:  aurem tuam ad me, 
y servant, O my ef exaudi me: salvum fac 
10 hopeth in thee: servum tuum, Deus meus, 
nercy on me, O sperantemin te: miser-re 
x Ihave cried to miàà, Domine, quoniam 
the day. Ps. Give a4 te clamavi tota dic. 
the soul of thy Ps. Letifica animam servi 
: for to thee, O tui: quia ad te, Domine, 
I have lifted up levavit antmam meam. 

l. V. Gloria. 

rc. y. 


422 XV. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


COLLECT. Ecclestam.—May thy continual mercy 
purify and def^nd thy church: and since without 
thee it cannot be safe, may it always be directed by 
the influence of thy grace. Thro’. 


EPISTLE. Gal. v. 25. vi. 1. 10.— Brethren: - 


If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Sprit 
Let us not be made desirous of vain glory, provok- 
ing one another, envying one another. (Chap. vi) 
Brethren, if a man be overtaken in any fault, you, 
who are spiritual, instruct such a one in the spiri 
of meekness, considering thyself, lest thou also be 
tempted. Bear ye one another's burdens: and so 
you shall fulfil the law of Christ. For if any man 
think himself to be something, whereas he is nothi 
he deceiveth himself. But let every one prove his 
own work, and so he shall have glory in himself 
only, and not in another. For every one shall beer 
his own burden. And let him, that is instructed in 
the word, communicate to him, that instructeth bim, 
in all good things. Be not deceived, God is not 
mocked. For what things a man shall sow, those 
also shall he reap. For he that soweth in his flesh, 
of the flesh also shall reap corruption. But he, that 
soweth in the spirit, of the spirit shall reap life ever- 
lasting. And in doing good, let us not fail. For 
in due time we shall rcap not failing, Therefore, 
whilst we have time, let us work good to all men 
but especially to those who are of the household of 
the faith. 

GRAD. Ps. xci.—It is good to give praise to the 
Lord: and to sing to thy name, O Most Hi 
V. 'Toshew forth thy mercy in the morning, and thy 
truth in the night. Alleluia, Alleluia. 

V. For the Lord is a V. Quoniam Deus mag? 
great God, and a great nus Dominus, et Rer 

King over all the corth. magnus super oman We 
Alleluin. ram. New. 

GOSPEL. Luke vii. —See p. 2. 


SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 499 


Ps. xxxix.—With expectation I have 
: Lord, and he was attentive to me: 
my prayer, and he put a new canticle 
h: a hymn to our God. 

—May thy mysteries, O Lord, preserve 
8 defend us against the attacks of the 


ohn vi.—The bread which I will give 
: the life of the world. ' 
Mentes.—May the efficacy of these 
‘ies, O Lord, possess both our souls 
hat their effects, not our own sensuali- 


s take the lead in us. Thro’. 


UNDAY after PENTECOST. 
INTROIT. Ps. Ixxxv. 


rey on me M ISERERE mihi, Do- 
, for I have mine, quoniam ad te 
the day: clamavi tota die: quia tu, 
Lord, art Domine, suavis ac mitis 
mild, and es, ef copiosus in miseri- 
nercy to all cordia omnibus invocanti- 
thee. Ps. bus te. Ps. Inclina, Do- 
hy ear, O mine, aurem tuam mihi, 
ar me: for el exaudi me: quoniam 
id poor. inops et pauper sum ego. 
. Gloria. 

‘. Toa nos.—May thy grace, O Lord, 
1t and follow us; and make us con- 
8 in the practice of good works. Thro’. 
Ephes. iii. 13. 21.— Brethren : I pray 
itat my tribulations for you, which is 
For this cause [ bow my knee to the 
Lord Jesus Christ, of whom all pa- 
ven aud earth is named, that he would 
ording to the riches of his glory, to be 
by his Spirit with might unto the in- 


430 XVI. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


ward man. "That Christ may dwell by faith in your 
hearts: that being rooted and founded in charity, you 
may be able to comprehend, with all the saints, what 
is thie breadth and length, and height and depth: to 
' know also tlie charity of Christ, which surpaseth all 
knowledge, that you may be filled unto all the fab 
ness of’ God. Now to him who is able to do all 
things more abundantly than we desire or understand, 
according to the power that worketh in us: to him 
be glory in the Church, and in Christ Jesus, unto all 
generations world without end. Amen. 

GRAD. Ps. ci.—'The Gentiles, O Lord, shal 
fer thy name, and all the kings of the earth thy 
glory. V. For the Lord has built up Sion: and he 
shall be there seen in his glory. Alleluia, Alleluia. 

V. Sing to the Lorda V. Cantate Domino 
new song; for the Lord canticum . novum: quis 
hath done wonderful mirabilia fecit Dominus. 
things. Alleluia. Alleluia. 

GOSPEL. Luke xiv. 1. 11.—Al that tim: 
When Jesus went into the house of one of the chief 
of the Pharisees on the Sabbath-day to cat bread, 
they watched him. And behold there was a certain 
man before him that had the dropsy. And Jesus 
answering, spoke to the lawyers and Pharisees say- | 
ing: [sit lawful to heal on the Sabbath-day? But 
they held their peace. But he taking him, healed 
him, and sent hiin away. And answering them, he 
said: Which of you shall have an ass or an ox fall 
into a pit; and will not immediately draw him out 
on the Sabbath-day ? And thgy could not answer 
him to these things. And he spoke a parable also 
to them that were invited, marking how they chose 

the first seats at the tahle, saying to them: When 
thou art invited to a wedding, sit not down in tbe 
first place, lest perhaps one more Wowourahle than 
thou be invited by hin ; and he Wer inwnedi ines wit 
him, come and say to thee, Gwe We wan YR 


XVII. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. sol 


ind then thou begin with shame to take the lowest 
3lace. But when thou art invited, go, sit down in 
he lowest place: that when he who invited thee 
*ometh, he may say to thee, Friend, go up higher. 
Then shalt thou have glory before them that sit at 
table with thee: because every one that exulteth 
himself, shall be humbled; and he that humbleth 
himself, shall be exaited. CREDO. 

OFFERT. Ps. xxxix.—Look down, O Lord, to 
help me: let them be put to confusion and shame, 
who seek to take away my life: look down, O Lord, 
to help me. - 

SECRET.—Cleanse us, O Lord, we beseech thee, 
by the efficacy of this sacrifice: and by thy mercy 
make us worthy to partake thereof. Thro’. 

COMM. Ps. lxx.—I will remember thy justice 
alone, O Lord: O God, thou hast instructed me 
from my Youth: abandon not me in my old age, and 
at the end of my life. 

P. COMM.  Purifica.—Mercifully, O Lord, we 
beseech thee, purify our souls, and renew them by 
these holy mysteries; that we may receive help 
thereby, both while we are in these mortal bodies 
and hereafter. -Thro’. 


XVII. SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 
. INTROIT. Ps. cxviii. 
"Hot art just, O Lord, J STs es, Domine, et 
and thy judgment rectum judiciumtuum : 
is right: deal with thy fac cum servo tuo secun- 
servant according to thy dum misericordiam tuam. 
mercy. Ps. Blessed are Ps. Beati immaculati in 
the undefiled in the way: via: qui ambulant in lege 
who walk in the law of Domine. 
the Lord. V. Glory. V. Gloria. 
COLLECT. Da, quesumus.—Grant, We DREN 
we, O Lord, that thy people may avoid €X wo 


432 XVII. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


tagion of the devil: and with a clean heart follow 
thee, the only true God. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. Ephes. iv. 1. 6.—Brethren: 1 whe 
am a prisoner in the Lord, beseech you that you 
walk worthy of the vocation in which vou are call- 
ed. With all humility and mildness, with patience, 
gupporting one another in charity. Careful to keep 
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. One 
body and one spirit; as you are called in one hope : 
of your calling. One Lord, one faith, one bepti 
One God, and Father of all, who is above all, and 
through all, and in us all, who is blessed for evet 
more. 

GRAD. Ps. xxxii.—Blessed is the nation tha 
hath the Lord for its God: the people whom be bath 
chosen for his inheritance. V. By the word of the 
Lord, and the breath of his mouth, were the heavens 
formed, and the whole host thereof. Alleluia. 

Ps. O Lord, hear my Ps. Domine, 
prayer, and let my cry orationem meam, d ds 
come unto thee. Alle- mor meus ad te perveni. 
luta. Alleluia. 

GOSPEL. Matt. xxii. 35. 46.—Alt that tim: 
The Pharisees come to Jesus: and one of them 
doctor of the law, asked him, tempting them: Mee 
ter, which is the great commandment of the law? 
Jesus said to him: Thou shalt love the Lord thy Gd 
with thy whole heart, and with thy tohole soul, and 
with thy whole mind. This is the greatest and the 
first commandment. And the second is like to this: 
Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On thes 
two commandments dependeth the whole law 
the prophets. And the Pharisees being gathered to- 
gether, Jesus asked them, saying: What think you 
of Christ? whose son is he? they say to him: De- 
Vid's. He saith to them: How then doth David i2 
Jirit call him Lord, saying, The Lord sad to 

Lord, sit on my right hank whit Y make ny ence 





WEDNESDAY IN EMBER WEEK. 433 


y footstool? If David then call him Lord, how is 
3 his son? And no man was able to answer him a 
Ord; neither durst any man from that day forth 
k him any more questions. CnEpo. 
OFFERT. Dan. ix.—i Daniel prayed unto my 
bd, saying: Hear, O Lord, the prayers of thy ser- 
nt: look favourably on thy sanctuary; and mer- 
un look down upon this thy people, who are 
by thy name, O God. 
SECRET.—We humbly beseech thy Majesty, O 
wd, that the sacred mysteries we celebrate may 
sanse us from all past offences, and from those we 
gy hereafter be guilty of. Thro. — 
COMM. Ps. Ixxy. — Vow ye, and pay to the 
Ard your God ; all you that round about him bring 
esent: to him that is terrible; even to him, who 
keth away the spirit of princes; to the terrible 
ith the kings of the earth. 
P. COMM. Sanctijicationibus.—May our vices be 
wed, O Almighty God ! and an etern remedy pro- 
ured for us by these sacred mysteries. ‘Thro’. 





EMBER WEEK IN SEPTEMBER. 
WEDNESDAY. 
INTROIT. Ps. lxxx.—Rejoice to God our helper: 
aloud to the God of Jacob: take the pleasing 
and harp; sound the trumpet in the begin- 
ing ofthe month, for it is a commandment in Israel, 
ad a judgment to the God of Jacob. Ps. He gave 
te commandment to Joseph, when he came out of 
te land of Egypt; he heard a tongue which he 
mew not V Glory. 
After Kyrie eleison, 1s said, 
t us pray. Let us kneel down. .R. Stand up again. 
I. COLLECT. Misericordve.—May our weakness, 
) Lord, we beseech thee, be supported by the relie 
f thy mercy ; that as we are continually decaying 
0 










A WEDNESDAY: EMBER WEEK. 
by our own nature, we may be strengthened by thy 


I. LESSON. Amos ix.18.—Thussaith ve Lard 
God: Behold the days come, when thy un 
shall overtake f 


Sucetiea and every hl shale tiled, 
bring back the captivity of my peaple Israel 
they shall build the abandoned ci 
them ; and they shall plant ps 
wine of them ; and shall make gardens, 
fruits of them. And I will plant ther 
own land ; and I. will no more pluck th 
their land, which Ihave given them, saith: 


thy God. 

GRAD. Ps. cxii.—Who is as the 
who dwellest on high ; and looketh down 
things in heaven and in the earth? Y. 


Il. COLLECT. Presta.—Grant, we beseech thes 
© Lord, the humble request of thy family; tht 
whilst they observe abstinence from bodily food 
souls may fest from sin. Thro’, 

Here is said the UL. and TI. Collects, as poxk | 

il, LESSON. 2 Evi. viii. L. 10, fh those da: 





the women, and ali dae 
that could understand. Ana the ear e dha qe 
ple were attentive 1 the vodk. And VakaWs 


IN SEPTEMBER. 435 


*eribe stood upon a step of wood, which he made to 
speak upon. And he opened the book before all the 
e, for he was above all the people; and when 
opened it, all the people stood. And Esdras 
blessed the Lord the great God: and all the people 
answered: Amen, amen; lifting up their hands, 
‘And they bowed down, with their faces to the 
ground. Now the Levites made silence among the 
Beople to hear the law; and the people stood in 
lace. And they read in the book of the law 
of God distinctly and plainly to be understood ; and 
uuderstood when it was read. And Nehemias, 
Esdras the priest and scribe, and the Levites who 
interpreted to all the people, said: This is a holy 
day to the Lord our God, do not mourn nor weep. 
For all the people wept when they heard the words 
ef the law. And he said tothem: Go, eat fat meats, 
and drink sweet wine, and send portions to them 
that have not prepared for themselves; beeause it is 
the holy day of the Lord, and be not sad, for the joy 
of the Lord is our strength. 

GRAD. Ps. xxxii.— Blessed is the nation, whose 
God is the Lord; the people, whom the Lord hath 
Er chosen for its inheritance. F. By the word of the 
| Lord, the heavens were established: and all the 

poWer of them by the spirit of his mouth. 

GOSPEL. Mark ix. 16.—.4t that time: One of 
the multitude speaking to Jesus, said : Master, I have 
brought my son to thee, having a duwunb spirit, 
who, wheresoever he taketh him, dasheth him, and 
he foameth, and gnasheth «with his teeth, and pineth 
away: and I spoke to thy disciples to cast him out, 
and they could not. Who answering them, said: 
O incredulous generation, how long shall I be with 
you? how long shall F‘suffer you? bring him unto 
me. And they brought him. And when he had 

seen him, immediately the spirit troubled hin. Sw 
being thrown down upon the ground, he tolled 


Oo2 





436 WEDNESDAYS EMBEK WEEK. 


about foaming. And he asked his father: How leng 
time is it since this hath happened unto him? Bu 
he said: From bis infancy: and oftentimes hath he 
cost him into the fire and into waters, to desire 
him. But if thou eanst do any thing, help us, lus- 
ing compassion on us. And Jesus saith to him: É 
thou canst believe, all things are possible te him dut 
believeth. And immedia the Father of a 
erying out, with tears said : believe, Lord: 
my unbelief. And when Jesus saw the multi 
running together, he threatened the uncleen 
saying to him: Deaf and dumb spirit, I 


me 
him. And crying out, and him, he 
went out of Pim, and he b rare es so tint 
many said: He is dead. But Jesus taking him by 
the hand, lifted him up; and he arose. And whe 
he was come into the house, his disci 
asked him: Why could not we east him out? * 
he said to them: This kind can go out by nothing 
but by prayer and fasting. 

OFFERT. Ps. cxviii.—1 will meditate on thy eom- 
mandmenis, which I have loved exceedingly ; and! 
will put forth my bands to thy commandments which 
] have loved. 

SECRET.—May this oblation, O Lord, we de 
seech thee, cleanse away eur sins; and ify hoth 
the bodies and souls of thy servants for the 
ing of this sacrifice. Thro’. 

COMM. 2 Esdr. viiii—Eat your fat meats and 
drink your sweet wine, end send portions to them 
that have not prepared any for themselves: because 
it is the holy day of the Lord, and be not sed; fot 
the joy of the Lord is our strength. 

P. COMM. Sumentes—Having received, O Lord, 
these heavenly gifts, we humbly beseech thee, that 
what by thy mercy we celebrate with dus 
we may aleo receive with dieposmmona wang SNR 


presents, Thro’. 





[ 437 } 


FRIDAY IN EMBER WEEK. 


-ROIT. Ps. civ. Let the hearts of them rejoice 
eek the Lord: seek ye the Lord, and be 
thened: seek his face evermore. Ps. Give 
to the Lord, and cali upon his name: declare 
eds among the Gentiles V. Glory. 

LLECT. Presta.—Grant, we beseech thec, 
nighty God, that whilst with yearly devotion 
ep these holy appointed times, we may be 
leasing to thee in body and mind. Thro’. 


SSON. Osee. xiv. 2—Thus saith the Lord: 
O Israel, to the Lord thy God: for thou hast 
own by thy iniquity. Take with you words, 
turn to the Lord and say to him: Take away 
puity, and receive the good; and we will ren- 
B es of our lips. Assyria shall not save us, 
ll not ride upon horses, neither will we say any 
the works of our hands are our gods; fori 
rilt have mercy ou the fatherless that is in thee. 
heal their breaches, I will love them freely ; 
' wrath is turned away from them. I will be 
dew, Israel shall spring as the lily, and his 
hall shoot forth as that of Libanus His 
ves shall spread, and his glory shall be as the 
ree; and his smell asthat of Libanus. 'They 
ye converted that sit uuder his shadow: thev 
ive upon wheat, and they shall blossom as a 
his memorial shall be as the wine of Libanus. | 
im shall say, What have I to do ony more with 
I will hear him, and I will make him flourish 
green fir-tree: from me is thy fruit found. 
8 wise, and he shall understand these things ? 
it, and he shall know these things ?—For the 
of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk 
n ; but the transgressor shall fall in them. 


4D. Ps. Ixxxix.—Turn to us, O Lord, a while 
003 


438 SATURDAY: EMBER WEEK. 


and hear thy servants. 7". Lord, thou hast been: 
refuge from generation to generation. 

GOSPEL. Luke vii. 36. 50. as in p. 221. 

OFFERT. Ps. cii.—Blees the Lord, O mys 
and never forget all he hath done for thee: and 
youth shall be renewed like thc eagle's. 

SECRET.—May the sacrifice we offer on 
fast, O Lord, we beseech thee, be well pleasin 
thee ; that cleansing away our sins, it may mak 
worthy of thy grace, and bring us to thy ete 
promises. Thro’. 

COMM. Ps. cxviiii—Remove from me repr 
and contempt; because I have sought after 
ordinances, O Lord: for thy testimonies are 
meditation. 

P. COMM. Quesumus.—We beseech, the 
almighty God, that while we return thee thanks 
what we have received, we may receive those bi 
ings, which are still greater. Thro’. 





SATURDAY IN EMBER WEEK. 

INTROIT. Ps. xciv.—Come let us adore ( 
and fall down before the Lord, and weep before 
Lord that made us; for he is the Lord our ( 
Ps. Come let us praise the Lord with joy: le 
joyfully sing to God our Saviour. V. Glory. 

After Kyrie eleison, is said, 

Let us pray. Let us kneel down. R. Stand up a 
I. COLLECT.—O Almighty and everlastin 
who, by a wholesome abstinence, healest k 
and soul: we humbly beseech thy Majesty, thet, 
ing appeased by our prayers and fasts, thou ma 

grant us present and future help. Thro’. 

I. LESSON. Zev. xxiii. 96.—7n those days: 
Lord spake to Moses saying : Upon the tenth da 
the seventh month shall be the day of atonem 
it shall be most solemn, and shall be called h 
and you shall atllict your souls on that day, 


IN SEPTEMBER. 439 


ll offer a holocaust to the Lord. You shall do no 
ile work in the time of this day ; because it isa 
of propitiation, that the Lord your God may be 
ciful unto you. Every soul that is not afflicted 
his day, shall perish from among his people: 
every soul that shall do any wogk, the saine will 
stroy from amoug his people. You shall do no 
k therefore on that day: it shall be an cverlast- 
ordinance unto vou in al! your generations and 
llings. Itis a Sabbath of rest, and you shall af- 
iow souls, beginning on the ninth day of tho 
: from evening until evening you sball cele- 
> your Sabbaths, saith the Lord JAlmighty. 
RAD. Ps. xxviii.—Forgive us, O Lord, our 
: never let the Gentiles say : Where is now their 
? F. Help us, O God our Saviour; and for 
honour of thy name O Lord, deliver us. 


us pray. Let us kneel down. R. Stand up again. 


. COLLECT. Da nobis.—Graut, we beseech 
O Almighty God, that by fasting we may be 
i with thy grace; and by abstinence become 
ager than all our enemies. Thro’. 
. LESSON. Lev. xxiii. 39. 43.—In those days: 
Lord spoke to Moses, saying : From the fiftieth 
of the seventh month, when you shall have 
ered in all the fruits of your land, you shall 
brate the feast of the Lord seven days, on the 
day and the eighth shall be a Sabbath, that is a 
of rest. And you shall take to you ou the first 
the fruits of the fairest tree, and branches of 
n trees, and boughs of thick trees, and willows of 
brook, and you shall rejoice before the Lord your 
i, And you shall keep the solemnity thereof 
"n days in the year. It shall be an everlasting 
inance in your generations. In the seventh month 
ll you celebrate this feast. And you shall dwell 
iowers seven days, every one that is of the race 


[srael, shail dwell in tabernacles: that your pos- 


440 SATURDAY: EMBER WEEK. 


terity may know that I made the children of Imee 
. to dwell in tabernacles, when I brought them out of 
the land of Egypt. 1 am the Lord your God. 

GRAD. Pe. ii. —Behold, O God, our Protee- 
tor, Ibok down on thy servants. V. Lord God of 
Hosts, hear the prayers of thy servants. = 
Let us pray. Let us kneel down. R. Stand up again. 

III. COLLECT. Twuere.—Defend, O Lord, we 
beseech thee, thy family; that by thy bounty, we 
may obtain those helps of' salvation, which, by thy 
inspiration, we seek after. Thro’. 

I. LESSON. Micheas vii. 14.—Q Lord our Ged: 
Feed thy people with thy rod, the flock of thy m 
heritance, them that dwell alone in the forest, aecord- : 
ing to the days of old. The nations shall see, end 
shall be confounded at all I their Who me 

ike to thee, who takest away iniquity, 

passest by the sin of the remnant of thy inbertusee? 

e will send his fury in no more, because he de- 
lighteth in mercy. He will turn again and he 
mercy on us: he will put away our iniquities ; 
he will cast all our sins into the bottom of the ses. 
Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob, thy mercy to 
Abraham: which thou hast sworn to our' fathers, 
from the days of old, O Lord our God. 

GRAD. Ps. Ixxxix.—Tum to us, O Lord, a 
while, and hear thy servants. V. O Lord, thou hat 
been our refuge from generation to generation. 

Let us pray. Let us kneel down. R. Stand up again. 

IV. COLLECT. Presta.—Grant, O Lord, we 
beseech thee, that we may so abstain from 
food, a8 to fast from all those vices that attack u& 


IV. LESSON. Zach. viii. 14.—In those day: 
The word of the Lord came to me saying : 'Thus saith 
the Lord of Hosts: As I purposed to afflict you, 
when your fathers hed provoked vos No wre, nd. 
I had no mercy: 8 Wrnng ARAN, V have Sees. 


IN SEPTEMBER. 441 


| days to do good to the house of Juda, and 
m: fear not. These then are the thin 
‘ou shall do: Speak ye truth every one to his 
ur: judge ye truth and judgment of peace 
gates. And let none of you imagine evil in 
arts against his friend: and love not a false 
r all these are the things that I hate, saith 
i, And the word of the Lord of Hosts came 
saying: ‘Thus saith the Lord of Hosts: The 
he fourth month, and the fast of the fifth, 
fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth, 
to the house of Juda, joy, and gladness, and 
lemnities ; only love ye truth, and peace, 
Lord of Hosts. . 
D. Ps. cxl.—Let my prayer be directed as 
in thy sight, O Lord. V. 'The lifting up of 
la, as evening sacrifice. 
ray. Let us kneel down. R. Stand up again. 
JLLECT. Ut nobis.—Aas it is by thy grace, 
we render thee the tribute of this solemn 
grant us, we beseech thee, the favour of thy 
nd pardon. Thro’. 
SSSON. Dan. iii. 49.—In those days: The 
the Lord went down with Azarias and his 
ons into the furnace: and he drove the flame 
ire out of the furnace, and made the midst 
urnace like the blowing of a wind bringing 
| the fire touched them not at all, nor troubled 
or did them any harm. Then these three, 
yne mouth, praised and glorified, and blessed 
he furnace saying. 
‘ow the Canticle and VI. Collect. pp. 66, 67. 
with the Collect, 4 cunctis, p. xx. | 
TLE. Heb. ix. 2. 12.—Brethren: Thee 
bernacle made the first, wherein were the 
icks, and the table, and the setting forth of 
rhich is called the Holy. And after the 
veil, the tabernacle, which is called the 





449 SATURDAY: EMBER WEEK. 


Holy of Holes: having the censer, end the 
ark of the testament covered on every | with 


bims of glory overshadowing the propitistory : of 
which it is not needful to speak now particularly. 
Now these things being thus ordered ; into the fnit 
tabernacle the prieste indeed always enterct accum. 
plishing the offices of sacrifices. 
the high-priest alone, once a year; not withow 
blood, which he offereth for his own, p ri 
ignorance: o ost signifying thi 
way into the Holies tae not yet nado manifest, 
whilst the former tabernacle was yet 
Which: is a parable of the ime then present: 
ing to which gifts and sacrifices are offered, which 
cannot, as to the conscience, make him perfect the: 
serveth, only in meatsand in drinks, and divers wasb- 
ings, and justices of the flesh, laid on them until the 
time of correction. But Christ being come an high- 
priest of the good things to coine, by a greater and 
more perfect tabernacle not niade with hands, that i& 
not of this creation: neither by the blood of goats or 
of calves, but by his own blood, entered once mito 
the Holies, having obtained eternal redemption. 
TRACT. Ps. cxvi.—Praise the Lord all ye nt 
tions ; praise him all ye people: for his mercy »seon- 
firmed upon us; and the truth of the Lord remaineth 
r ever. 


GOSPEL. Luke xiii. 6. 17.——At that tmt: 
Jesus spoke to the multitude this parable: A certain 
man had a fig-tree planted in his vineyard, and he 
eame secking fruit on it, and found none. And he 
suid to the dresser of the vineyard : Behold for these 
three yeurs Y come seeking fruit on thie €g-tree, and 
I find none. Cut it down therefore. why convert 
it the ground? But he: answers BAA. NS Nis: 


IN SEPTEMBER. 443 


Lord, let it alone this year also until I dig about it, 
end dung it. And if happily it bear fruit; but if 
mot, then after thou shalt cut it down. Aid he was 
teaching in their synagogue on the Sabbath. And 
behold there was a woman who had a spirit of infir- 
mity eighteen years: and she was bowed together, 
neither could she look upwards at all. Whom when 
Jesus saw, he called hér unto him, and said to her: 
Woman, thou art delivered from thy infirmity. And 
he laid his hands upon her, and immediately she 
was imade straight, and glorified God. And the 
ruler of the synagogue (being angry that Jesus had 
healed on the Sabbath) answering, said to the mul- 
titude: Six days there are wherein you ought to 
work. In them therefore come, and be healed ; and 
not on the Sabbath-day. And the Lord answering 
him said: Ye hypocrites, doth not every one of you 
on the Sabbath day loose his ox or his ass from the 
manger, and lead them to water? And ought not 
this daughter of Abraham, whom Satan had bound, 
lo, these eighteen years, be loosed from this bond 
on the Sabbath-day ? And when he had said these 
things, all his adversaries were ashamed: and all 
the people rejoiced for all the things that were glori- 
ously done by him. 

OFFERT. P^;.|xxxvii.—O Lord the God of my 
salvation, I have cried in the day and in the night be- 
fore thee: let my prayer come in before thee, O Lord, 


SECRET.—Grant, we beseech thee, O almighty 
God, that the offerings presented before the eyes of 
thy Majesty, may obtain for us the grace of devotion, 
and everlasting life. Thro’. 

COMM. . xxiii.—In the seventh month you 
shall keep feasts, because I made the children of 
Israel dwell in tents, when I brought them out of 
the land of Egypt: I am the Lord your God. 

P. COMM. FPerficiant.—May thy sacraments, O 

Lord effect in us what they contain: that We Way 


~ 


4M XVIL SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


enj m reality what we now celebrate in represe 
wu Thro’. 





XVIIL SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 
INTROIT. Eccles. xxxvi. 


3 our 
belp we can do nothing well pleasing to thee. 
ÉPISTLE. 1 Cor. i. 4. 8. — : I give 


: 
: 
: 
: 


our Lord Jesus Christ. o also will confirm you 
unto the end without crime, in the day of the commg 
of our Lord Jesus Christ. 


kings the omnes wre quie 
earth thy glory. Alas am Sue de 


XIX. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 445 


PEL. Matt. ix. 1. 8—.4t that time: Jesus 
7 into a boat, he passed over the water and 
ito his own city. And behold they brought 
one sick of the palsy, lying on a bed. And 
2eing their faith, said to the man sick of the 
Be of good heart, son, thy sins are forgiven 
And behold some of the Scribes said within 
ves: He blasphemeth. And Jesus seeing 
uos. said: Why do you think evil in your 
'hether it is easier to say, Thy sins are 
| thee: or to say, Arise and walk. But that 
y know that the Son of Man hath power on 
» forgive sins, (then said he to the man Bick 
palsy,) Arise, take up thy bed, and go into 
se. And he arose and went into his house. 
e multitudes seeing it, feared, and glorified 
it gave such power to men. CREDO. 
T. Exod. xxiv.—Moses consecrated an 
the Lord, offering whole burnt-offerings 
, and slaying victims: he made an evening 
| for a sweet odour to the Lord God in the 
the children of Israel. 
RET.—O God, who by the participation of 
"ust sacrifice makest us partakers of the one 
e divine nature: grant, we beseech thee, that 


now thy truth, so we may shew it by a wor- . 


duct of life. Thro’. 

M. Ps. xev.—Bring up sacrifices, and come 
courts: adore the Lord in his holy court. 
IMM. Gratias.—Being fed, O Lord, with 
y sacrifice: we give thee thanks, humbly be- 
g thy mercy: that thou wouldst make us 
of what we have received. ‘Thro’. 


IX. SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 
INTROIT. Psalm lxxvii. 
the Saviour of 4LUS populi ego sum, 
people, saith the, 2 dit Dominus: de qua- 
0 


C ataca PU LR DRE 


iu 


446 XIX. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


Lord: in whatever dis- cumque tribulations 
tress tliey call on me, I maverint ad me, ezau 
will hear them: and will eos: et ero illorum D 
be their Lord for ever. mus in perpeluum. Ps 
Ps. Attend, O my people, tendite, popule meus 
to my law, incline your gem meam: inclinai 
ears to the words of my rem vestram in verte 
mouth. V. Glory. mei. V. Gloria. 


COLLECT. Omnipolens.—O Almighty and 
*iful God, favourably defend us from all adver 
that being free both in soul and body, we may 
security of mind perform thy service. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. Eph. iv. 93. 28.— Brelhren : B 
newed in the spirit of your mind ; and put oi 
new man, who, according to God, is created in 
tice, and holiness of truth. Wherefore putting: 
lying, speak ye the truth every man with his n 
bour: for we are meinbers one of another. Bea 
and sin not. Let not the sun go down upon 
anger. Give not place to the devil. He that i 
let him now steal no more: but rather let his 
bour working with his hands the thing which { 
that he may have soinething to give to him ths 
fereth need. 

GRAD. Ps. cxl.—Let my prayer be direct 
incense in thy sight, O Lord. The lifting upo 
hands, as evening sacrifice. Alleluia, Allelusa. 


V. Give glory to the V. Confitemini 1 
Lord, and call upon his mo, et invocate nomea 
name: deliver his decds annuntiate inter 6 
among the Gentiies. Allel. opera ejus.  Alleluit 

GOSPEL. .Matt. xxii. ii 14.———JA that | 
Jesus spoke to the Scribes and Pharisees in a’ 
ble, saying: ‘The kingdom of heaven is likem 
a king, who made a marriage for his son, An 
sent his servants, to call thein that were invit 
the marriages and they would wot come, Aga 
sent other servants, saying "Y OS Noexe Yaar -we 


XIX. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 447 


waited: Behold, I have prepared my dinner; my 
Reeves and fatlings are killed, and all things are 
ready: come ye to the inarriage. But they neglect- 
@d, nnd went their ways, one to his farm, and another 
to his merchandise. And the rest laid hands on his 
@ervants, and having treated them contumeliously 
put them to death. But when the king had heard 
of it, he was angry, and sending his armies, he de- 
atr syed those murderers, and burnt their city. ‘Then 
he saith to his servants:. The marriage indeed is 
Feady ; but they that were invited, were not worthy. 
Go ye therefore into the high-ways; aud as many 
as you shall find, call to the marriage. And his 
wervants going forth into the ways, gathered to- 
gether all they found, bo:h bad and good: and the 
Zuarriage was filled with guests. And the king went 
án to see the guests; and lie saw there a man who 
had not on a wedding garment. And he saith to 
him: Friend, how camest thou in hither not having 
on a wedding garment? But he was silent. Then 
the king said to the waiters: Bind his hands and 
his feet, and cast him into the exterior darkness; 
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. For 
many are called, but few are chosen.' Crepo. 


'" OFFERT. Ps. cxxxvii.—tif I should walk in the 
midst of tribulation, thou, O Lord, wilt quicken me: 
And thou hast stretched forth thy haud against the 
wrath of my enemies, and thy right hand hath 
saved me. 

SECRET.—Grant, we beseech thee, O Lord, that 
the offerings we bring before thy divine Majesty, 
may avail to our salvation. Thro’. 

COMM. Ps. cxviii.—Thou hast commanded thy 
commandments to be kept most diligently: O that 
my ways may be directed to keep thy justifications. 

P. COMM. Twa nos.—May the healing efficacy 
of these thy mysteries, O Lord, mercifully free us 

Pp2 


448 XX. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


from our perverseness, and make us always obedial 
to thy commandments. Thro’. 


XX. SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 
INTROIT. Dan. iii. 
HATEVER thou 07 fecisli se- 
hast done to us, O bis, mina, i | 
Lord, thou hast done by — judicio fecisti : quia 
a just judgment: for we cavimus tibi ew 
have sinned and disohey- fuis non obedivimus: sed da 
ed thy commandments: gloriam nomini iib, d 
but glorify thy name, and nobiscum : 
deal with us according to tudinem misericordia tee. 
thy great mercy. Ps. exviii. Beak mae 

Ps.Blessed are the un- culah in. via: qui anle 
defiled in the way, who lant in Domini. 
walk in the law of the V. ia. Pelri, d 
Lord. P. Glory. Fiho, fyc. 

COLLECT.  Largire.—Favourably grant, we 
beseech thee, O Lord, thy servants both pardon and 
peace; that, being cleansed from the guilt of el 
their offences, they may serve thee with secure mi 
Thro’. 

EPISTLE. Eph. v. 15.21.—Brethren : See there- 
fore how you walk circumspectly not as unwise, but 
as wise: redeeming the time, because the days are 
evil. Wherefore become not unwise, but under 
standing what is the will of God. And be not drunk 
with wine, wherein is luxury, but be ye filled with 
the holy Spirit, speaking to yourselves in psalms and 
hymns, and spiritual canticles, singing and making 
melody in your hearts to the Lord: giving thanks 
always for all things in the name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, to God and the Father. Being subject one 
another in the fear of Christ. 


GRAD. Ps. ex&y.— Ye eyes of all eem in thee, 
O Lord: and thou givest them meek in Que wena. 





XX. SUNDAY AFTER FENTECosT, 440 


V. Thou thy band, and fillest with thy bless: 
Yang every living creature. /liluia, Alleluia. 


Judea into Galilee, went to him, and 
Na eot flown end. heal his en for ho ab at 





"Unless you see signs and wonders, you believe not. 
The rüler eaith 4o him: Lord, eame down before 
that my'son die. Jesus saith to him: Go thy way, 
‘sou liveth. ‘The man believed the word which 
mid to him, and went bis way. And as he 

Avus going down, his servants met him; and they 
‘word, saying, that his son lived. He asked 


ES TUB em went, when ‘we remembered thee, 
ion. 

SECRET.—May these mysteries, O Lord, we 
beseech thee, procure us a heavenly remedy, and 
cleanse away the vices of our hearts, Thro’. 

COMM. Ps. cxviii—Remember, O Lord, what 

| thou saidst io thy servant, and by which thou 
iuum me hopes: this hath comforted me in my 


; P. COMM, UL oorr. That wo may Ve wor 
; P 
/ 


450 XXI. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


of thy sacred gifts, O Lord: grant, wo bescech thee, 
we may cron obey thy commandments. Thrd. 


XXI. SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 
INTROIT. Esther xiii. 
Att things, O Lord, I voluntate tua, De- 
are in thy power: : 
and no one can resist thy sila: el non est qui 
will; for thou madest resistere  volunia tua: 
all things: heaven and  íu erm fecisti omnia, ce 
earth, and whatever is lum et lerram, e univers 
contained within the que celi ambitu contiam- 
compass of the heavens: tur: Dominus wir» 
thou art Lord of all. rum tu es. 
^ Ps. Blessed arethe un- Ps, Beati. immaculsi 
defiled in the way; who in via: qui ambulani à 
walk in the law of the e Domim. 
Lord. P. Glory. , — V. Gloria. 


COLLECT. ' Familiam.—Preserve thy family, 0 
Lord, we beseech thee, by thy constant mercy : that 
under thy protection, it may be freed from all adver. 
sity ; and by the practice of good works, continue 
devoted to thy name. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. Ephes. vi. 10. 17.—— Brethren; Be 
strengthened in the Lord, and in the might of bis 
power. Put you on the armour of God, tbat you 
may be able to stand against the deceits of the devil 
For our wrestling is not against flesh and blood; 
but against principalities and. powers, against the 
rulers of the world of this darkness, against the spirit 
of wickedness in the high places. “Wherefore take 
unto you the armour of God, that you may be able 
to resist in the evil day, and to stand in all things 
perfect. Stand therefore having your loins girt about 
witb truth, and having on the Wreest-qlete af ius- - 

tice, and your feet shod with the preparation ot en 


XXI. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 451 


gospel of peace : in all things taking the shield of 
ith, wherewith you may be able to extinguish all 
the flery darts of the most wicked one. And take 
unto you the helmet of salvation, and the sword of 
the spirit, which is the word of God. 


GRAD. Ps. Ixxxix.—Lord thou hast been our - 


refuge from generation to generation. V. Before the 
mountains were made, or the earth and the world 
were formed : thou art God for ever and ever. Allel. 

P When Israel went V. In hi Israel de 
out gypt, the house lo, domus Jacob de 
of Jacob from a barba- NIU barbaro. Alleluia. 
rous people. Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. Matt. xviii. 23. 35.—At that time: 
Jesus spoke to his disciples this parable: The king- 
dom of heaven is likened to a king who would take 
an account of his servants. And when he had begun 
to take the account, one was brought to him that 
owed him ten thousand talents. And as he had not 
wherewith to pay it, his lord commanded that he 
should be sold, and his wife and children, and all 
that he had, and payment to be made. But that 
servant falling down, besought him, saying: Have 
patience with me and I will pay thee all. And 
the lord of that servant being moved with pity, let 
him go and forgave him the debt. But when that 
servant was gone out, he found one of his fellow- 
servants that owed him a hundred pence; and lay- 
ing hold of him, he throttled him saying: Pay what 
thou owest. And his fellow-servant falling down, 
besought him, saying: Have patience with me, and 
I will pay thee all. And he would not: but went 
end. cast him into prison, till he paid the debt. Now 
his fellow-servants seeing what was done, were very 
much grieved, and they came and told their lord 
all that was done. "Then his lord called him, and 
sid to him: Thou wicked servant, \ forgave hee S 


459 XXII. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


the debt, because thou besoughtest me: should& 
not thou then have had compassion also on thy & 
low-servant, even as I had compassion on thee? 
And his lord being angry delivered him to the tor 
turers, until he paid all the debt. So also shall my 
heavenly Father do to you, if you forgive not every 
one hia brother from your hearts. Crepo. 


OFFERT. Job i.—There was a man whose nem 
was Joh, and that man was simple and upright, and 
fearing God: and Satan asked to tempt him; eni 
power was given him by the Lord over his poss 
sions, and over his flesh: and he destroyed all ki 
substance, and his sons: and he wounded his fied 
with a grievous ulcer. 


SECRET.—Mercifully receive, O Lord, thes 
offerings, by which thou art pleased to be a | 
and restore us to salvation by thy powerful good 
ness Thro’. 

COMM. Ps. exviiii—My soul hath looked tob 
saved by thee, and hath relied on thy word: wha 
wilt thou judge those who persecute me? 
wicked ones have long persecuted me, help me, @ 
Lord my God. 

P. COMM. Immortalitatis—Having received tbt 
food of immortality, we beseech thee, O Lord, thd 
what we have taken with our mouths we may re 
ceive with pure souls. Thro’. 





XXII. SUNDAY ‘after PENTECOST. 
INTROIT. Ps. cxxix. 
[F thou, O Lord, wilt S iniquitates obseresme 
mark iniquities; Lord, ris, Domine, Domum 
who shall stand it? For quis suslinebit ? 
with thee there is propi- apud te propitiatw ah 
tiation, O God of Israel. Deus Israel. 
Ps. Out of the depths — Ps De profunda de 


XXII. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 453 


have cricd to thee, O maviad te, Domine, Do- 
wd, Lord hear my mine eraudr vocem meam. 
ico. P. Glory. V. Gloria. 


COLLECT. Deus refugium.—O God, our refuge 
d strength, fountain of all goodness, mercifully 
re ear to the fervent prayers of thy church, and 
mt, that what we ask with fiith, we may effec- 
ily obtain. Thro’. 


EPISTLE. Philip. i. 6. 11. Brethren: We 
3 confident of this very thing, that he who hath 
gun a good work in you, will perfect it unto the 

of Christ Jesus. As it is meet for me to think 
B for you all: for that I have you in my heart; 
d that in my bands, and in the defence and con- 
mation of the gospel you are all partakers of ny 
fV. For God is my witness, how i long after you 
in the bowels of Jesus Christ. And this ! pray, 
at your charity may more and more abound in 
wwiedge and in all understanding ; that you may 
trove the better things, that you may be sincere 





without offence unto the day of Christ. Filled 
ith the fruit of justice, through Jesus Christ, unto 
e glory and praise of God. 

GRAD. Ps. cxxxii.—Behold how-good and how 
epasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity. 
; It is like the precious ointment on the head, that 
n down upon the beard of Aaron. Alleluia, Al- 
uid. 


V.They that fear the — V. Qui timent. Dom - 
ord, hope in him: he is num sperent in eo: adju- 
eirhelperandtheirpro- tor et protector eorum est. 
etor. Jlleluia. Allelum.  . 

GOSPEL. Matt. xxii. 15. 21.——.4 that time: 
he Pharisees going, consulted among themselves 
)W to ensnare Jesus in his speech. Ang they send 
‘him their disciples, with the Herodians, saying: 
laster, we know that thou art a true speaker, ard 


454 XXIII. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


teachest the way of God in truth, neither caret hec 
for any man: for thou dost not regard the personed 
men. Tell us therefore what thou dost wit 
lawful to give tribute to Cessar or not? But Jem 
knowing their wickedness, said: Why do yes 
tempt me, ye hypocrites? Shew me the com a 
the tribute. An they offered him a penny. Aad 
Jesus saith to them: Whose image and inscriptio 
is this? They say to him Ceear’s. Then he sash 
to them: Render therefore to Cresar the things that 
are Ceesar’s: and to God, the things that are 
REDO. 


OFFERT. Esther xiv.—Remember me, O Lord, 
who art above all power; and put a proper speech 
in my mouth, that my words may be pleasing whea 
[ come before the prince, 

SECRET.—Grant, O merciful God, that this = 
cvifice of salvation may constantly both free us from 
o"r sins, and protect us from all adversity. Thro. 


COMM. Ps. xv.— cried out, because thos 
heardest me, O God ; bend now thine ear, and bes 
my words. 


P. COMM. Sumpsimus. —-Havin ng received, 0 
Lord, the sacred mysteries, we humb y beseech thee, 
that what thou hast ordered us to do in remembranee 
of thee, may be a help to our weakness. Thro’. 





XXIII. SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 


(Gr Should there be but 23 Sundays after Pentecost, 
the Mass of the 24th is said to-day, and this on the 
preceding Saturday, (if u be neiher a. double er 
semi-double) in which case, if is said on som 
vacant day before it. 

INTROIT. Jer. xxix. 
HE Lord saith : Y en- DES IT Domus: Ege 
tertain thoughts of cog een 





*- 


XXII. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


peace, not of affliction: 
shall call on me, and 
will hear you: and 

ing back your captive 


455 


pacis, et non affictionis : 
invocabilis me, et ego ex- 
audam vos: ef reducam 
caplwitalem vestram de 


" from all places. cunctis locis. 
s. Thou, O Lord, hast Ps. Benedixishh Domine, 
Memed thy land: thou lerram tuam: avertis 
best brought back the captivitatem Jacob. 

ive children ot Jacob. . Gloria. 

. Glory. 


COLLECT. Absolve-—Pardon, O Lord, we be- 
seech thee, the sins ef thy people: that we may be 
delivered by thy goodness from the guilt we have 
contracted by our own weakness. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. Philip. iii. 17. 21. iv. 1. 3.-—Brethren : 
Be followers of me, and observe them who walk so 
& you have our model. For many walk, of whom 
I have told you often (and now tell you weeping) 
that they are enemies of the cross of Christ ; whose 
end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and 
Whose glory is their shame: who mind earthly 
things. But our conversation is in heaven; from 

Whence also we look for the Saviour, our Lord 
Jesus Christ, who will reform the body of our low- 
ness, made like to the body of his glory, according 

to the operation whereby also he is able to subdue 
all things unto himself. (Chap. iv.) Therefore, my 
dearly beloved brethren, and most desired, my joy, 
and my crown: so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly 
beloved. I beg of Evodia, and I beseech Syntyche, 
to be of one mind in the Lord. And I entreat thee 
also my sincere companion, help those women that 
have laboured with me in the gospel, with Clement 
and the rest of my fellow labourers, whose names 
«re in the book of life. . 

‘GRAD. Ps. xliii.—Thou hast saved us O Lord 
from them that afflict us: and hast put them to 
shame that hate us. V. In God shall we glory ek 


456 XXII. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


the day long: and in thy name we will give pram 
for ever. Alleluia, Alleluia, 

V. Out of the depths V. Ps. cxxix. De pre 
] have cried to thee, O fundis clamavi ad te, De 
Lord: Lord hear my mine: me, erem 
voice. Alleluta, vocem meam. — Alleluim 

GOSPEL. Matt. ix. 18. 26.——At that &m: 
As Jesus was speaking to the multitude: Behold s 
certain ruler came up, and adored him, esying: 
Lord, my daughter is even now dead; but come hy 
thy hand upon her, and she shall live. And Jess 
rising up followed him, with his disciples. And be 
hold à woman who was troubled with an i»ue of 
blood twelve years, came behind hiin, and touched 
the hem of his garment. For she said within be- 
self: If I shall touch only his garment, [ shall le 

' healed. But Jesus turning and seeing her, said: Be 

of good heart, daughter, thy faith hath made thee 
whole. - And the woman was made whole from that 
hour. And when Jesus was come into the house df 
the ruler, and saw the minstrels and the inultitude 
making a rout, he said: Give place: for the girl 3 
not dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him& 
scorn. And when the multitude was put forth, ke 
went in and took her by the hand. And the maid 
arose. And the fame hereof went abroad into ell 
that country. CREDO. 


OFFERT. Ps. cxxix.—Out of the depths I have 
cried to thee, O Lord; Lord hear iny voice: from 
the deptlis I have cried to thee, O Lord. 

SECRET.—We offer thee, O Lor, this sacrifiet 
of praise, as a repeated token of our homage; titi 
thou mayest accomplish in us what thou hast already 
granted beyond our deserts. Thro’. 

COMM. Mark xi.—Amen, I say unto you, al 
things whatsoever you ask when ye pray, believe 
you shall receive: and they shall coine unto you. 

P. COMM. Quesumws.—We teseech hee, 


XXIV. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 457 


Almighty God, that thou wouldst not leave exposed 
to the dangers of this life, those whom thou hast joy- 
fully made partakers of this divine food. Thro’. 

As there cannot be less than 23, nor more than 98 
Sundays after Pentecost, tt 1s to be observed, that 
the Mass of the 24th is always said on that Sunday 
which immediately precedes Advent. When there- 
fore i that there are any intervening 
Eamdays between the 23d and the last, the In- 
troit, Gradual, Offertory, and Communion, are 
taken from the 23d, and the rest of the Mass from 
the Sundays which were omüted after Epiphany: 
Jor instance, if but one S. ; the Mass is of the 
6th after Epiphany ; if two, of the 5th and 6th; if 
three, of the 4th, 5th, and 6th; and if four, of 
the 3d, 4th, 5th, and 6th. 


. XXIV. Or last SUNDAY after PENTECOST. 
Ail as on the twenty-third Sunday, except. 
COLLECT. Exrcita.—Stir up, we beseech thee, 
O Lord, the hearts of thy faithful: that, becoming 
more zealous in the performance of good works, 
they may receive from thy goodness more effectual 
remedies for their disorders. Thro’, 
EPISTLE. Colos. i. 9. 14.—Brethren: We cease 
bot to pray for you, and to beg that you may 
- be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wis- 
dom, and spiritual understanding: that you may 
walk worthy of God, in all things pleasing: being 
fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the 
knowledge of God: strengthened with a!| might, 
tecording to the power of his glory, in all patience 
&nd long-suffering with joy. Giving thanks to God 
the Father, who hath made us worthy to be par- 
takers 'of the lot of the saints in light: who hath 
delivered us from the power of darkness, and heath 
translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his \ove. 


Qq 


458 XXIV. SUNDAY AFTER PENTECOST. 


In whom we have redemption through his b 
the remission of sins. 


GOSPEL. Matt. xxiv. 15. 35.—/ that 
Jesus said to his disciples: When you shall s 
abomination of desolation, which was spoken 
Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy pine 
that readeth, let him understand. Then the 
are in Judea, let them flee to the mountain 
he that is on the house-top let him not come 
to take any thing out of his house: and he tha 
the field, let him not go back to take his coat. 
wo to them that are with child, and give m 
those days. But pray that your flight be! 
the winter, or on the Sabbath. For there sh 
then great tribulation, such as hath not heer 
the beginning of the world until now, neithe 
be. And unless those days had been shorten 
flesh could be saved: but for the sake of the 
those days shall be shortened. Then if any 
shall say to you: Lo here is Christ, or thet 
not believe him: For there shall arise false C 
and false prophets, and shall shew great si 
wonders, insomuch as to deceive (if possi 
whe elect. Behold I have told it you, before 
if therefore they shall say to vou: Behold 
in the desert; go ye not out: Behold he is 
closets, believe it not. For as lightning come 
of the east, and appeareth even into the we 
shall also the coming of the Son of Man be. V 
soever the body shall be, there shall the eagk 
be gathered together. And immediately aft 
tribulation of those days, the sun shall be dari 
and the moon shall not give her light, and th 
shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the hi 
shall be moved: and there shall appear thes 
the Son of Man in heaven: and then shall all 
of the earth moore: ond they shall see the f 
Man, coming in the clouds of heaven wu 


VIGIL OF AN APOSTLE. 459 


power and majesty. And he shall send his angels 
With a trumpet, and a great voice: and they shall 
r together his elect froin the four winds, from 
fhe farthest parts of the heavens to the utinost 
bounds of them. And from the fig-tree learn a para- 
We: when the branch thereof is now tender, and the 
come forth, you know that summer is nigh. 
Bo you also, when you shall see all these things, know 
ye that it is nigh even at the doors. Amen, I say to 
you, that this generation shall not pass, till these 
things be done. Heaven and earth shall pass, but 
my words shall not pass. Crepo. 


' SECRET.—Mercifully receive, O Lord, the pray- 
@s and offerings of thy people: turn our hearts to 
thee; that being freed fiom earthly concupiscence, 
We may desire heavenly pleasures. Thro’. 


‘P. COMM. Concede.—Grant, we beseech thee, 
O Lord, that whatever vice our souls are subject to 
may be cured by the virtue of the sacrament we have 
received. Thro’. 


COMMON OF SAINTS. 


INCE the Church of Christ, under the immediate 
direction of the Holy Ghost, has instituted festivals 
in honour of the Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, &c. 
who, either by their preaching—their miracles—the 
shedding of their blood, or the purity of their lives, have 
ample testimony to the truth of our holy religion, 
let us regard them as our Ancestors, from whom the 
Precious inheritance of faith hath descended to us; let 
ts thank God on their several anniversaries, for havin 
made us members of his one, holy, Catholic and Apostolve 
: and whilst we submit our reason and under- 
Manding to the sublime mysteries she teaches, let us 
bend our stubborn wills to the practice of the heavenly 
Precepts she inculcates. 


MASS on the VIGIL of an APOSTLE. 
INTROIT. /%. PR as a fruitful olive, trus 
qa 





460 VIGIL OF AN APOSTLE. 


in the house of the Lord, have hoped in the merey of 
my God: and I will wait on thy name, for it is goed 
in the sight of thy saints. Ps. Why dost thou 
glory in mischief, that art mighty in iniquity? 
V. ory. ) 

COLLECT. , Da, quesumus.—Grant, we beseech 
thee, O Almighty God, that the venerable solemnity 
of thy blessed apostle N. which we are now prepa 
ing to celebrate, may increase our devotion and ad- 
vance our salvation. Thro’. 

LESSON. Eccles. xliv. and xlv.—The blessing of 
the Lord is on the head of the righteous mas. 
Therefore did the Lord give him an inheritance, and 
assign him a part among the twelve tribes; and bs 
found grace in the sight of ail flesh. And he made 
him great to the terror of his enemies, and by his 
words he tamed monsters. He rendered him glott- 
ous in the presence of kings, and gave him his com 
mandments in the sight of his people, and shewed 
him his glory. For his faith and meekness he sane- 
tified him, amd made choice of him among all flesh: 
and publicly gave him his precepts, and the law of 
life and discipluic, and highly exalted him. 
settled with him an etcrnal covenant, and encom 
passed him with the girdle of righteousness : and the 
Lord hath put on him a crown of glory. 


GRAD. Ps. cxi—The just shall flourish like the 

Im-trec: he shall grow up like the Cedar of Lr 
banus in the house of the Lord. —. . 'To shew forth 
thy mercy in the morning, and thy truth in UM 
night. 
GOSPEL. John xv. 12. 16.——— 4t that tae: 
Jesus said io his disciples: This is my com 
ment, that you love one another, as I have 
you. Greater love than this no nmn hath, that 8 
man lay down his life for his friends, You are mf 
friends, if you do the things that I command you 
I wil not now c9 you serve, for toa 


MASS f. STATUIT, &c. 461 


fmoweth not what his lord doth. But I have called 
[m friends: because all things whatsoever I have 

of my Father, I have made known to you. 
You have not chosen me: but I have chosen you; 
wd have appointed you that you should go, and 
ould bring forth fruit; and your fruit should re- 
mein: that whatsoever you shall ask of the Father 
la my name, he may give it you. 

OFFERT. Ps. viii.—Thou hast crowned him 
wih glory and honour, and hast set him over the 
Works of thy hands, O Lord. 

SECRET.—Whilst with respect for the Apostolic 
dignity, we offer these sacred mysteries, grant, we 
beseech thee, O Lord, (by the intercession of blessed 
NK. thy Apostle, whose triumphs we are preparing 
to celebrate) that thy people inay ever pray to thee, 
ind obtain their desires. Thro’. 

COMM. Ps. xx.—His glpry is great in thy salva- 
Ya: glory and great beauty shalt thou lay upon 


P. COMM.  Sancti.—Being appeased, O Lord, 
bythe prayers of thy holy apostle N. grant us for- 
Prone and a remedy against all future relapses. 

9 . 





MASS I. Statuit, of a MARTYR and BP. 


INTROIT. Eccles. xlv. 


HE Lord settled with TATUIT ei Dominus 
him a covenant ef testarnentum pacis, et 
e, and made him a principem fecit eum: ut 
fthat he might have sit illi Sacerdotii digni- 

thehonour of Priesthood tas in eternum. Ps. Me- 

for ever. Ps. O Lord, mento, Domine, David, 
remember David, and all et omnis mansuetudinis 
lis meekness. ejus. 
V. Glory. V. Glory. 
COLLECT. /yfirmiatem, Have regard, O A 
q 


462 MASS I. STATUIT. 


mighty God to our weakness; and as we sink under 
the weight of our doings, let the glorious intercessen - 
of blessed N. thy Martyr and Bishop, be a prote. 
tion to us, Thro’. 

EPISTLE. James i. 12. 18.—Dearly beloved: 
Blessed is the man that endureth temptation; fer 
when he hath been proved, he shall receive the crown 
of life, which God hath promised to them that leve 
him. Let no man, when he is tempted, say thet le 
is tempted by God. For God is not a tempter of. 
evils, and he tempteth no man. But every maa 8. 
tempted by his own concupiscence, being drawa 
away and allured. Then whén concupiscence hath 
conceived, it bringeth forth sin. But sin, when i s 
completed, begetteth death. Do not err therefore, 
my dearest brethren. Every best gift, and every - 
perfect gift, is from above, coming down from the 
Father of lights, with whom there is no ner 
shadow of alteration. For of his own will he 
begotten us by the word of truth, that we might be 
some beginning of his creatures. 

GRAD. Ps. lxxxviii.—1 have found David my 
servant: with my holy oil I have anointed him: £t 
my band shall help him ; aud my arm shall . 
him. P. The enemy shall have no advantage over ' 
him: nor the son of iniquity huve power to hut 
him. Alleluia, Alleluia. V. Ps. cx. Tu es sacerdos 
tn eternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech. Alleluis, 
Alleluia. P. Thou art a priest for ever according 
to the order of Melchisedech. Jilelusa, Alleluia. 

After Septuag. instead of Alleluia and V. is said 

TRACT. Ps. xx.—Desiderium anime ejus tt 
bwisti ev: et voluntate labiorum ejus non Jfraudam 
eum, &c. Thou hast given him his heart’s desire! 
and hast not withholden from him the will of hislipt. 
V. For thou hast prevented him with blessings of 

sweetness. V. Thou hast set on ina hed w CUm 


of precious Stones. 


OF A MARTYR AND BISHOP. 463 


GOSPEL. Luke xiv. 96. 33-—-4t that time: 
Sus said to his disciples : If any man come to me, 
id bate not his father, and inother, and wife, and 
iüldren, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own 
® also, he cannot be my disciple. And whosoever 
th not carry his cross and come after me, cannot 
'my disciple. For which of you having a mind to 
dld a tower, doth not first sit down and reckon the 
that are necessary, whether he have where- 
thal to finish it: lest after he hath laid the founda- 
u, and is not able to finish it, all that see it begin 
mock him saying: This man began to build, 
d was not able to finish. Or what king about to 
‘and make war against another king, doth not first 
.down and think whether he be able with ten 
Dusand, to meet him that with twenty-thousand 
meth out against him. Or else whilst the other ig 
t afar off, sendiug an embassy, he desireth condi- 
ms of peace. So likewise every one of you that 
th not renounce all that he possesseth, cannot be 
y disciple. 
OFFERT. Ps. lxxxviii. —My truth and my mercy 
all be with him: and in my name shall his horn 
! exalted. 


SECRET.—Mercifully receive, O Lord, the offer- 
gs dedicated to thee by the inerits of blessed N. thy 
arty and Bishop, and grant they may be a con- 
qual support to us. Thro’. 


COMM. Ps. Ixxxviii—Once have I sworn by my 
dliness, and hiis seed shall endure for ever; and his 
one as the sun before me, and as the moon perfect 
© ever, and a faithful witness in heaven. 


P. COMM. Refecti.—Being fed with the partici- 
ation of thy sacred gifts, we heseech, thee, O Lord 
ar God, that we miay feel the efficacy thereof by 
ie intercession of blessed N. thy Martyr and Bishor 
hose feast we celebrate. ‘Thro’. 


| [ 464 ] 
MASS II. Sacerdotes Dei, of the same. 
INTROIT. Dan. iii. 


O YE priests of God, ACERDOTES Dei 
bless the Lord: O benedicite Domis 
re saints and humble of um: sancti et humiks 
jeart, praise God. Ps. O corde laudate Deum. Ps 
all ye works of the Lord, Benedicite omnis opera 
bless the Lord, praise Domini Domino, laudate 
him, and extol him for et superexaltate eum 2 
ever. V. Glory. BEC V. Gloria. 


. COLLECT. . Deus, qui nos.—O God, who, 
the yearly solemnity of blessed N. thy Martyr 
Bishop, rejoicest the hearts of thy faithful; merc- 
fully grant that we who celebrate his martyrdom, 
may enjoy his protection. Thro’ 

‘EPISTLE. 2 Cor. i. 3. 7.—Brethren: Bieesed 
be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Father of mercies, sand the God of all comfort, who 
comforteth us in all our tribulation; that we elo : 
may be able to comfort them who are in all distress 
by the exhortation wherewith we also are exhorted 
by God. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in 
us, so also by Christ doth our comfort abound— 
Now whether we be in tribulation, 1£ £s for your e1- 
hortation and salvation : or whether we be comforted, 
wis for your consolation: or whether we be «- 
horted, itts for your exhortation and salvation, whieh | 
worketh the enduring of the same sufferings which 
we also suffer. That our hope fo» you may be stead- 
fast: knowing that as you are partakers of the su 
ferings, so shall you be also of the consolation: it 
Christ Jesus our Lord. 

GRAD. Ps. viii.—Thou hast crowned him with 
glory and honour. V. And best «et him over the 
V. Hic est sacerdos, quem corona Meis. Wiss. 





OF A MARTYR AND BISHOP. 465 
8 is the priest whom the Lord hath crowned. 
"Septuag. instead of Alleluia and V. ts said 


CT. Ps. cxi.— Beatus vir qui &met Dominum; 1 
Jafis gus cut nimis, Sc. — Blessed is the = 
st feareth the Lord, in his commandments he 


ith exceedingly. V. His seed shall be mighty 
th; the generation of the righteous shall be 

V. Glory and wealth shall be in his house; 
justice remaineth for ever and ever. 


PEL. Matt. xvi. 24. 27.—JH thet time: 
aid to his disciples: If any man will come 
a, let him deny himself, and take up his cross 
ow me. For he that will save his life, shall 

and he that shall lose his.life for my sake, 
id it. For what doth it profit a man, if he 
» whole world, and suffer the loss of his own 
Or what exchange shall a man give for his 
For the Son of man shall come in the glory 
Father with his angels: and then will he ren- 
very man according to liis works. 


ERT. Ps. Ixxxviii.—I have found David, 
rant: with my holy oil have I anointed him. 
y hand shall help him, and my arin shall 
rep him. 


RET.—Sanctify, O Lord, the offerings con- 
] to thee: and being appeased thereby, mer- 
look upon us, by the intercession of blessed 
Martyr and Bishop. Thro’. 

[M. Ps. xx.—Thou, O Lord, hast set upon 
d a crown of precious stones, 

OMM. Hec nos.—May this communion, O 
leanse us from sin, and, by the intercession 
ed N. thy Martyr and Bishop, make us effeo- 
artakers of this heavenly remedy. 


A 7. 
tw 


[ 466 ] 


MASS III. In virtute, of a MARTYR not e 
BISHOP. 
INTROIT. Ps. xx. 


TN thy strength, O Lord, N virtute tna, De 
the just shall rejoice : mine, letabitur je- 
and in thy salvation he tus: et r salutare 
shall rejoice exceeding- tuum exultabit veheme- 
ly: thou hast given him ter: desiderium anime 


his heart’s desire. ejus tribuisti ei. 
Ps. For thou hast Ps. Quoniam preve- 
vented him with bless- nisti eum in benedietio- 


ings of sweetness: thou nibus dulcedinis: posus- 
hast set on his head a_ ti in capite ejus coronam 
crown of precious stones, de lapide pretioso, 

V. Glory. ' F. Gloria. 


COLLECT. Presta.—Grant, we beseech 
O Almighty God, that we, who celebrate the festi 
of blessed N. thy Martyr, may, by his intercessio, 
be strengthened in the love of thy name. 


LESSON.  Wisd. x. 10. 14.—The Lord conduet- 
ed the just man through the right ways, and shewed 
him the kingdom of God, and gave him the know 
edge of the holy things: made him honourable in ks 
labours, and accomplished his labours. In the de 
ceit of them that over-reached him, she stood by 
him, and made him honourable. She kept him 
safe from his enemies, and she defended him from 
seducers, and gave him a strong conflict, that be 
might overcome, and know that wisdom is migbtit 
than all. She forsook not the just when he ws 
sold, but delivered him from sinners: she went 
down with him into the pit, and' in bands she ket 
him not, till she brought bim the sceptre of the king- 
dom, and power against those. that oppressed him: 
and shewed them to be Vers, thet eceused Vio e. 
gave him everlasting glory. 


OF A MARTYR NOT A BISHOP. 467 


D. Ps. cxi.—Blessed is the man that feareth 
‘d: he shall delight exceedingly in his com- 
ienta. P. His seed shall be mighty upon 
the generation of the righteous shall be bless- 
delura, Alleluia. V. Posuisti Domine, 
us coronam de lapide pretioso. Alleluia. 
‘hou hast set on his head, O Lord, a crown of 
s jewels, Alleluia. 
eptuas. instead of Alleluia and V. is said 
TRACT. Desnderium, p. 462. 
PEL. .Matti. x. 34. 42.——JH that time: 
tid to his disciples : Do not think that I came 
peace upon earth: I came not to send peace, 
sword. For I came to set a man at variance 
his father, and the daughter against her mo- 
d the daughter-in-law against her mother-in- 
ind a man’s enemies inst they of his 
usehold. He that loveth his father or mother 
yan me, is not worthy of me: and he that 
on or daughter more than me, is not worthy 
And he that taketh not up his cross, and 
th me, is not worthy of me. He that findeth 
shall lose it: and he that shall lose his life. 
, Shall find it. He that receiveth you, re- 
me; and he that receiveth me, receiveth him 
it me. He that receiveth a prophet in the 
f a prophet, shall receive the reward of a 
: and he that receiveth a just man in the 
'& just man, shall receive the reward of a 
a. And whosoever shall give to drink to one 
' little ones a cup.of cold water only in the 
f a disciple, amen, I say to you, he shall nog 
reward. 
ERT. Ps. viii—Thou hast crowned him, 
, with glory and honour, and hast set' him 
» works of thy hands. 
RET.—Receive, O Lord, we beseech thee, 
rings and prayers: purify us by these hear 
'steries, and mercifully hear us. ‘Thro’. 


468 MASS IV. LETABITUR. 


COMM. Matt. xvi.—If any man will come afer 
me, let him deny himself, take up his cross and fel- 
low me. 

P. COMM. Da us.—Grant, we beseech 
thee, O Lord our God, that ee we rejoies on We 
feasta of thy saints in this life, so we may enjoy that 
sight for ever in that which is to come. Thre’. 


MASS IV. Letabitur, of the same. 
INTROIT. Pes. ixiiit 
"HE just man shall re- [,ETABITUE jte 
ef pn in the Lord, and in Domino, et spen 
| hope in him, andall bit in eo: et 

the upright in heart shall tur omnes recti corde 
be praised. Ps. Hear,O Ps. Exaudi, Deus, aw 
God, my prayer, when I tionem meam, cam de 
makesupplicationtothee: precor: a timore minis 
deliver my soul from the eripe animam mea. 
far ofthe enemy. . Gloria. 


. t, we 
O Almighty God, that by the intercession of 
N. thy Martyr, we may be delivered from all eor 
poral adversities, and our hearts be cleansed from ell 
evil thoughts. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. 2 7%m. ii. 8. 10. iii. 10. 


beloved: Be mindful that the Lord Jesus Christ ! | 


risen again from the dead, of the seed of David, ac 
cording to my l. Wherein I labour even unte 
bands, as an evil doer: but the word of God B 
not bound. Therefore J endure all things for the 
wake of the elect, that they also may obtain the al 
vation, which is in Christ Jesus, with heavenly gley- 
(Chap. ii.) But thou hast fully known my dee 
trine, manner of life, purpose, faith, long-waffer 
ing, love, patience, persecutions, afflictions: such 
as came upon me at Antocn, at Leonnm, wh u. 
Lystra: w permecutions Y endured, und wah 


OF A MARTYR NOT A BISHOP. 469 


Khem all the Lord delivered me. And all that will 
Rive godly in Jesus Christ, shall suffer persecution. 

. Pe. xxxvi—When the just man falleth, 
Re shall not.be bruised: For the Lord putteth his 
wend under him. V. He sheweth mercy and lendeth 
all the day long: and his seed shall be in blessing. 


V. Qui sequitur me, non ambulat in tenebris sed 
habelit lumen vie eterne. Alleluia. V. He that fol- 
loweth me, walketh not in darkness, but shall have 
the light of life. Alleluia. 

After . instead of Alleluia and V. is said 
Sep TRACT, tus, p. 465. 

GOSPEL. Matt. x. 26. Bat that time: 
Jesus said to his disciples: Nothing is covered that 
thall not be revealed, nor hid, that shall not be 
known. That which I tell you in the dark, speak 
ye in the light: and that which you hear in the ear, 
preach ye upon the house tops. And fear ye not 
them that kill the body, and are not able to kill the 
soul: but rather fear him that can destroy both soul 
and body into hell. Are not two sparrows sold fora 
&sthing: and not one of thern shall fall to the ground 
without your Father. But the very hairs of your 
head are all numbered. Fear not therefore: better 
we you than many sparrows, Every one therefore 
that shall confess me before men, I will also con- 
ibas him before my Father who is in heaven. 

OFFERT. Ps. x.—Thou hast set on his head, O 
Lord, a crown of precious stones: he asked life of 
thee, and thou didst grant him it. Alleluia. 

SECRET.—May our devotion, O Lord, be accept- 
able in thy sight: and may this intercession on whose 
Ratival we pay it, make it available to our salvation. 


COMM.—Let him who serveth me, follow me; 
wd where I am, there also shall my servants be. 
P. COMM. Mefecti-—Being fed by the pexücwo- 
v 


470 MASS V. PROTEXISTI, 


tion of thy sacred gifts, we beseech thee, O Loni eu 
God, that we may feel the efficacy thereof, by the 
intercession of blessed N. thy Martyr, whose feat 
we celebrate. Thro’. 





MASS V. Protexisti, of a MARTYR a 

PASCHAL TIME. 

INTROIT. Ps. lxiii. 

r['HoU hast protected ROTEXISTI ms 
me, O God, from the Deus, a converts 
assembly of the malig- malignantium, ileus: 
nant, Alleluia: from the a multitudine opera 
multitude of the workers tium iniquitatem. Ale 

of iniquity. -Allel. Allel. lana, 7 
Ps. Hear, O God, my Ps. Exaudi, Deus, ore- 
prayer, when I make tionem meam, cum de 
supplication to thee: de- precor: a timore inimici 
liver my soulfrom thefear eripe animam meam. 

of the enemy. V. Glory. F. Gloria. 

COLLECT.  //irmitatem.—Of a Martyr and 
Bishop. Have regard, O Almighty God, to our weak- 





nother. Deus, qui.—O God, who by the yearly 
solemnity of blessed N. thy Martyr and Bishop, re 
Joicest the hearts of thy faithful, mercifully grast 
that we, who celebrate his martyrdom, may enpy 
his protection. Thro’. 

COLLECT. Presta.—Of a Martyr not a Bishop. 
Grant, we beseech thee, O Almighty God, that we 
who celebrate the festival of blessed N. thy Martyr, 
may by his intercession, be strengthened in the love 
of thy name. Thro’. 

Peu S RR t, we beseech 
ee,O Almighty y Une interven 
blessed N. thy Martyr, we rany We deiverel iam 


OY A MARTYR IN PASCHAL TIME. 471 


y adversities, and our hearts be cleansed 
Hl evil thoughts. Thro’. 
ISON. Wisd. v. 1. 5.—The just shall stand 
reat constancy against those that have afflicted 
ind taken away their labours. ‘These seeing 
be troubled with terrible fear, and shall be 
d at the suddenness of their unexpected sal- 
saying within themselves, repenting and 
ag for anguish of spirit : These are they whom 
| some time in derision, and for a parable of 
ch. We fools esteemed their life, madness, 
eir end without honour. Behold, bow the 
mbered among the children of God, and their 
mongst the saints. 


| of the foregoing Lesson, the EPISTLE, 
2 Tim. ti. p. 468, 1s occasionally read. 


uia, Alleluia. WV. The heavens shall confess 
nders, O Lord, and thy truth also in the church 
saints. Alleluia. "V. Posuisti Domine, super 
ejus coronam, de lapide pretioso. Alleluia. 
ou hast sct on his head, O Lord, a crown of 
18 stones. Alleluia. 


JPEL. John xv. l. 7.—.4 that time: Jesus 
' his disciples: I am the true vine; and my 
‘is the husbandman. | Every branch in me, 
areth not fruit, he will take awfy: and every 
at bearcth fruit, he will purge it, that it may 
forth more fruit. Now you are clean by rea- 
the word which I have spoken to you. Abide 
and I in you. As the branch cannot bear 
f itself, unless it abide in the vine, so neither 
ou, unless you abide in me. I ain the vine; 
e branches: he that abideth in me, and Iin 
he same beareth much fruit: for without me 
n do nothing. If any one abide not in me, 
ll be cast forth as a branch, and Sha wither, 
»y shall gather him um and cast him into the 
r é 


472 MASS V. PROTEXISTI, &c. 


fire, and he burneth. If you abide in me, and ty 
word abide in you, you shall ask whatever you wil; 
and it shall be done unto you. 

OFFERT. Ps. lxxxviii.—The heavens shall eo 
fess thy wonders, O Lord: and thy truth m the 
church of the saints. Alleluia, Alleluia. 


SECRET. Of a Martyr and a Bishop.—Mercifuly 
receive, O Lord, the offerings dedicated to thee by 
tlie merits of blessed N. thy Martyr and nnd 
grant they may be a continual support to us. Thro. 

Another.—Sanctify, O Lord, the offerings conse- 
crated to thee: and, being appeased thereby merel- 
fully look upon us by the intercession of blessed N. 
thy Martyr aud Bishop. Thro’. 


SECRET. Ofa Martyr not a Bishop.—Receire, 
O Lord, we beseech thee, our offerings and prayers: 
parity us by those heavenly inysteries, and 

rear us. Thro’, 

Another.—May our devotion, O Lord, be accept 
able in thy sight ; and may his intercession, on whose 
festival we pay it, make it available to our salvation. 
Thro’. 

COMM. Ps. lxiii.—The just shall rejoice in the 
Lord, and shall hope in him: and all the upright in 
heart shall be praised. Alleluia, Alleluia. 


P. COMM. Refech.—Of a Martyr and Bishop. 
Being fed by the participation of thy sacred gifts, we 
beseech thee, O Lord, our God, that we may feel 
the efficacy thereof by the intercession of blessed N. 
thy Martyr and Bishop. ‘Ibro’. 

Another. Hac nos Comnunto. — May this com- 
munion, O Lord, cleanse us from sin, and by the 
intercession of blessed N. thy Martyr and Bishop, 
make us effectually partakers of this heavenly remedy. 

ro’. 

P. COMM. Da, quesumvus.—Of a Marcy wie 
Bishop. Grant, wo Dewees Thee, O Lard cur Ga 


“ 


MASS VI. STATUIT TuI, &c. ~ 478 


as we rejoice on the feasts of thy saints in this 
so we may enjoy their sight for ever in that 
th i8 to come. Thro’. 

wiher. Refecti— Being fed by the participation 
ty sacred gifts, we beseech thee, O Lord our 
, that we may feel the efficacy thereof, by the 
cession of blessed N. thy Martyr. Thro’, 


$$. >? 
ASS VI. Sancti tui, of MANY MARTYRS. 
INTROIT. Ps. cxliv. 


IY saints, O Lord, Q' ANCTI tui, Domine, 
shall bless thee ; and benedicent te; glo- 
kofthe glory of thy riam regni tui dicent, 
dom. Allel. A'lel. Alleluia, .Alleluiu. 

% I will extol thee, O Ps. Exultabo te, Deus, 
my king; and bless meus rex; et benedicam 
name for ever and nomini tuo in seculum 

V. Glory. seculi. V. Gloria. 


ISTLE. 1 Peter i. 3. 7.—Blessed be the God 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according 
| great mercy hath regenerated us into a lively 
, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the 
,unto an inheritance uucorruptible and unde- 
and that cannot fade, reserved in heaven for 
who by the power of God are kept by faith 
salvation ready to he revealed in the last time. 
rein you shall greatly rejoice, if now you must 
ra little timo made sorrowful in divers temyta- 
' £hat. the trial of your faith, (much more yre- 
Rr3 


474 MASS VI. SANCTI TUI, &c. 


cious than gold which is tried by the fire) may be 
found unto praise, and glory, and honour, at the 
appearing of Jesus Christ our Lord. 

Alleluia, Allcluia. V. Thy saints, O Lord, shall 
flourish like the lily: and as the sweet perfume of 
balsa shall they be before thee. JAileluia. V. Pre- 
tiosa in conspectu Domini mors sanctorum ejus. Ab 
leluia, Alleluia. V. Precious in the sight of the 
Lord is the death of his saints. .2Ileluia. 


GOSPEL. John xv. 5. 11.—At that time: Jena 
said to his disciples : Y am the vine, you the branches: 
he that abideth in me, and I in bim, the same beer- 
eth much fruit: for without me you can do nothing. 
If any one abide not in me, he shall be cast forth as 
a branch, aud shall wither, and they shall gather him 
up, and cast him into the fire, and he burneth. If 
you abide in me, and my word abide in you, you 
shall ask whatever you will, and it shall be done 
unto you. In this is my Father glorified; that you 
bring forth very much fruit, and become my disciples 
As the Father bath loved me, I also have loved you. 
Abide in my love. If you keep my commandinents 
you shall abide in iny love; as I also have kept my 
Father's commandments, and do abide in liis love. 
These things have I spoken to you, that my joy may 
be in you, aud vour joy may be filled. 

OFFERT. Ps. xxxi.—Be glad in the Lord, and 
rejoice ye just: and glory all ye right of heart. .3l- 
lelura, /lleluia. 

SECRET. Of Martyrs and Bishops.—Attend, 0 
Lord to our carnest prayers, which we put up in 
memory of thy saints; and since we trust not in our 
own righteousness, may we be helped by the merits 
of those, who were well-pleasing to thee. ‘Thro’. 

SECRET. Of Martyrs not. Bishops.—We bri 
thee, O Lord, the oQeriues of our devotion; 
may they be acceplabic xo thee in honwor af Nen Sie, 
and available to our salvation, "NS. 





MASS VII. INTRET, &c. 


475 


COMM. Ps. xxxii.—Be glad iu the Lord, O ye 


ust, Alleluia : praise. becometh the upright. 


Slllel. 


P. COMM. Quesumus.—Of Martyrs and Bishops. 
Being filled with thy saving mysteries, we beseech 
thee, O Lord, that we may be helped by their inter- 


cession, whose festival we celebrate. 


Thro’. 


P. COMM. Presta nobis.— Of Martyrs not Bishops. 
Grant, we beseech thee, O Lord, by the intercession 
of thy Holy Martyrs N. and N. that what we have 
taken with our mouths, we may receive with a pure 


soul, Thro’. 


MASS VII. Intret of MANY MARTYRS. 


INTROIT. 


ET the sighing, O 
Lord, of the prison- 
come in before thee: 
render to our neighbours 
sevenfold in their bosom ; 
revenge the blood of thy 
saints which hath been 
shed. 

Ps. OGod,the heathens 
are come into thy inherit- 
ance; they have defiled 
thy holy temple: they 
have made Jerusalem as 
a place to keep fruit. 

V. Glory. 


Ps. \xxviii. 
NTRET in conspectu 
tuo, Domine, gemi- 
tus compeditorum: red- 
de vicinis nostris septu- 
plum in sinu eorum: 
vindica sanguinem sanc- 
torum tuorum, qui effu- 
SUS est. 

Ps. Deus, venerunt 
Gentes in hereditatem 
tuam: polluerunt tem- 
plum sanctum tuum: po- 
suerunt Jerusalem in po- 
morum custodiam. 

V. Gloria. 


COLLECT. Beatorum.—We beseech thee, O 
Lord, that the solemnity of thy blessed Martyrs and 
Bishops N. and N. may be a protection to us, and 
their venerable prayers recommend us to thy mercy. 

9 


ro’. 
LESSON.  Wisd.iii. 8.—The souls of the just are 
in the hand of God, and the torment of death shall 
aot touch them. In the sight of the unwise they 
scemed to die; and their departure wes teken for 


476 MASS VII. INTRET, &c. 


misery ; and their going away from ua, for utter de- 
struction: but they are in peace. And though in 
the sight of men they suffered torments, their hopeis 
full of immortality. Afflicted in few things, in many 
they shall be well rewarded ; because hath tried 
them, and found them worthy of himself. As gold 
in the furnace he hath proved them, and as a victim 
of a holocaust he hath received them, and in time 
there shall be respect had to them. The just shall 
shine, and run to and fro, like sparks among the 
reeds. They shall judge nations, and rule over pee- 
ple, and their Lord shall reign for ever. 

GRAD. Exod. xv.—God is glorious in bis saints, 
wonderful in his Majesty, and miraculous in his 
works. V. Thy right hand, O Lord, is magnified ia 
strength: thy right hand hath slain the enemy. 
Alleluia, Allelhma. V. Corpora sanctorum im pact 
sepulta sunt ; el nomina eorum vivent in generum, 
et generationem. Alleluia. V. The bodies of the 
saints are buried in peace; and their names shall 
live for ever and ever. Alleluia. 

After Septuag. instead of Alleluia and V. is said 

TRACT. Ps. exxv.— Qui seminant tn lacrymis, ia 
exullatione metent. They who sow in tears shall 
reap injoy. V.Going they went and wept, and cas- 
ing their sced. V. But coming they shall come with 
joy and fulness, carrying their sheaves, 

GOSPEL. Luke xxi. 9. 19.—At that time: Jems 
said to his disciples : When you shall hear of wars 
and seditions, be not terrified ; these things mus 
first come to pass, but the end is not yet presently. 
Then he said to them: Nation shall rise against ns 
tiom and kingdom against kingdom. And there 
shall be great earthquakes in divers places, and peste 
lences, and famines, and terrors from heaven, 
there shall be great gne. — Vox ere oll these things 
they will lay their hands on you. und perce ye, 
delivering you up to the synogognes end ‘wtp Er 


MASS VIII. SAPIENTIAM, &c. 477 


Ons, draggin you before kings and governors for 
Dy name e. Anditshall happen unto you fora 
estimony. Lay it up therefore in your heurts, not 
@ meditate before how you shall answer. For I 
will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your 
idversaries shall not be able to resist and guin-say. 
And you sliall be betrayed by your parents, and bre- 
hren, and kinsmen, and friends: and some of you 
hey will put to death. And you shall be hated by 
ll men for my name’s sake: but a hair of your head 
hall not perish. In your patience you shall possess 
our souls. 

OFFERT. Ps. Ixvii.—God is wonderful in his 
aints : the God of Israel is he, who will give power 
imd strength to his people ; blessed be God. Allel. 


SECRET.—Attend, O Lord, to our earnest pray- 
a, which we put up in inemory of thy saints; and 
nce we trust not.in our own righteousness, may we 
be helped by the merits of those, who were well- 
pleasing to thee. Thro’. 


COMM. Wisd. iiii—And though in the sight of 
men they suffered torments. God hath tried them: 
as gold in the fiirmace he hath proved them, and like 
an holocaust ho accepted them. 

P. COMM. Quesumus.—Being filled with thy 
maring mysteries, we bescech thee, O Lord, that we 
may be helped by their intercession, whose festivals 
wecelebrate. Thro’. 


oom 


— 








MASS VIII. Sapientiam, of the same. 
INTROIT. Eccles. xliv. 

ET nations relate the APIENTIAMsancto- 

wisdom of the saints ; rum narrent populi; 

end the Church publish et laudes eorum nuntio 

ir praises. Their names Ecclesia. Nomina eorum 

llive for ever. vivent in seeculum seecoM. 
#%, Rejoice in the Lord, Ps. Exultate just a 


78 MASS VIII. SAPIENTIAM, &c. 


ye just: praise becometh Domino: rectos dec [' 
the righteous. collaudatio. 

V. Glory. V. Gloria. 

COLLECT. Deus, qui nos.—O God, by whos 
favour we celebrate the festival of thy hor 
N. and N. grant that we may enjoy their à 
in eternal bliss. Thro’. 

LESSON. 'Wisd. v. 16. 20.—The just shall live 
for evermore, and their reward is with the Lord, and 
the care of them with the Most High. Therefore 
shall they receive a kingdom of glory, and a crown 
of beauty at the hand of the Lord: for with his right | 
hand he will cover them, and with his holy arm will 
he defend them. And his zeal will take its armoar, 
and he will arm the creature for the revenge of his 
enemies. He will put on justice as a breast- 
and will take true judgment instead of a helmet: He 
will take equity for an invincible shield. 

GRAD. Ps. cxxiii.—Our soul hath been deliver- 
ed, as a sparrow out of the snare of the fowlem 
V. The snare is broken, and we are delivered, our 
help isin the name of the Lord, who made heavea 
and earth. Alleluia, Allduia. V. Ps. |xvit.—Jush 
epulentur et exultent in conspectu. Dei, et delectenlur 
in letiha. Alleluia. V. Let the just feast and re 
joice before God: and be delighted wi.h gladness. 
“Alleluia. 

After Septuag. instead of Alleluia and V. is sad 
TRACT, Qui seminant, p. 476. 

GOSPEL. Luke vi. 17. 23.—.At that time : Jesas 
descending from the mountain, stood in a plam 
place, and the company of his disciples, and a very 
great multitude of people from all Judea and Jeru 
salem, and the sea coast both of Tyre and Sidor, 
who were come to hear him, and to be healed of 
their diseases. And they thet were troubled with 
unclean spirits, were cured, And al he veo 
soughtto touch him, for vivae went out Tow Tis. 


MASS IX. SALUS AUTEM, &c. 479 


and healed all. And he, lifting up his eyes on his 
disciples, said : Blessed are the poor; for your's is 
the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that hunger 
now: for you shall be filled. Blessed are ye that 
weep now ; for you shall laugh. Blessed shall you 
be when men shall hate you, and when they shall 
separate from you, and shall reproach you, and cast 
out your name as evil, for the Son of Man's sake. 
Be glad in that day, and rejoice: for behold, your 
reward is great in heaven. 

OFFERT. Ps. cxlviii.—The saints shall rejoice in 
glory: they shall be joyful in their beds: the high 
praises of God shall be in their mouth. Alleluia. 

SECRET.—We bring thec, O Lord, the offerings 
of our devotion ; and may they be acceptable to thee 
in honour of thy saints, and, by thy mercy, available 
to our salvation. Thro’. 

. COMM. Luke xii.—But I say to you my friends: 

fear not those who persecute you. 

&P. COMM. Praesta.—Grant, we beseech thee, 

OyLord, by the intercession of thy holy Martyrs N. 
LN. that what we have taken with our mouths 
may receive with a pure soul. Thro’. 


" MASS IX. Salus autem, of the same. 


INTROIT. 


HE salvation of the 
just is from the Lord: 
and he is their protector 
in the time of trouble. 
Ps. Be not emulous of 
evil doers: nor envy them 
that work iniquity. 
V. Glo 


COLLECT. Deus, qui 





Ps. xxxvi. 
SALUS autem justo- 
rum a Domino: et 

protector eorum est in 

tempore tribulationis, 
Ps. Noli emulari in 

malignantibus ; neque ze- 

laveris facientes iniquita- 

tem. V. Gloria. 

O God, who, by the 


yearly solemnity of thy holy Martyrs N. and N. 
comfortes 


t us thy people; 


mercifully grant, thet, os 


we rejoice at their merits, we may likewise We ew- 
»ouraged by their examples. ‘Thro’. 


480 MASS IX. SALUS AUTEM, &c. 


EPISTLE. Heb. x. 32. 38. — Brethren: Call to 
mind the former days, wherein, being illuminated, 
you endured a great fight of afflictions. And on the 
one hand indeed, by reproaches and tribulations 
were made a gazing-stock ; and on the other, be 
come companions of them that were used in 
sort. For you both had compassion on them thst 
were in bands, and took with joy the being stripped 
of your own goods, knowing that you have a better 
and a lasting substance. Do not therefore lose your 
confidence, which hath a great reward. For patience 
is necessary for you: that, doing the will of God, you 
may receive the promise. For yet a little anda very 
little while, and he that is to come, will come and 
will not delay. But my just: man liveth by faith. 

GRAD. Ps. xxxiii.—The just cried and the Lord 
heard them, and delivered them out of all ther 
troubles. V. ‘The Lord is nigh unto them that ar 
of a contrite heart: and he will save the humble of 
heart. Allel. Alle. V. Te martyrum candidatus lev 
dat exercitus, Domine. Alleluia. P. 'The white-robed 
army of Martyrs praise thee, O Lord. Alleluia. 


After Septuag. instead of Alleluia. and V. is said 
TRACT, Qui seminant, p. 476. . 

GOSPEL. Matt. xxiv. 3. 14.—.% that time: 
As Jesus was sitting on mount Olivet, the disciples 
rame to him privately, saying: Tell us when these 
things shall be ? and what shall be the signs of thy 
coming, and of the consummation of the world? 
And Jesus answering said to them: Take heed thet 
uo man seduce you: for many will come in my name 
saying, I am Christ: and they will seduce many. 
And you shall hear of wars, and rumours of wart 
See that ye be not troubled. For these things mus 
come to pass, but the end is not yet. For patios 
shall risc against nation, and kingdom against king: 
dom ; and there shall be yestilences and famines, si 
earthquakes in placeas NOW al Mees are Une UF 


o — 


MABB X. * sTA'TUIT, &c. 441 


‘sorrows. "Then shall they deliver you up to 
sted, and shall put you to death: and you 
3 hated by all nations for my name’s suke. 
en shall many be scandalized: and shall be- 
e another: and shall hate one another. And 
use prophets shall rise, and shall seduce many. 
cause iniquity hath abounded, the charity of 
hall grow cold. But he that shall persevere 
nd shall be saved. 

ERT. Wied. iii.—The souls of the just are in 
d of God : and the torment of death shall not 
em. In the sight ofthe unwise they seemed 
but they are in peace. Alleluia. 
RET.——Be appeased, O Lord, we beseech 
' the offerings we have made ; and defend us 
1 dangers, by the intercession of thy holy 
, N. and N. Thro’. 

.M.—What I say to you in the dark, speak 
the light, saith the Lord: and what is whis- 
ou in the ear, preach you on the house-tops. 
IMM. Hec nos.—May this communion, O 
urify us from sin, and, by the intercession ot 
y Martyrs N. and N. make us partakers of 
rof heaven. Thro’. 








K. * Statuit, of a CONFESSOR and BISHOP. 


JUSIVE of those degrees of Confessors who 
e glorified Jesus Christ, as well by their suf- 
for religion, as by the purity of their lives, 
Bishops, Priests, Doctors of the Church, Monks 
laries), there were also others, of various secular 
18, who passed through life without being at- 
0 the things of the world. Despising what- 
transitory, they dedicated themselves to God; 
ttifying their bodies by a rigorous penance, 
so absolute a conquest over their own will, as 
>a kind of martyrdom. Let us therefore be- 
od on their several festivals, that he would en- 
2 follow their example, 
Ss 


182 MASS X.* STATUIT, 


INTROIT, Statuit, as in Mass I. p. 461. 

COLLECT. Da, quesumus.—Grant, we beseech 
thee, O Almighty God, that the venerable solemnity 
of bles.ed N. thy Confessor and Bishop, may improve 
our devotion, and strengthen in us the hopes of salve- 
tion. Thro’. 

LESSON. Eccles. xliv. and xlv.—Behold a gs 
priest, who in his time pleased God, and was found 
just: and in the time of wrath became an atone- 
ment. There were none found like him in observing 
the law of the Most High. Therefore, by an oath, 
did the Lord make him great amongst his people. 
He gave him the blessing of all nations, and establish- 
ed his covenant on his head. He acknowledged him 
in his blessings: he stored up his mercy for him: 
and he found favour in the eyes of the Lord. (Chap. 
xlv.) He exalted him in the sight of kings: and 
gave him a crown of glory. He made with him an 
eternal covenant: and bestowed on him a gres 
priesthood : and rendered him blessed in glory. To 
perform the priestly office, to sing praises to the name 
of God ; and to offer him precious incense for an 
odour of sweetness. 

GRAD. Eccles. xliv.——Behold a great prelate, 
who in his days pleased God. V. There was none 
found like him in keeping the law of the Most High. 
Alleluia, Alleluia. V. Tu es sacerdos in eternum 
secundum ordinem Melchisedech. Alleluia. — PF. Thou 
art a pricst for ever, according to the order of Me- 
chisedech.  .4//eluia. 

ifler Septuag. instead of Alleluia and V. is said 

TRACT, Beatus, p. 465. 

GOSPEL. Matt. xxv. 14. 23.—J4t that mt: 
Jesus spoke this parable to his disciples : A man goi 
into a far country, called his servants, and delive 
to them his goods. And 3o one he gave five talents 
and to another vxo, aud to another one, to exery sae 
according to his proper ably» ead Wee SINN S 








OF A CONFESSOR AND BISHOP. 483 


t his journey. And he that had received the five 
nts went his way and traded with the same, and 
ied other five. And in like manner he that had 
sived the two, gained other two. But he that 
received the one, going his way digged into the 
h, and hid his lord’s money. But after a Jon 
3 the lord of those servants came, and reckoned 
1 them. And he that had received the five 
ats coming, brought other five talents, saying: 
d, thou didst deliver to me five talents, behold 
we gained other five over and above. His lord 
to him: Well done good and faithful servant, 
wise thou hast been fuithful over a few things, I 
place thee over many things: enter thou into 
joy of thy lord. And he also that had received 
two talents came and said: Lord, thou deliver- 
: two talents to me: behold I have gained other 
» His lord said to him: Well done good and 
ful servant, because thou hast been faithful over 
w things, I will place thee over many things: 
T thou into the joy of thy lord. 
IFFERT. Ps. 88.—I have found David, my ser- 
t: with my holy oil I have anointed him: For 
hand shall help him, and my arm shall strengthen 
le 
ECRET.—May thy saints, O Lord, we beseech 
» cause joy to all thy people: that while we cele- 
e their merits, we may experience their patron- 
Thro’. 
'OMM. Luke xii.—This is the faithful and pru- 
t servant, whom the Lori placed over his family, 
ve them in due season their measure of wheat. 
'. COMM. Prasta.—Grant, we beseech thee, O 
aighty God, that while we return thee thanks for 
at we have partaken of, we may, by the inter- 
sion of blessed N. thy Confessor and Bishop, re- 
ve still greater favours. Thro’. 
Ss2 


[ 484 ] 


MASS XI. Sacerdotes tui, of the same. 


INTROIT. Psalm cxxxi. 

LET thy priests, O SACERDOTES tui, 

Lord, be clothed Domine, induant jus- 
with justice; and let thy  titiam, et sancti tui exul- 
saints rejoice. For thy tent. Propter David ser- 
servant David'ssake, turn vum tuum, non avertas 
not away the face ofthine faciem Christi tui. 
anointed. Ps. Memento, Domine, 

Ps. Remember, O Lord, David, ct omnis mansue- 
David and all his mmeek- tudinis ejus. V. Gloris. 
ness. V. Glory. 

COLLECT.  Eraudi.—Hear, O Lord, we be- 
seech thee, the prayers we offer on this solemnity 
of blessed N. thy Confessor and Bishop: and by his 
intercession, who worthily served thee, deliver us 
from all our sins. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. Heb. vi. 93. 27.—Brethren : There 
were mae many priests, because by reason of death 
they were not suffered to continue. But Jesus, for 
that he continueth for ever, hath an everlasting priest- 
hood. Whereby he is able also to save for ever them 
that come to God by him: always living to make in- 
tercession for us. For it was fitting that we should 
have such a high priest, holy, innccent, undefiled, 
separated from sinners, and made higher than the 
heavens: who needeth not daily (as the other priests) 
to offer sacrifice first for his own sins, and then for 
the people's: for this Jesus our Lord did once in 
offering himself. 

GRAD. Ps. exxx.—I will clothe her priests with 
salvation, and her saints shall rejoice exceedingly. 
V. 'There will I bring forth a horn to David : I hase 
prepared a lamp for my anointed. leluia, .Allelue. 

. Juravit Dominus et non panitebit eum: Tua 
sacerdos in aternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech. 
Alleluia. V.'The Lord hath sworn, wt Wi WR N- 


pent: thou art a priest for ever according, io SR. 


order of Melchisedech. Ai ew. 


— manm tuli mmndiiMMpeue deo od! sepan VERY x *'- 


MASS XII. IN MEDIO, &c. 485 
After Se . instead of Alleluia and V. is said 
TRACT. Beatus, p 


GOSPEL. Matt. xxiv 49. 47. — At that time: 
"Kesus said to his disciples : Watch ye therefore, be- 
Gaüse ye know not at what hour your Lord will come. 
Fut this know ye, that if the good man of the house 

at what hour the thief would come, he would 
Certainly watch, and would not suffer his house to 
be broken open. Wherefore be you also ready, be- 
Cause at what hour you know not, the Son of Man 
will come. Who thinkest thou is a faithful and wise 
Bervant, whom his lord has appointed over his family 
to give them meat in season? * Blessed is that ser- 
vant, whom when his lord shall come, he shall find 
Bo doing. Amen, I say to you, he shall place him 
Over all his goods t. 

OFFERT.—My truth and my mercy shall be with 

im ; and in my name shall his be exalted. 
SECRET.—May the annual solemnity, we beseech 
thee, O Lord, of holy N. thy Confesgor and Bishop, 
er us acceptable to thy mercy: that by this sa- 
Crifice of propitiation, he may both receive a happy 
reward, and obtain for us the gifts of thy mercy. 


COMM. * Blessed, &c. as above, from * to 1. 

P. COMM. Deus fidelium——O God, the re- 
warder of faithful souls, grant that we may obtain 
forgiveness by the prayers of blessed N. thy Confes- 
mr and Bishop, whose venerable feast we celebrate. 

ro’. 


MASS XII. In medio, of DOCTORS. 
INTROIT. Eccles. xv. 


HE opened his mouth I^ medio Ecclesise ape- 

in the midst of the ruit os ejus, et im- 

Church, and the Lord plevit eum Dominus spi- 

filled him with the spiri zn sapientie et intel 
8 


486 MASS XII. IN MEDIO, 


of wisdom: he clad him lectus: stolam glori in- 
with a robe of glory. duit eum. 

Ps. It is d to give Ps. Bonum est conf 
praise to the Lord, and to teri Domino, et psallere 
sing to thy name, O Most nomini tuo, Altissime! 
lligh. P. Glory. - F. Gloria. 


COLLECT. Deus qui.—O God, who didst give 
Blessed N. to thy people for a minister of eternal sal- 
vation: grant we beseech thee, that he who was 
the instructor of our life here on earth, may become 
our intercessor in heaven. Thro’. 

LESSON. 2 Tim. iv. 1. 8.—Most dearly beloved: 
l charge thee before God and Jesus Christ, who shall 
judge the living and the dead, by his coming, and 
his kingdom: preach the word; be instant in sea- 
son, out of season ; reprove, intreat, rebuke, in all 
patience and doctrine. For there shall be a time, 
when they will not endure sound doctrine: but ac- 
cording to their own desires they will heap to them- 
selves teachers, having itching ears. And will in- 
deed turn away their hearing from the truth, but 
will be turned into fables. But be thou vigilant, 
labour in all things, do the work of an evangelist, 
fulfil thy ministry. Be sober. For I am even now 
ready to be sacrificed: and the time of my dissola- 
tion is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have 
finished my course, I have kept the faith. As to the 
rest, there is laid up for me a crown of justice, 
which the Lord, the Just judge, will render to mein 
that day: and not only to me but to them also who 
love his coming. 

GRAD. Ps. xxxvi.—The mouth of the just shall 
meditate wisdom: and his tongue shall speak judg- 
ment. V. The law of his is in his heart: and 
his steps shall not be supplanted, O Lord. Allel. Alld. 
~ V. Amavit eum Dominus, «& ornowt eum; solam 
gloria indu eum. V. Ve Lor Nov ed, and thane 
ed him, and hath clothed him with a robe cf Ba 


OF DOCTORS. 487 


After Septuag. instead of Alleluia and V. is said 
TRACT, Beatus, 465. 


GOSPEL. Matt. v. 13. 19.——M that time: 
Jus said to his disciples: You are the salt of the 
earth. But if the salt lose its savour, wherewith 
shall it be salted? It is good for nothing any more 
bat to be cast out, and to be trodden on by men. 
You are the light of the world. A city seated on a 
mountain cannot be hid. Neither do men light_a 
eandle and put it under a bushel, but upon a candle- 
stick, that it may shine to all that are in the house. 
So let your light shine before men, that they may 
see your good works, and glorify your Father who is 
inheaven. Do not think that I am come to destroy 
' the law, or the prophets. I am not come to destroy, 
but to fulfil. For, amen I say unto you, till heaven 
and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall not pass of 
the law till all be fulfilled. He therefore that shall 
break one of the least of these commandments, and 
Shall so teach men, shall be called the least in the 
kingdom of heaven. But he that shall do and teach, 
he shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven. 

OFFERT. Ps. xc.—The just shall flourish like 
the palin-tree: he shall grow up like the cedar of 
Libanus. 

SECRET.—Let the pious prayers of thy holy ser- 
vant N. never be wanting to us, O Lord: that they 
may make our offerings acceptable to thee, and 
always obtain for us thy pardon. Thro’. 


COMM. Luke xii.—This is the faithful and pru- 
dent servant, whom the Lord placed over his family, 
to give them their rneasure of wheat in due season. 

P. COMM. Ut nobis.—Let blessed N. O Lord, 
thy Confessor and great Doctor, become our advo- 
cate, that this thy holy sacrifice may procure our 
salvation. Thro’ 


[ 488 ] 


MASS XIII. Os justi, of a CONFESSOR not a BP. 
INTROIT. Ps. xxxvi. 
HE mouth of the just (O^ justi meditabitur 
man shall meditate sapientiam, et lingua 
wisdom, and his tongue ejus loquetur judicium: 
speak judgment: thelaw lex Dei ejus in corde 
of his God is in hisheart. ipsius. 

Ps. Be notemulous of Ps. Noli emulari in 
evil doers, nor envy them  malignantibus : neque ze- 
that work iniquity. laveris facientes iniquita- 

V. Glory. tem. V. Gloria. 

COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who comfortest 
us by the yearly solemnity of blessed N. thy Confes- 
sor; mercifully grant, that while we celebrate his 
festival, we may imitate his actions. Thro’. 

LESSON. Eccl. xxxi. 8. 11.— Blessed is the man 
that is found without blemish; and that hath no 
goue after gold, nor put his trust in money nor in 
treasures. Who is he, and we will praise lim, fx 
he hath done wonderful things in his life. Who hath 
been tried thereby, and made perfect, he shall have 
glory everlasting. He that could have transgressed, 
and hath not transgressed : and could do evil things, 
and hath not done them. Therefore are his 
established in the Lord, and all the church of tbe 
saints shall declare his alms. 

GRAD. Ps. xci.--The just shall flourish like the 
palm-tree: he shall grow up like the cedar of Li 
banus in the house of the Lord. V. To shew forth 
thy mercy in the morning, and thy truth in the night 
Alleluia, Alleluia. V. Beatus vir qui suffert tenla- 
lionem, quoniam cum probatus fuerit, accipwel coronam 
vile. Alleluia. P. Dlessed is the man that endureth 
temptation ; for when he hath been proved, he shall 
receive the crown of life. Alleluia. 

After Septuag. stead of Aiichoin and V. ts said 
TRACT, Beatus, py. AGd. . 
GOSPEL. Lake xà. $5. M3. — AX thot Nem. 


MASS XIV. JUSTUS UT PALMA, &c. 489 


Jerus said to his disciples: Let your loins be girt, and 
lamps burning in your hands, and you yourselves 
like to men who wait for their lord, when he shall 
return from their wedding; that when he cometh 
and knocketh, they may open to him immediately. 
Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord, when he 
cometh, shall find watching: Amen, I say to you, 
that he will gird himself, and make them sit down 
‘to theat, and passing will minister unto them. And 
if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the 
third watch, and find them so, blessed are those ser- 
vants, But this know ye, that if the householder did 
know at what hour the thief would come, he would 
surely watch, and would not suffer his house to be 
broke open. Be you then also ready: for at what 
hour you think not, the Son of man will come. 

OFFERT. Ps. \xxxviii.—My truth and my mercy 
We with him: and in my name shall his horn be 
exalted. 

SECRET.—We offer thee, O Lord, in honour of 

saints, a sacrifice of praise, by which we liope to 
be delivered: from all present and future evils. Thro’. 

COMM. Matt. xxiv.—Blessed is that servant 
whom when his Lord shall come, he shall find watch- 
mg. Amen, I say to you, he shall place him over 
all his goods. 

P. COMM. Refecti.—Being refreshed, O Lord, 
With this heavenly meat and drink, we humbly be- 
®eech thee, that we may be assisted by his prayers, 
On whose feast we have received these sacred myste- 
Fries Thro’. 


MASS XIV. Justus ut palma, of the same. 
INTROIT. P5. xci. 
"[ HE just shallflourish T USTUS ut palma flo- 
like the palm-tree: rebit: sicut cedrus 
he shall grow up like the Libani mu\tiplicabitur~. 
Cedar of Libanus: being plantatus in domo Vo- 





490 MASS XIV. JCSTUS UT PALMA, &c. 


planted in the house of mini, in atriis domus De 
the Lord, in the courts of nostri. 
the house of our God. Ps. Bonum est confi 

Ps. It is good to give teri Domino: et psallere 
praise to the Lord: and nomini tuo Altissime! 
to sing to thy name, O V. Gloria. 

Most High! V. Glory. 

COLLECT. .4desto.—Attend, O Lord, to the 
hu:üble prayers we present to thee on the solemnity 
of hi: sed N. thy Confessor; that we who have no 
contidence in our own righteousness, may be hel 
by his prayers, who was so pleasing to thee. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. 1 Cor. iv. 9. 1H.— Brethren : We are 
made a spectacle to the world, and to angels and to 
men. We are fools for Christ's sake, but you are 
Wise in Christ: we are weak but you are strong: 
you are honourable, but we without honour. Even 
unto this hour, we both hunger and thirst, and are 
naked, and are buffeted, and have no fixed abode, 
and we labour working with our own hands: we 
are reviled, and we bless: we are persecuted, and 
we stiller it. Wo are blasphemed, and we entreat: 
we are made as the refuse of this world, the offscour- 
ing of all, even until now, — I write not these things 
to confound you ; but I admonish you as iny dearest 
children, in Christ Jesus our Lord. 

GRAD. Ps. xxxvi.—The mouth of the just shah 
meditate wisdom ; and his tongue shall speak judg- 
ment. The law of his God is in his heart, and his 
steps shall not be moved. Allel. «lel. V. Beatus, vi 
qui timet Dominum ; in mandatis ejus. cupit. nines. 
Allel. V. Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord 
he delights exceedingly in his commandments, Ald. 

After Septuag. instead of Alleluia and V. is said 

TRACT, Beatus, p. 4G5. 
GOSPEL. Luke xiv. $3. 34.—\§_-.4t that time 
Jesus said to his disciples: Fear nor Wie okie 
it hath pleased your Father to ve you a hagas 





MASS Xv. * OS JUSTI OF ABBOTS. 491 


Sell what you possess and give alms. Mako to your 
selves bags, which grow not old, a treasure in heaven 
which fuileth not: where no thief approacheth, nor 
moth corrupteth. For where your treasure is, there 
will your heart be also. 

OFFERT.—Ps. xx.—In thy strength, O Lord, the 
just shall joy : and in thy salvation, he shall rejoice 
exceedingly : thou hast given him his soul’s desire. 

SECRET.—Grant, we beseech thee, O Almighty 
God, that our humble offerings may be acceptable 
to thee, for the honour of thy saints, and purify us 
both in body and mind. Thro’. 

COMM. Matt. xix.—Amen, I say to you, that 
you who have forsaken all things and followed me, 
shall receive an hundred fold, and shall possess life 
everlasting. 

P. COMM. Quaesumus. —W e bescech thee, O Al- 
nighty God, that by the intercession of thy holy con- 
fessor N. the heavenly food we have received may 
lefend us from all adversity. Thro’. 


MASS XV. * Os justi of ABBOTS. 

IN TROIT, as in Mass XIII. p. 488. 

COLLECT. Intercessio.—May the intcrcession, 
O Lord, of the blessed Abbot N, recommend us to 
thee: that what we cannot hope for through our own 
merits, we tnay obtain by his prayers. ‘Thro’. 

LESSON. Eccles. xlv. 1. 6.—' This saint was be- 
loved of God and men: whose memory is in bene- 
diction. He made him like the saints in. glory, and 
magnified him in the fear of his enemies. And with 
his words he made prodigies to cease. Ile elorified 
him in the sight of kings, and gave him command- 
ments in the sight of his people, and shewed him his 
glory. He sanctified him in his faith and meekness, 
and chose him out of all flesh. For he heard him 
and his voice, and brought him into a cloud. Aud he 
gaye him cominandments before his face, ow a Vow 
f life and instruction. 








492 mass xv. * OS JUSTI, OF ABBOTS. 


GRAD. Ps. xx.—Lord thou hast prevented him 
with blessings of sweetness: thou hast set on his 
head a crown of precious stones. P. He asked life 
of tiec, and thou hast given him length of days, for 
ever aud ever. dleluia, Alleluia. V. Justus ut 
palma fierebit: sicut cedrus Lnbani multiplicabitw 
Allelia, The just shall flourish like the palm tree; 
he shall grow up like the cedar of Libanus. Alledwa. 


«TJ r Septuag. instead of Alleluia and V. is said 
TRACT, Beatus, p. 465. 


GOSPEL. .Matt. xix. 97. 29.——.J that time: 
Peter said to Jesus: Behold we have left all things, 
and have followed thee: what therefore shall we 
have? And Jesus said to them: Amen, I say to 
you, that you who have followed me in the regenere 
tion, when the Son of Man shall sit on the seat of bis 
majesty, vou also shall sit on twelve scats judging 
the twelve tribes of Isracl. And every one thar ath 
left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or me 
ther, or wife, or children, or lands for my names 
sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall possess 
lite everlasting. 

OFFERT. Ps. xx.—-Thou hast given him, 0 
Lord, his soul’s desire: and hast not withholden from 
him the will of his lips. Thou hast set on his head 
a crown of precious stones. 

SECRET.—May blessed N. the Abbot intercede 
for ux, O Lord, that the offerings we have laid on 
thy altars, may avail us unto salvation. Thro’. 

COMM. Luke xii.—'T his is the faithful and prt 
dent servant, whom the Lord placed over his family, 
to give them their measure of wheat in due senson. 

P. COMM.  Protegat.—May the receiving of this 
sacrament, and the intercession of blessed N. the 
Abbot, protect us, O Lord ; that we may both copy 
after the virtues of lis We, and experience dhe belg 
of his intercession, "Wo. 


0 ———— a me EOE oe oe e 


{ 493 ] 
MASS XVI. Loquebar, ofa Virgin and Martyr. 


“WV BATEVER objections human policy may urge 
against the state of virginity, it is nevertheless 
perfectly 


le to the christian system. An in- 
carnete God recommends it by word and example :— 
Ei. Paul bestows the greatest encomiums on it; and in 


wrery age, those who preserved their virginit 
esteemed the noblest portion of 
On the festivals therefore of these illustrious 


ulwa 
Chri 


were 
ock of 


of the Son of God, let us beseech him to grant 


grace of perseverance to all such as by vow 


ave 


voluntarily consecrated themselves to his service in that 
perfect state, as well as for that purity of soul, which 
essentially necessary for every one, since without it, 


®o one can see God. 


INTROIT. 


[SPOKE of thy testi- 
monies before kings, 
wad I was not ashamed : 
V meditated also on thy 
commandments, which 1 
loved exceedingly. 
Ps, Blessed are the un- 
in the way, who 
wak in the law of the 
led. P. Glory. 


Ps. cxviii. 


OQUEBAR de testi- 

moniis tuis in con- 
spectu regum, et non con- 
fundebar: et meditabar 
in mandatis tuis que 
dilexi nimis. 

Ps. Beati immaculati 
in via, qui ambulant in 
lege Domini. 

V. Gloria. 


COLLECT. Deus, qui. — O God, who amongst 
Cher miracles of thy power, has bestowed the crown 
of martyrdom even on the weaker sex: mercifully 

t that we, who solemnize the festival of blessed 

» thy Virgin and Martyr, may, by following her 


example, come to thee. 


Thro’. 


LESSON. Eccles. li. 1. 8. — I will give glory to 
O Lord, my king, and I will praise thee, O 


God, 


my Saviour. 


I will give glory to thy name 


for thou hast been a helper and protector to me, 


"hd hast preserved my body fron destruction, from 
he snare of an unjust tongue, and from the ipa of 
- t 


494 MASS XVI. LOQUEBAR, 


them that forge lies, and in the sight of them that 
stood by, thou hast been my helper. And thou has 
delivered me, according to the multitude ofthe merey 
of thy name, from the roaring lions, that were ready 
to devour me. Out of the hands of them that sou 
my life, and from the gates of atflictions, which 
compassed me about; from the oppression of the 
flame which surrounded me, and in the midst of the 
fire 1 was not burnt. From the depth of the belly 
of hell, and from an unclean tongue, and from lying 
words, from an unjust king, and from a slanderous 
tongue: my soul shall praise the Lord even to death, 
because thou succourest those that trust in thee, and 
deliverest them from the hands of the Gentiles, 0 
Lord our God. 

GRAD. Ps. xliv.—Thou hast loved justice and 
hated iniquity. V. 'l'herefore, God, thy God bath 
anointed thee with the oil of gladness. Alleluia, 
Alleluia, V. Aldducentur Regi Virgines post eam: 
proxime ejus afferentur tibi in letitia. Alleluia. V. After 
her shall virgins be brought to the king: her neigh 
bours shall be brought to thee with joy. Alleluia. 


Afier Septuag. instead of Alleluia and V. is said 

TRACT. Ps. xliv.—Veni sponsa Christi, aci 
coronam quam tibi Dominus preparavit in elergum: 
pro cujus amore sanguinem tuum, fudisti. Come, 
spouse of Christ, receive the crown which the Lord 
hath prepared for thee for ever: for whose love thou 
didst shed thy blood. V. Thou hast loved justice, 
and hated iniquity: therefore God, thy God hath 
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fe- 
lows. V. With thy comeliness and thy beauty st 
out, proceed prosperously and reign. 

GOSPEL. Matt. xxv. 1. 13.——44t that lim: 
Jesus spoke to his disciples this parable: The king- 
dom of heaven shall be ike to ten wein. who taki 
their lamps went out to meet Cos btdegroam 
the prides And five of them were fodhsin, AWE 


OF A VIRGIN AND MARTYR. 495 


Wise. But the five foolish, having taken their lamps, 
did not take oil with them: but the wise took oil in 
their vessels with the lamps. And the bridegroom 
ing, they all slumbered and slept. And at mid- 
igit there was a cry made: Behold the bridegroom 
cometh, go ye forth to meet him. Then all those 
pins arose and trimmed their lam And the 
ish said to the wise: Give us of your oil, for 
our lamps are gone out. The wise answered, say- 
ing: Lest perhaps there be not enough for us an for 
You, go you rather to them that sell, and buy for 
relves Now whilst they went to buy, the 
m came: and they that were ready, went 

in with him to the marriage, and the door was shut. 
Bat at last came also the other virgins, saying: 
Lord, Lord open to us. But he answered, saying: 
Amen, I say to you, 1 know you not. Watch ye, 
ore, because you know not the day nor the 


OFFERT. Ps. xliv.—Virgius shall be brought in 
her retinue to the king: her relations shall be pre- 
sented to thee with joy and gladness: they shall be 
@troduced into the temple to the Lord the King. 

SECRET.—Receive, O Lord, the offerings we 
bring on the solemnity of blessed N. thy Virgin and 

r by whose intercession we hope to be deliver- 
€ Thro’. 

COMM. Ps. cxviii.—Let the proud be ashamed, 

use they have done unjustly towards me, but I 
Will be employed in thy commandments, in thy jus- 
tfications that I may not be confounded. 

P. COMM. Auzrilientur—May the mysteries we 
have received, O Lord, be a help to us, and, by the 
Intercession of blessed N. thy Virgin and Martyr, 
Cause us to enjoy her cominual protection. Thro’. 

t 


[ 496 ] 


MASS XVII. Me expectaverunt, of the same. 
INTROIT. Pe. cxviii. 


HE wicked have E expeeteverun 
waited for me to des- peccatores, ut per- 
troy me: but I have un- derent me: testimnoniatua 
derstood thy testimonies, Domine, intellexi. Omnis 
O Lord. I have seenan consummationis vidi f 
end of all perfection: thy nem: latum mandatum 
cominandment is exceed- tuum nimia. 
ingly broad. Ps. Beati immaculati 
Ps. Blessed aretheun- in via, qui ambulant a 
defiled in the way, who leg Domine. 
walk in the law of the V. Gloria. 
Lord. V. Glory. 


COLLECT. Indulgentiam.—Let blessed N. thy 
Virgin and Martyr, O Lord, sue for our pardoa: 
who by the purity of her life, and profession of thy 
virtue, was always pleasing to thee. Thro’. 

LESSON. Eccles.li. 13. 17.—0O Lord, my God, 
thou hast exalted my dwelling place upon the earth, 
and I have prayed for death to pass away. I 
upon the Lord the father of my Lord, that he would 
not leave me in the day of my trouble, and in the 
time of the proud, without help. I will praise thy 
name continually and will praise it with thanksgiving; 
and my prayer was heard. And thou hast saved me 
from destruction, and hast delivered me from the 
evil time. Therefore I will give thanks and praise 
thee, O Lord our God. 

GRAD. Ps.xlv.—God will assist her with bis 
favourable countenance : God is in the midst of her, 
she shall not be moved. The stream of the river 
maketh the city of God joyful: the Most High hath 
sanctified his own tabernacle. Alleluia. V. He 
est Virgo sapiens, et uno. de numero prudentium. Ab 
leluia. V. This is & wise Virgin, and one fi On 
number of the prudent. Allleluas. 


OF MANY VV. AND MM. 497 


r tuag. instead of Alleluia and V. 1s said 
Bep RACT, Vent, p. 494. 
JPEL. Matt. xiii. as in p. 501. 
*ERT. Ps. xliv.—Grace is spread on thy lips, 
re hath God blessed thee for ever. 
/;RET.—Mercifully receive, O Lord, the of- 
| consecrated to thee, and by the merits of 
| N. thy Virgin and Martyr, grant they may 
is a continual support. Thro’. 
MM. Ps. cxviiii—I have done judgment and 
» O Lord, let not the proud calumniate me: 
walked upright in the ways of thy command- 
: 1 have hated all evil ways. 
'OMM. Divim  muneris.—Being plentifülly 
th thy divine gifts, we beseech, thee, O Lord 
Xd, that by partaking of them through the in- 
ion of blessed N. thy Virgin and Martyr, we 
btain eternal life. Thro’. 


| XVIII. * Loquebar, of many VV. and MM. 
All as in Mass, XVI. p. 493, except 

4LECT. Da nobis.—Grant, we bescech theo, 
d our God, that with a constant devotion, we 
slebrate the victories of thy holy Virgins and 
 N. and N. that though we cannot solemnize 
is we ought, we may seek their prayers with 
: humility.— ‘Thro’. 

STLE. 1 Cor. vii. as in. p. 500. 


'RET.—Look down, we beseech thee, O Lord, 
offerings laid on thy altar, on this feast of thy 
Virgins and Martyrs N. and N. that as thou 
Xitowed glory on them so by the sacred mys- 
thou mayest grant us pardon. Thro’. 
"OMM. Presta nobis.—Grant, we beseech 
) Lord, by the intercession of thy Virgins and 
ra, to receive with a pure inind what we re- 
with our mouths, Thro’. 
Tt3 





[ 498 ] 


MASS XIX. Dilexisti, of a Virgin only. 
INTROIT. Js. lxiv. 


Tou hast loved jus- piLExem justtem 
tice and hated iniqui- et odisti iniquitatem: 

: therefore, God, thy Propterea unxit te Deas, 
God hath anointed thee Deus tuus, oleo leuue 
with the oil of gladness, prz consortibus tuis. 
above thy fellows. 

Ps. My heart hath ut- Ps. Eructavit cor meum 
tered a good word: I verbum bonum; dicoego 
speak my works to.the opera mea Regi. 
King. V. Glory. V. Gloria. 


COLLECT. Eraudi.—Give ear to us, O God our 
Saviour, that as we celebrate with joy the solemnity 
of blessed N. thy Virgin, so we may improve in the 
affection of piety. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. 2 Cor. x. 15. xi. 1. 2.—Brethrea: 
Let him that glorieth, glory in the Lord: for not be 
that commendeth himself, is approved ; but he whom 
God commendeth. (Chap. xi.) Would to God you 
could bear with some little of my folly: but do 
bear with me. For Iam jealous of you with tbe 
jealousy of God. For I have espoused you to one 
husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgi 
to Christ. 

GRAD. Ps. xliv.—With thy comeliness and 
thv beauty set out proceed prosperously and reign. 
V. Because of truth and meekness, and justice, 
thy right hand shall conduct thee wonderfully. l- 
leluia, Alleluia. V. Adducentur Regi Virgines post 
eam: prorime ejus afferentur tibi in leliia, Ak 
leluia. 7. After her virgins shall be brought to the 
King : her neighbours shall be brought to thee with 

joy. Alleluia. 
After Seytuag. instead of Adieloia and V. ts said 


TRACT. Ps. x\iw—-Audi, fie, & wie oe 





499 


Hing aurem tuam : quia concupivit Rex speciem tuam. 
Hearken, O daughter, and see, and incline thy ear, 
for the King is taken with thy beauty. V. All the 
rich among the people shall entreat thy countenance : 
the daughters of kings shall honour thee. P. Virgins 
shall be brought in her retinue to the King; her re- 
lations shall be presented.to thee. V. They shall be 
hreught with gladness and rejoicing: they shall be 

ht into the temple of the King. 

SPEL. .Matl. xxv. as in p. 494. 

OFFERT. Ps. xliv.—The daughters of kings 
have delighted thee in thy glory. The queen stood 
os thy right hand in gilded clothing, surrounded 
With variety. 

SECRET.—May the offerings, O Lord, of thy de- 
Yout people, be acgeptable to thee in honour of thy 
mints: by whose merits they have experienced help 
mtheir afflictions. Thro’. 

COMM. Matt. xxv.—The five wise virgins took 
oil in their vessels with their lamps: and at midnight 

was a cry made: Behokl! the bridegroom 
cometh : go ye out and meet Christ the Lord. 

P. COMM.  Satiasti.—Thou hast fed, O Lord, 
thy family with these sacred oblations: ever there- 

comfort us with her intercession, whose feast 
We celebrate. Thro’. 


MASS XX. Vultum tuum, of ihe same. 
INTROIT. Ps. xliv. 


A the rich among ULTUM tuum de- 
the people shall en- precabuntur omnes 


d A VIRGIN NOT A MARTYR. 





Geat thy countenance: 

afer her shall virgins 
brougut to the king: 

9r neighbours shall be 
ught to thee in joy and 
Dess, 

Ps. My heart hath ut- 


divites plebis: adducen- 
tur Regi virgines post 
eam: proxime ejus af- 
ferentur tibi in letitia et 
exultatione. 


Ps. Eructavit cor meun 


We Wass XY. VULTUM TUUM, 


‘ered 2 zood worl: I verbum bonum: dieo ego 
-pea& ‘nv works to the opera mea Regi. 
King. 7. Glory. V. Gloria. 

COLLECT. Exaudi.—Give ear to us, O Godour 
Saviour. “hat 23 we celebrare with joy the solemnity 

X nesaed N. chy Virgin, so we may improve in the 
afection or piety. Thro’ 

SPISTL=. 1 Cor. vii. 95. 34.—Brethren: Con- 
-eminz -irnns I have no commandment of the 
Lom: jut I give counsel, as having obtained mercy 
che Cori to be thithful. I think therefore that 
this ^s med for the present necessity, for a menm 
"tu de, Art thou bound to a wife? aeek not to be 
wosea. Art thou 'oosed from a wife? seek nota 
wije, But if thou tke a wife, thou hast not sinned. 
And if a virgin marry. she hath @ot sinned: never- 
"eie, ich shall have tribulation of the flesh. Bat 
| spare vou, This therefore I say, brethren: the 
ime is shurt: it remaineth, that they also who have 
wives, Je as ir they bad none; and they that weep, 
WOU they wept aot; and they that rejoice, a 
T Chev micived not: and they that buy as though 
"ev possessed’ not; and they that use this world, as 
oinev used it not: for the fashion of this world pet 
set away. — But I would have you to be vrithoutso- 
Heirude. He shar is without a wite, is solicitous for 
We wines thar beionz to the Lord, how he may 
piease God. But be that is with a wife, is solicitous 
jr tne things cf the world, how he may please his 
wire: and ie isdivided. And the unmarried woman 
and the virgin thinketh on the things of the Lord 
that she may be holy both in y and spirit, in 
Chris Jesus our Lord. 

GRAD. P; xliv.—The King shall greatly desire 
thy beauty : for he isthe Lord thy God. V. Hearken, 
O daughter, see, and Welme Wy eme. Hel, Alla 
V. Hee est cirgo sapien: et una de numere yealate 

tiem. Alleluia. V. Line aw à 
of tae number of the prudent. Aya. 


- a eet A m 


wee Nitgin, wn. wes. 


UN. 


OF A VIRGIN NOT A MARTYR. 501 


Mer Septuag. instead of Alleluia and V. is said 
TRACT, Audi filia, p. 498. 


GOSPEL. Matt. xii. 44. 52. — Al that time: 
Sou spake to his disciples this parable: The king- 
tla of heaven is like unto a treasure hidden ina 
fied. Which a man having found, hid it, and for 
oy thereof goeth, and selleth all that he hath, and 

eth that field. Again the kingdom of heaven is 
Kiké to a merchant seeking good pearls. Who when 
ihe had found one l of great price, went his way, 
wad sold all that he had, aud bought it. Again the 

i m of heaven is like to a net cast into the sea, 
gethering together of all kinds of fishes. Which, 
when it was filled they drew out, and sitting by the 
ahore, they chose 3» the good into vessels, but the 
bad they cast forth? So shall it be at the end of the 
world. The angels shall go out, and shall separate 
the wicked from among the just. And shall cast them 
into the furnace of fire; there shall be weeping and 
faehing of teeth. Have ye understood all these 
ings? "They say to him: Yes. He said unto 
them: Therefore every scribe instructed in the king- 
dom of heaven, is like to à man who is a householder 
Who bringeth forth out of his treasure new things 
"aud old. 

OFFERT. Ps. xliv.—After her shall virgins be 
lrought to the King : her neighbours shall be brought 
to thee with gladness and rejoicing: they shall be 
brought into the temple of the Lord the King. 

SECRET.—May the offerings, O Lord, of thy 
devout people be acceptable to thee in honour of thy 
Saints; by whose merits they have experienced help 
in their afflictions. Thro’. 

. COMM. Matt. xiii—The kingdom of heaven is 
like a merchant seeking good pearls: who when he 

ad found one pearl of great price, he went his way, 
&nd sold all that he had and bought it. 


502 MASS XXI. COGNOVI, 


P. COMM. Satiasti,. — Thou hai fed, O Lon, 
thy family with these sacred oblationa: ever, there- 
fore, comfort us with her intercession, whose feas 
we celebrate. Thiro’. 


MASS XXI. Cognovi, of HOLY WOMEN. 
HE Church has decreed honours, not only to those 
who have sanctified the married state by the ex 
ercise of the virtues of a profound humility, unwearied 
patience, and purity of heart, but also to others, who 
after an irregular course of life, became so highly in 
flamed with the love of God. as to be rendered almost 
rqual to virgins. Let us then beg of Him, through the 
intercession of these Saints, that he would grant u 
the grace of a sincere compunction for our past tren 
gressions, accompanied by such an ardent charity as 
covereth a multitude of sins. 


INTROIT. Ps cxviii. 


KNEW, O Lord, that OGNOVI Domine 
thy judgments are quia equitas judici 
equity: and in thy truth tua; et in veritate tus 
thou hast humbled me:  humiliasti me: Confige 
Pierce thou my flesh with — timore tuo carnes meas: 
thy fear: for I am afraid a mandatis tuis timui. 
of thy judgments. 

Ps. Blessed are the un- Ps. Beati immaculati 
defiled in the way: who in via: qui ambulaut in 
walk in the law of the lege Domini. 

Lord. V. Glory. V. Gloria. 


COLLECT.  Exaudi.— Give ear to us, O God 
our Saviour, that as we celebrate with joy the so- 
lemnity of blessed N. so we may improve in the af- 
fection oftrue piety. Thro’. 

LESSON. Prov. xxxi. 10.—Who shall find a 
valiant woman? the price of her is as of things 
brought from afar off, and from the uttermost 
coasts, The heart of her Von wusterh to ee, 
and he shall have no need of spotla, She wih vexit 





OF HOLY WOMEN. 503 


him good and not evil, nil the days of her life. She 
sought wool and flax, and hath wrought by the 
@ounsel of her hands. She is like the merchant's 
Whip she bringeth her bread from afar. And she 
hath risen in the night, and given prey to her house- 
ld, and victuals to her maidens. She hath con- 
sidered a field, and bought it: with the fruit of her 
hands she hath planted a vineyard. She hath girded 
ber loins with strength, and liath strengthened her 
um. She hath tasted and seen that her traffic is 
pied : her lamp shall not be put out in the night. 
hath put out her liand to strong things, and her 
fingers have taken hold of the spindle. She hath 
opened her hand to the needy, and stretched out her 
hands to the poor. She shall not fear for her house 
I the cold of snow, for all her domestics are cloth- 
ed with double garments. She hath made for her- 
self clothing of tapestry ; fine linen and purple is 
covering. Her husband is honourable in the 
where he sitteth among the senators of the 
She made fine linen and sold it, and delivered 
&girdle to the Chananite. Strength and beauty are 
clothing, and she shall laugh in the latter day. 
he hath opened her mouth to wisdom, and the law 
of clemency is on her tongue. She hath looked well 
© the paths of her house, and hath not eaten her 
idle. Her children rose up, and called her 
blessed: her husband, and he praised her. Many 
laughters hath gathered together riches: thou hast 
‘urpassed them all. Favour is deceitful, and beaut 
S vain: the woman that feareth the Lord, she shall 
Je praised. Give her of the fruit of her hands, and 
€t her works praise her in the gates. 
. GRAD. Ps. xliv.—Grace is poured abroad on thy 
ips, therefore hath God blessed thee for ever. Be- 
"Ause of truth, and meekness, and justice; and thy 
ight hand shall conduct thee wonderfully. Alleluta, 
Ueluia. V. Specie tua et pulchritudine tua, inlende, 


504 ANNIVERSARY MASS OF TIE 


rospere procede ; et regna. Alleluia. P. In thy come 
fines and beauty go on, proceed prosperously and 
reign. Alleluia. 
After Septuag. instead of Alleluia and V. is said 
TRACT, ent, p. 494. 


GOSPEL. Malt. xiii. as in p. 501 


OFFERT. Ps. xliv.—Grace is poured abroad on 
thy lips, therefore hath God bl thee for ever and 
ever. 

SECRET.—May the offerings, O Lord, of d 
devout people, be acceptable to thee in honour 
thy saints: by whose merits they have 
help in their afflictions. Thro’, 

COMM. Ps. xliv.—Thou hast loved justice, and 
hated iniquity; therefore, God, thy God hath 
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy ft 
OWS, 

P. COMM. Satiasti.—Thou hast fed, O Lord, 
thy family with these sacred oblations: ever there 
fore comíort us with her intercession whose feast we 
celebrate. Thro’. 


ANNIVERSARY MASS of the DEDICATION 
of a CHURCH. 
INTROIT. Gen. xxviii. 

pus place is awful! it IRRIBILIS est locus 

is the house of God, iste! hic Domus De 
the gate of heaven: and est, et porta coeli: et vo- 
it shall be called the cabitur aula Dei 
palace of God. 

Ps. Howlovely arethy Ps. Quam dilecta t 
tabernacles, O Lord of  bernacula tua, Domine 
Hosts! My soul longeth virtutum! Concupiscit et 
and fainteth for the courts deficit anima 1nea in atria 
ofthe Lord. V. Giry. Sow. V. Gloria 

COLLECT. Deus, quà nobis. — O Ga aw Y- 
newest every year rhe day of the coss exe Sm S. 








DEDICATION OF A CHURCH. 505 


y temple, and bringest us always in health to 
ebrating these sacred mysteries: hear the 
| of thy people, and grant that whosoever 
ome hither to ask any blessing of thee, may 
in obtaining all his requests. Thro’. 
SON. Rev. xxi 9. 5.—In those days: ! 
aw the holy city, the new Jerusalem coming 
ut of heaven, from God, prepared as a bride 
1 for her husband. And I heard a great voice 
ie throne, saying: Behold the tabernacle of 
th men, and he will dwell with them. And 
all be his people: and God himself with them 
9 their God. And God shall wipe away all 
9m their eyes: and death shall be no more, 
urning, nor crying, nor sorrow shall be any 
br the former things are passed away. And 
sat on the throne said: Behold I make all 
jew. 
D.—This place was made by God, a m 
li value: it is without reproof. P. O God, 
m choirs of angels attend, hear the prayers 
servants. Alleluia, Alleluia. V. Adorabo ad 
& sanctum tuum: et confilebor nomini tuo. 
. V. I will adore thee in thy holy temple, 
rill praise thy name. Alleluia. 
Septuag. instead of Alleluia and V. is said 
TRACT. Quwu confidunt, p. 189. 
PEL. Luke xix. 1. 10——/ that time: 
ntering in, ke walked t h Jericho. And 
there was a man named Zacheus, who was 
af of the publicans, and he was rich. And 
ght to see Jesus, who he was, and he could 
the crowd, because he was low of stature. 
wning before he climbed up into a sycamore 
at he might see him: for he was to pass that 
And when Jesus was come to the place, look- 
he saw him, and said to him: Zacheus make 
Uu 


506 ANNIVERSARY MASS OF THE, &c. 


haste and come down: for this day I must abidein 
thy house. And he made haste and came down,end 
received him with Joy. And when all saw it, they 
murmured, saying, he was gone to be a guest 
with a man that was a sinner. But Zacheus stand- 


said to him: This day is salvation come to this house; 
because he also is a son of Abraham. For the Son dl 
man is come to seek and to save that which was lost. 
Crepo. 

OFFERT. 1 Chron. xxix.—Lord God, in the 
simplicity of my heart have I joyfully offered all these 
things: and I have seen with t joy thy people, 
which are here present. O God of srael, preserve 
them for ever in this disposition. Alleluia. 

SECRET.—Grant, we beseech thee, O Lon, 
our petition, that whilst we offer thee these our vows, 
we may, by thy help, obtain an eternal reward. 
Thro’. 

COMM. Matt. xxi—My house shall be called 
the house of prayer, saith the Lord : in it whosoever 
asketh receiveth ; and he who seeketh, findeth; and 
the door shall be opened to him that knocketh. 

P. COMM. Deus, qui de vivis.—O God, who, 
out of living and choice stones, preparest to thy 
majesty an eternal abode, help thy people at their 
prayers; that as thy Church is co ly enlarged, 
80 it may be spiritually increased. ‘Thro’. 


| 507 ] 
VOTIVE MASSES of the B. V. MARY. 


. ——— 
Fron CANDLEMAS to ADVENT. 
INTROIT. 


HAT Holy M other, ALVE, Sancta Pa- 

who didst bring forth rens, enixa puerpera 
fe King whoreignsover Regem, qui colum ter- 
heaven and earth forever- ramque regit in secula 
inore. sreculorum. 

Ps. My heart hath ut- Ps. Eructavit cor me- 
tered good tidings: I ad- um verbum bonun:: dico 
ürem my works to the ego opera mea Regi. 
King. V. Glory. V. Gloria. 


COLLECT. Concede nos.—Grant, O Lord, we 
thee, that we thy servants may enjoy con- 
Want health of body and mind, and by the glorious 
ion of blessed Mary, ever a Virgin, be de- 
from all temporal afflictions, and como to 

those joys that are eternal. Thro’. 

LESSON. Eccles. xxiv. 14. 16.—From the begin- 
ang, and before the world, was 1 created, and unto 
the world to come I shall not cease to be, and in the 
holy dwelling place have I ministered before him. 

so was I established in Sion, and in the holy 
tty likewise I rested, and my power was in Jerusa- 
km And I took root in an honourable people, and 
D the portion of my God his inheritance, and my 
thode is in the full assembly of saints. 

GRAD.— Thou art blessed, and worthy of our rc- 
gects, O Mary, the Virgin, who, without prejudice 
to thy virginity, didst become the mother of the 
Beviour. P. O Virgin-mother of God! he whom 
the whole world cannot contain, became man, and 
was shut up in thy womb. lel. Allel. V. Virga 
ksse floruit : virgo Deum el hominem genuit : pacem 

u 


508 VOTIVE MASSES OF THE B. V. MARY. 


Deus reddidit, in se reconcilians, ima, summis. Al 
leluia. V. A sucker of Jesse hath budded: a ve 
hath brought forth him, who is God and man: 
hath restored peace by reconciling in his person the 
highest things with the lowest. Alleluia. 


" Septuag. instead of Alleluia and V. ts said 
Vie Sep "TRACT, de, p. 510. 
GOSPEL. Luke ix. 97. 28.——At that tm: 
Whilst Jesus spoke to the multitude: A certain woman 
from the crowd lifting up her voice said to him: 
Blessed is the womb that bore thee, and the pee 
that gave thee suck: but he said ; Yea, rather bles- 
sed are they who hear the word of God and keep it. 
From Easter to PENTECOST. 
GOSPEL. John xix. 25. 27.——J/4 that time: 
There stood by the cross of Jesus, his mother, and 
his mother's sister, Mary of Cleophas, and Mary 
Magdalen. When Jesus therefore had seen his mo- 
ther and the disciple standing, whom he loved, be 
said to his mother: Woman, behold thy son. After 
that, he saith to his disciple: Behold thy mother. 
And from that hour the disciple took ber to his 





own. 

OFFERT. From Canpiemas lo Easter. 

Thou art truly happy, O sacred Virgin Mary, and 
most worthy of praise: for out of thee arose the 
of righteousness, Christ our God. 

OFFERT. From Easter to Pentecost. 

Blessed art thou, O Virgin Mary, who didst bear 
the Creator of all things: thou didst bring forth him, 
who made thee, and remainest a Virgin for ever. 
dileluia. 

OFFERT. From Penrecest to ADVENt 

Hail Mary, full of grace; the Lord is with thee; 
blessed art thou amongst women : and blessed is the 
fruit of thy womb. 

SECRET.—May, 0 Lora. oy Sex own sexes uh 
the intercession of blesacd Mary, ever a Wingate 


VOTIVE MASSES OF THE B. V. MARY. 509 


Oblation procure us peace and happiness both in this 
l'ife, and in that which is to come. Thro’. 

COMM.—Blessed is the womb of Mary, the Vir- 
win which bore the Son of the eternal Father. 

P. COMM. Sumptis.—Having received, O Lord, 
what is to advance our salvation ; grant we may al- 
ways be protected by the patronage of blessed Mary, 
ever à Virgin, in whose honour we have offered this 
Bacrifice to thy Majesty. ‘Thro’. 

OG When a Votive Mass of the D. V. is said on Sa- 
turday, the II. Conrecr, &c. are as follows. The 
* Ill. either Ecclesise, or Deus omnium, p. 50. 

IL COLLECT. Deus qui corda.—O God, who 
by the light of the Holy Ghost, has instructed the 
hearts of the faithful: grant, that by the direction of 
the same Holy Spirit, we may relish what is right, 
and always enjoy his consolation. Thro’. 

HM. SECRET.—Sanctify, O Lord, the offerings 
we have made ; and cleanse our hearts by the fire of 
the Holy Ghost. Thro’. 

..IL. P. COMM. Sancti Spiritus.—May the pour- 
ang forth of thy Holy Spirit, O Lord, cleanse our 

and make them faithful by his inward dew 
falling on them, Thro’. - 





From ADVENT to CHRISTMAS. 


Introit, Offertory, and Communion, as on the IV. 
Sunday of Advent, p. 68. Collect, Secret, and 
P. Comm. are the II. Collect, &c. on the first Sun- 
day, p. 50, &c. Lesson and Gospel as on the 
Annunciation, the 25th of March. 

GRAD. Ps. xxiiii——Lift up your gates, O ye 
Pemces, and be ye lifted up, O eternal gates ; and the 
King of glory shall enter in. P. Who shall ascend 
Into the mountain of the Lord: or who shall stand in 
his holy place? He whose hands are innocent, and 
Whose heart is clean. velia, Alleluta. 

u 


X 


510 MASSES FOR THE DEAD. 


V. Hail Mary full of grace, the Lord is with thee: 
blessed art thou amongst women. Alleluia. 





Fron CHRISTMAS to CANDLEMAS. 
INTROIT. Vultum tuum, p. 499. 


Collect, Secret, and P. Comm. as on the CIRCUM- 
CISION, pp, 88, 89. Epistle, Titus iii, and Gospel 
Luke ii. as an p. 79. 

GRAD. Ps. xliv.—Thou art beautiful above the 
sons of men: grace is poured abroad on tby lips 
V. My heart hath uttered a good word : I speak my 
works to the King: my tongue is the pen of a 
scrivener that writeth swiftly. Alleluia, Alleluia. 
V. After child-birth thou remainedst still a Vir- 
gin: O Mother of God intercede for us, we 
Iter Septuag. instead of Alleluia and V. is sed 

TRACT, Gaude, Maria, Virgo, cunctas here 
sola interemisti. Rejoice, O.Virgin Mary, thou alone 
hast destroyed all heresies. V. Who didst believe 
the words of Gabriel the archangel. P. Whilst 
Virgin, thou didst bring forth him that was God and 
man ; and after child-birth didst remain a pure Vir- 
gin. V.O Mother of God, intercede for us. 

OFFERT.—Thou art truly happy, as p. 508. 

COMM.—Blessed is the womb of Mary the Vir- 
gin, which bore the Son of the eternal Father. 





MASS for the DEAD. 
On the Day of Decease or Burial. 
IN TROIT. 
(3RANT them eternal EQUIEM eternam 
rest, O Lord; and dona eis, Domine; 
let perpetual light shine et lux perpetua luceat es 
on them. Ps. 'Te decet hymnus 


Ps. A hymnbecometh Dens, iw Sion. et tibi 
thee, O God, in Sion ;and  reddevor exa Ww V 





MASSES FOR THE DEAD. 511 


& vow shal be paid to salem. Exaudi orationem 
hee in Jerusalem. O meam: ad te omnis caro 
hear my prayer:allflesh veniet. 

hall come to thee. 

Grant them, &c.to Ps. Requiem, &c. usq. ad Ps. 
. COLLECT. Deus, cui.—O God, whose property 
it is always to have mercy and to , we humbly 
present our prayers to thee in behalf of the soul of 

servant N. which thou hast this day called out 

the world: beseeching thee not to deliver it into 

the hands of the enemy, nor to forget it for ever ; but 

command it to be received by the holy angels, and 

to be carried into paradise ; that as it believed and 

heh’ in thee, it may be delivered from the pains of 
and inherit everlasting life. 

EPISTLE. 1 Thes. iv. 12. 17.—Brethren: We 
will not have you ignorant concerning them that are 
asleep, that you be notsorrowful, even as others who 
have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died 
and rose again, even so them who have slept through 
Jesus, will God bring with him. For this we say 
unto you in the word of the Lord, that we who are 
alive, who remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall 
Dot prevent them who have slept. For the Lord 

If shall come down from heaven with com- 
mandment: and with the voice of an archangel, and 
With the trumpet of God: and the dead who are in 

ist, shall rise first. Then we who are alive, who 

are left, shall be taken up together with them in the 

uds to meet Christ, into the air, and so shall we 

always with the Lord. Wherefore comfort ye 
OMe another with these words. 


GRAD. Requiem aternam dona eis, Domine et 
hex perpetua luceat eis. V. Ps. cxi. In memoria 
erii justus: ab auditione mala non timebit. 

Grant them eternal rest, O Lord, and let perpetual 
light shine on them. V. The Just shall be in ever- 


E 


513 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD. 


lasting remembrance: he shall not fear the evi 


hearing 


TRACT. Absolve, Domine, animas omniun 


lium defunctorum ab omni vinculo dilectorum. 


.H 


gratia tua illis. succurente, mereantur evadere jud- 


cium ultionis. 


—Release, O Lord, the souls of all the faith 


V. Et lucis eterna beatitudine | 


de- 


parted from the bonds of their sins. V. And by the 
assistance of thy grace may they escape the sentence 


of condemnation. 
light. 


V. And enjoy the bliss of eterna 


The SEQUENCE or PROSE. 


NE day of wrath, that 
dreadful day 
Shall the whole world in 
ashes lay, 
As David and the Sybils 
say. 
What horror will invade 
the mind, 
When the strict Judge, 
who would be kind, 
Shall have few venial 
faults to find! 

The last loud trumpet’s 
wond’rous sound 

Must thro’ the rending 
tombs rebound, 

And wake the nations 
under ground. 

Nature and death shall 
with surprise 

Behold the pale offender 
rise! 

And view the Judge with 
CONSCIOUS eyes. 


p's irce, dies illa 
Solvet seeclum in favilla: 
Teste David cum Sybille 


Quantus tremor est fi- 
turus, 

Quando Judex est vete 
turus, 

Cuncta stricte discuss 
rus! 

Tuba mirum sperges 
sonum 

Per sepulchra regionum 


Coget omnes ante thro 
num. 

Mors stupebit, et nature, 

Cum resurget creature 


Judicanti responsurs 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD. 


with universal 
1 mystic book 
living and the 


e ascends his 
rone, 
each Becret sin 


d shame con- 
r own. 

what intrest 
iake, 

iy last impor- 


e 
most just have 
quake ? 


ity formidable. 


y'sunexhaust- 

g! 

nfortable pity 
what my ran- 


9 

y dear-bought 
ost, [tost. 
of guilty terror 
» for me didst 
1 pain, 

cious blood the 
1 stain: 

we agonies be 


iom avenging 


"Dey, 
debt (too great 


519 
Liber scriptus proferetur, 
In quo totum continetur, 
Unde mundus judicetur. 
Judex ergo cuim sedebit. 


Quidquid latet, apparebit | 
Nil inultum remanebit. 


Quid sum miser, tunc 
dicturus, 

Quem: patronum rogatu- 
rus, 

Cum vix justus sit secu- 
rus ? 

Rex tremendes majesta- 
tis! 

Qui salvandos salvas gra- 


tis, 
Salva me fons pietatis. 
Recordare Jesu pie, 
Quod sum causa tuc vie, 


Ne me perdas illa die. 

Querens me, sedisti las- 
SUS: 

Redemisti, crucem pas- 
sus: 

Tantus labor non sit cas- 
sus. 

Juste Judex ultionis, 


Donum fac remissions 


514 


Before the sad accounting 
day. 

Surrounded with amaz- 
ing fears ; 

Whose load my soul with 
anguish bears ; 

1 sigh, I weep: accept 
my tears. 

Thou, who wast mov'd 
with Mary’s grief, 

And by absolving of the 
thief, 

Hast given me hope, now 
give relief. 

Reject not my unworthy 
prayer, 

Preserve me from the 
dangerous snare, 

Which death and gaping 
hell prepare. 

Give my exalted soul a 
place 

Among the chosen right- 
hand race, 

The sons of God, and 
heirs of grace. 

From that insatiate abyss, 

Where flames devour, 
and serpents hiss, 

Promote me to thy seat 
of bliss. 

Prostrate, my contrit: 
heart I rend, 

My God, my Father, and 
my friend ! [end. 

Do not forsake me in my 

Well may they curse their 
second birth, 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD. 


Ante diem rationis. 
Ingemisco tanquam reus: 
Culpa rubet vultus meus: 
Supplicanti paree, Deus. 
Qui Mariam absolvist, 
Et latronem exaudisti, 
Mihi quoque spem de 
disti. 
Preces mes non mnt 
digne : 
Sed tu bonus fac benigne, 
Ne perenni cremer igne. 
Inter oves locum preste, 
Et ab heedis me seques 
tra, 
Statuens in parte dextra. 


Confutatis maledictis. 
Flammis acribus addictis. 


Voca me cum benedicti. 
Ora supplex et acclinis, 
Cor contritum quasi cinis, 


Gere curain mei finis 
Lacrymosa dies illa! 





915 


‘Who rise toa surviving Qua resurget ex favilla 
Judicandus homo reus. 
Huic ergo parce Deus: 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD. 


death. 
“Thou great Creator of 


Let ui - Jesu D 
guilty man compas- Pie Jesu Domine, dona 
sion find. Amen. eis requiem. Amen. 


GOSPEL. John xi. 21. 28.——.Jt that time: 
Martha said to Jesus: Lord, if thou hadst been 
here, my brother had not died. But now also I 
know that whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God 
will give itthee. Jesus saith to her: Thy brother 
shall rise again. Martha saith to him: I know that 
he shall tise again in the resurrection at the last day. 
Jesus said to her : I am the resurrection and the life ; 
he that believeth in me, although he be dead, shall 
live. And every one that liveth, and believeth in 
me, shall not die for ever. Believest thou this? 
She saith to him: Yea, Lord, I have believed that 
thou art Christ tbe Son of the living God, who art 
come into this world. 

OFFERTORY. 


Lord Jesus Christ, Domine Jesu Christe, 
King of Glory,deliverthe Rex glorie libera ani- 


souls of all the faithful 
departed from the flames 
of hell and from the 
deep pit. Deliver them 
from the lion’s mouth, 
lest hell swallow them, 
lest they fall into dark- 
ness : and let the standard 
bearer, St. Michael, bring 
them into the holy light: 
* Which thou promisedst 
of old to Abraham and 
his posterity. V. We of- 
fer thee, O Lord, a sacri- 
fice of praise and prayers: 


mas omnium fidelium 
defünctorum de ponis in- 
ferni, et de profundo lacu: 
libera eos de ore leonis, 
ne absorbeat eas tartarus, 
ne cadant in obscurum; 
sed signifer sanctus 
Michael, repreesentet 
eas in lucem sanctam: 
* Quam olim Abrahe 
promisisti, et semini ejus. 
V. Hostias et preces tibi, 
Domine, laudis offeri- 
mus: tu suscipe pro ani- 
mabus illis, quarum ho- 


516 


accept them in behalf of 
the souls we commemo- 
rate this day: and let 
them from death to 
life. * Which, &c. to V. 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD. 


die memoriam faci 
fac eas, Domime 
morte, transire ad 1 
* Quam olim, &c 
ad V. 


SECRET.—Have mercy, O Lord, we be 
thee, on the soul of thy servant, N. for whic 


offer this victim of praise, humbly 


beseechin 


majesty, that by this propitiatory sacrifice he (c 


may arrive at eternal rest. 


hro’. 


COMMUNION. 


Let eternal light shine 
on them, O Lord, with 
thy saints for ever: for 
thou art merciful. V. 
Grant them, O Lord, eter- 
nal rest: and let perpet- 
ual light shine on them. 
* With to V. 


Lux eterna luce 
Domine, * cum! 
tuis in seternum: 


pius es. P. Requi 
ternam dona cD 
et lux perpetua lue 
* Cum sanctis, & 


P. COMM.  Presta.— Grant, we beseech tl 
Almighty God, that the soul of thy servant, 
this day hath departed this life, being purifk 
freed from sin by this sacrifice, may obtain bo 
giveness and eternal rest. Thro’. . 





On the 3d, 7th, or 30th day after decease, the 
of the foregoing Mass ts said, except 

COLLECT. Quesumus.—Admit, we beseec 
O Lord, the soul of thy servant N. (the third, se 
or thirtieth day) of whose decease we commen 
into the fellowship of thy saints, and refresh i 
the perpetual dew of thy mercy. Thro’. 

SECRET.—Mercifully look down, O Lor 
beseech thee, on the offerings we make f 
soul of thy servant N. that being purified by 
heavenly myweriea, W vos Gnd vest in thy | 
Thro’ 


MASSES FOR THE DEAD. 517 


P.COMM.  Suscipe.—Receive, O Lord, our pray- 
Bes in behalf of the soul of thy servant N. that if any 
wtains of the corruptions of this world still stick to 
rt, they may be washed away by thy forgiving mercy. 





ANNIVERSARY MASS jor the DEAD. 
4lil as on the day of decease or burial, p. 510, except 
COLLECT. Deus indulgentiarium.—O God, the 
L.ord of mercy, give to the soul [souls] of thy ser- 
vant [servants | whose anniversary we commemorate, 
& place of comfort, a happy rest, and the light of 


e Thro e 
EX ESSON. 2 Mach. xii. 43. 46.—In those days: 
Judas the valiant commander making a gathering, 
he sent twelve thousand drachmas of silver to Je- 
rusalem, for sacrifice to be offered for the sins of the 
dead; thinking well and religiously concerning the 
resurrection. (For if he had not hoped that they 
that were slain should rise again, it would have 
Seemed superfluous and vain to pray for the dcad.) 
And because he considered that they who had 
fallen asleep with godliness, had great grace laid up 
for them. It is therefore a holy and wholesome 
thought to pray for the dead, that they may be loos- 
6d from their sins. 
GOSPEL. John vi. 37. 49. —— At that time: 
Fetus said to the multitude of the Jews: All that the 
er giveth me, shall come to me: and him that 
Cometh to me, I will not cast out. Because I came 
down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the 
Will of him that sent me. Now this is the will of 
the Father that sent me: that of all that he hath 
Siven me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it 
aes in the last day. And this is the will of my 
er who sent me; that every one who seeth the 
Son, and believeth in him, may have life everlasting, 
I will raise him up in the last day. 
x 


518 MASSES FOR THE DEAD. 


SEC f'1.—Favourably hear, O Lord, our hum- 
ble prayers in behalf of the soul [souls] of thy ser- 
vant [servants] the anniversary ot whose death 3 
this day, for whom we offer up this sacrifice of praise: 
that thou mayest vouchsafe to admit it [hem] t» 
the fellowship of thy saints. } 

P. COMM. Presta.—Grant, we beseech thee, 0 
Lord, that the soul [souls] of thy servant [servants] 
the anniversary of whose death we commemorat, 
being purified by this sacrifice, may obtain both 
pardon and eternal rest. ‘Thro’. 


The COMMON MASS for the DEAD. 
All as on the day of Decease, or Burial, except 
COLLECT. Deus, qui,for Bishops or Pries& — ! 
O GOD, by whose favour thy servants were ra i 
ed to the dignity of Bishops [or Priests] and 
thus honoured with the Apostolic functions: grant 
we beseech thee, that they may be admitted to the 
eternal fellowship of thy apostles in heaven. Thro’ 


For Brethren, Friends, and Benefactors. 


Deus Venie.—O God, the author of mercy, and 
lover of the salvation of mankind ; we address thy 
clemency in behalf of our brethren, relations and 
benefactors, who are departed this life, that by the 
intercession of blessed Mary, ever a Virgin, 
all thy saints, thou wouldst receive them into the 
enjoyment of sternal happiness. Thro’. 

For all the Faithful departed. 

Fidelium.—O God, the Creator and Redeemer of 
all the faithful, give to the souls of thy servants de- 
parted the remission of their sins: that through the 
help of pious supplications, they may obtain the per- 
don they have always desired. Who livest. 

LESSON. Rev. x1. NS. —Y« hose um x Swan 

ice from heaven, eu VOR No me ~ Bresacd we 
d c: ad who die w the Lora. X rom heneekerta wit 





MASSES FOR THE DEAD. 519 


Baith the Spirit that they may rest from their la- 
bours: for their works.follow them. 


GOSPEL. John vi. 51. 55. — At that time: Jesus 
maid io the mulhitude of the Jews: I am the living 
bread which came down from heaven. If any man 
eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread 
that I will give, is my flesh for the life of the world. 
"The Jews therefore strove among themselves, saying: 
How can this man give us his flesh to eat: Then 
Jesus said to them: Amen, amen I say unto you: 
Except you eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and 
drink his blood, you shall not have life in you. He 
that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath 
everlasting life: and I will raise him up in tlie last 


day. 

y SECRET, for Bishops or Priests. 

Accept, O Lord, we beseech thee, the sacrifice 
we offer for the souls of thy servants, Bishops [ or 
Priests] that those whom in this life thou dir'st ho- 
nour with the episcopal [or priestly ] dignity, thou 
mayest join to the fellowship of thy saints in the king- 
dom of heaven. Thro’. 

For Brethren, Friends and Benefactors. 


O God, whose mercy is infinite, graciously hear 
the prayers which we thy humble servants offer thee : 
and grant to the souls of our Brethren, Friends, and 
Benefactors, on whom thou didst bestow the grace 
to confess thy name, the pardon of all their sins by 
these mysteries of our salvation. Thro’. 

For all the Faithful departed. 


Look down favourably, we beseech thee, O Lord, 
on the sacrifice we offer for the souls of thy servants; 
that as thou wast pleased to bestow on them the 
merit of Christian faith, thou wouldst also grant them 
the reward thereof. Thro’. 


P. COMM. Prost. For Bishops, &c. 
Grant, we beseech thee O Lord, by thy mere 
x2 


520 MASSES FOR THE DEAD. 


clemency which we have implored on behalf of the 
souls of thy servants, Bishops [or Priests} that by 
thy mercy they may eternal y enjoy thy presence n 
whom they have hoped and believed. Thro’. 

For Brethren, Friends, and Benefactors. Presa. 
—Grant, we beseech thee, O Almighty and mere 
ful God, that the souls of our Brethren, Friends, snd 
Benefactors, for whom we have offered this sacrifice 
to thy Majesty, being, by virtue of these mysteries, 
purified from all sin, may, through thy mercy, re 
ceive the blessing of pe al light. ro’. 

For All the Faithful departed. Animabus.—Grant, 
we beseech thee, O Lord, that our humble prayers 
in behalf of the souls of thy servants, both men and 
women, may be profitable to them: so that thou 
mayest deliver them from all their sins, and make 
them partakers of the redemption thou hast purchss- 
ed for thein. Who livest. 

CorrEcT, &c. for a deceased Father or Mother. 

COLLECT. O God, who hast commanded us to 
honour our Father and Mother : mercifully shew pi 
to the souls [or soul] of my Father Lor] my Mother, 
and forgive him [ or her ] their [ or his or her] sins: 
and grant that 1 may see them [ or him or her] in 
the joys of eternal life. Thro’. 

SECRET.—Receive, O Lord, the sacrifice I offer 
for the souls [ or soul ] of my Father, [or of] my 
Mother: grant them [or him or her } eternal joysin 

the land of the living: and associate me with them 
[ or him or her ] in the bliss of thy saints. Thro’. 


P. COMM.—May the participation of these hes- 
venly mysteries, O Lord, I beseech thee, obtain rest 
and light for the souls [or soul ] of my Father[or x) 
my Mother: and may thy grace crown me wi 
them | or him or her \ for ever. Thro’. 


29th NOVEMBER. 521 
THE PROPER OF SAINTS. 


S the primitive Christians were accustomed to 
. meet every year on the anniversary of the Martyrs 
he churches or chapels usually erected to their mem- 
in the same place where the whole, or some sacred 
iains of their bodies had been buried, and as their 
ibs served for an altar, so it has ever since been the 
tom to put the relics of some Saint in, or beneath 
* stones. The Mass was not offered to the Mar- 
» but to the Gop of Manrvns, to whom alone sa- 
ice is due, to thank him as well for the strength and 

wherewith he had animated them, as for that 
e of bliss to which he has admitted them. Such was 
origin of the festivals of the Saints. 


XXIX. VIGIL OF ST. ANDREW. 
en this Vigil falls in Advent, the II. Collect is of 
idvent, and the III. of St. Saturninus. When it 
alls on Saturday, the Il. 1s Concede, p. 507, and 
te III. ts Eccl. p. 50, or Deus omnium, 1b. with 
heir respective Secrets and P. Comms. 


2 abovementioned Prayers are also said on every 
Tigil ( except those of Christmas, Easter, and Whit- 
unday, which have only one Collect) and within 
ll Octaves, when the Mass of the Octave is said, 
f directions to the contrary are not given. 
NTROIT. Matt. iv.—The Lord saw near the 
of Galilee two brethren, Peter and Andrew, and 
called them, saying : come ye after me, and I will 
ke you fishers of men. Ps. xviii. The heavens 
'w forth the glory of God: and the firmament de- 
reth the work of his hands. V. Glory. 
JOLLECT. sumus.——W e beseech thee, O 
nighty God, that thy blessed apostle Andrew, 
se festival we are preparing to celebrate, may 
plore thy assistance in our behalf, that being dis- 
wged from the guilt of our crimes, we may like- 
Ye be freed from all dangers. Thro’. 


Xx3 





3399 20th NOVEMREnR. 


COLLECT. Deus, qui.—Of St. SATURNINTS. 
—O God, by whose favour we celebrate the glory 
of blessed Saturninus, thy Martyr: grant that we 
may be assisted by his merits. ‘hro’. 

LESSON, as on the Vigil of an Apostle, p. 460. 

GRAD. Ps. exxxviii—To me, thy friends, O God, 
ure made exceedingly honourable: their principality 
is exceedingly strengthened, . I will number them, 
and they shall be multiplied above the sands. 

GOSPEL. John. i. 35. 51.— —J that time: 
John stood, and two of his disciples :. and bebolding 
Jesus walking, he saith: Behold the Lamb of 
And the two disciples heard him speak, and they 
followed Jesus. And Jesus turning, and seeing them 
following him, saith to them: hat seek you? 
Who said to him: Rabbi, (which is to say, being in- 
terpreted, Master,) where dwellest thou? He saith 
to them: Come and see. They came, and saw 
where he abode, and they staid with him that day: 
now it was about the tenth hour. And Andrew the 
brother of Simon Peter was one of the two who had 
heard of John, and followed him. He findeth first 
his brother Simon, and saith to him: We have 
found the Messias, which is, being interpreted, the 
Curist. And he broughthim to Jesus, And Jesus 
looking upon him, said: Thou art Simon, the Son 
of Jona: thou shalt be called Cephas, which is in- 
terpreted, Peter. On the following day he would go 
forth into Galilee, and he findeth Philip. And Jesus 
saith to him: Follow me. Now Philip was of 
Dethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter. Philip 
findeth Nathanael, and saith to him: We have 
found him of whom Moses in the law, and the pro- 
phets did write, Jesus the son of Joseph of Nazs- 
reth. And Nathanael saith to him; Can any thing 
of good come from Nazareth? Philiy saith to him: 
Come and see. Jesus www Natomas) coming, ts 
him, and he saith to him. Behortad an Nexus ws ‘te 


20th NOVEMBER. 523 


deed, in whom there is no guile. Nathaniel saith 
to him: Whence knowest thou me? Jesus answer- 
ed and said to him: Before that Philip called thee, 
when thou wast under the fig-tree, [ saw thee. 
Nathaniel answered him, and said: Rabbi, thou art 
the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. Jesus 
answered, and said to him : Because I said unto thee, 
I saw thee under the fig-tree, thou believest: greater 
things than these shalt thou see. And he saith to 
him: Amen, amen I say to you, you shall see the 
heaven opened, and the Angels of God ascending and 
descending upon the Son of Man. 

OFFERT. Ps. vii.— Thou hast crowned him 
with glory and honour: and hast set him over the 
works of thy hands, O Lord. 


SECRET.—We offer thee, O Lord, the gifts to be 
consecrated, whereby we, celebrating the festival of 
blessed Andrew the Apostle, beseech thee, that our 
minds may also be purified. Thro’. 

SECRET, of St. SATURNINUS. 

Sanctify, O Lord, the offerings we have consecrat- 
ed to thee, and being appeased thereby, mercifully 
look down upon us, by the intercession of blessed 
Saturninus, thy Martyr. Thro’. 

COMM. John i.—Andrew saith to Simon his 
brother: We have found the Messiah, who is called 
the Christ: and he brought him to Jesus. 

P. COMM. Perceptis.—Having received, O Lord, 
thy holy sacrament, we beseech thee that, by the 
intercession of blessed Andrew thy Apostle, what we 
perform in memory of his venerable passion, may be 
& remedy to us. 

P. COMM.  Sanctificet, of St. SATURNINUS. 
—May the receiving of this thy sacrament, O Lord, 
we beseech thee, sanctify us: and by the intercession 
of thy saints, inake us acceptable to thee. 


524 30th NOVEMBER. 


XXX. St. ANDREW, ap. 
INTROIT. Ps. cxxxviii. 


T°? me, thy friends, O IHI autem nins 
God, are made ex- honorati suut amit 
ceedingly honourable: tui, Deus: nimis confor- 
their principality is ex- tatus est principatus eo- 
ceedingly strengthened. rum. Ps. Domiue, pro- 
Ps. Lord, thou hast prov- basti me et cognovisti me 
ed ine aud known me: tu cognovisti sessionem 
thou hast known my sit- meam et resurrectionem 
ting down and my rising meam. P. Gloria. 

up. V. Glory. 

COLLECT. Majestaten.—We humbly besecch 
thy divine Majesty, O Lord, that as the blessed 
Apostle Andrew was a teacher and pastor of thy 
Church, so he may be with thee our perpetual inter- 
cessor. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. Rom. x. 10.18. Brethren : With 
the heart we believe unto justice: but, with the 
mouth, confession is made unto salvation. For the 
scripture saith: /Vhosoever believeth in him, shall wi 
be confounded. For there is no distinction of the 
Jew and the Greek: for the same is Lord over all, 
rich unto all that call upon him. For whosoever shall 
call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. How 
then shall they call on him, in whom they have net 
believed? Or how shall they believe him, of whom 
they have not heard? And how shall they hear, 
without a preacher ? And how shall they preach, 
unless they be sent? as itis written: How beaut, 


are the feet of them that preach the gospel o 
of them that ne good tidings of good lingo? Ba 
all do not obey the gospel. For Isaias saith: Lor, 
who hath believed our report? Faith then cometh 
by hearing: and hearing by the word of Chn* 
But I say: have they not heard? Yes verily, A” 
sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and thet 
words unto the ends of the whole world. 





sta ee wl 


9d DECEMBER. 595 


GRAD. Ps. xliv.—Thou wilt set them rulers over 
all the earth, and they shall remember thy name, O 
Lord. V. In place of thy fathers thou hast children 
born to thee: therefore shall nations praise thee. 
Alleluia, Alleluia. V. 'The Lord loved Andrew like 
a sweet smelling odour. Allel. 

GOSPEL. Matt. iv. 18. 22.——Al that time: 
Jesus walking hy the sea of Galilee, saw two bre- 
thren, Simon who is called Peter, and Andrew his 
brother, casting a net into the sea (for they were 
fishers). And he saith to them: Come ye after me, 
and I will make you to be fishers of men. And they 
immediately leaving their nets, followed him. And 

ing on from thence, he saw two other brethren, 
James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in 
a ship with Zebedee their father, mending their nets: 
and he called them. And they forthwith left their 
nets and father, and followed him. Crepo. 

OFFERT. Ps. cxxxviii—To me, O God, thy 
friends are exceeding honourable: exceeding mighty 
in their power. 

SECRET.— May the holy prayers of blessed 
Andrew the Apostle, we beseech thee, O Lord, ren- 
der our sacrifice pleasing to thee; that what we 
solemnize in his honour, his merits may render ac- 
ceptable. Thro’. 

COMM. Matt. iv—Come ye after me, and I 
will make you to be fishers of men: and they imme- 
diately leaving their nets, followed him. 

P. COMM. Sumpsimus.—As the divine mysteries 
we have partaken of with joy on this festival of bles- 
sed Andrew, conduce to the glory of thy saints; so, 
O Lord, we beseech thee, let them obtain for us par- 
don. Thro’. 


December lI. St. BIBIANA, v. m. 
All as in Mass XVII. p. 496, except 
COLLECT. Deus, omnium.—O God, the be- 


526 Qd AND 4th DECEMBER. 


stower of all good gifts, who in thy servant Bibiana 
joinedst the palm of martyrdom with the flower of 
Virginity, grant, that through her intercession, our 
hearts may be united to thee by charity; and that 
being delivered from all dangers, we may obtain ever- 
lasting rewards. Thro’. 





II. St. FRANCIS XAVIER, c. 

INTROIT.—I spake of thy law in the presence of 
kings, and I was not ashamed : and meditated on thy 
cominandimnents, which I loved exceedingly. Ps. 
Praise the Lord all ye nations: praise him all ye peo- 
ple: for his mercy is confirmed upon us, and the 
truth of the Lord remaineth for ever. V. Glory. 

COLLECT. Deus, qui Indiarum.—O God, who, 
by the preaching and miracles of blessed Francis, 
didst bring into thy Church the people of the Indies: 
mercitully grant that we may imitate Ins virtues 
whose glorious merits we venerate. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. Rom. x. p. 524. Grad. Offert. and 

Comm. as in Mass XIIEL p. 488. Secret and 

P. Comm. as in Mass XIV. p. 491. 

GOSPEL. Mark xvi. 15. 18. «dE that time: 
Jesus said to his disciples: Go ye into the whole 
world, and preach the gospel to every creature. 
Me that believeth and is baptized, shall be saved: 
but he that believeth not, shall be condemned. And 
these signs shall follow them that believe: In my 
name they shall cast out devils; they shall speak 
With new tongues: they shall take up serpents: and 
if they shall drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt 
them: they shall lay their hands upon the sick, and 
they shall recover. 


IV. St. PETER CHRYSOLOGUS, c. 
All as in Mass XII. p. 485, except 
COLLECT. Deus, qi.—9 God whe by thy divine 
providence didst ordain that blessed V vec se 
foreshewn by heaven, and chosen waa ws ved 





~ 


Gih DECEMBER. hU nr 


teacher to govern and instruct thy Church: grant, 
We beseech thee, that he who taught us the true way 
of life whilst here on earth, may now intercede for 
win heaven. Thro’. 

COLLECT, in commemoration of St. Barbara, as 
Deus qui £n Mass XVI. p. 493. 


VI. St. NICHOLAS, bp. c. 

INTROIT, Statuit, p. 461. 

COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who by innumer- 
able miracles hast honoured blessed Nicholas the 
Bishop: grant, we beseech thee, that by his merits 
and intercession we may be delivered from eternal 
flames. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. Heb. xiii. 7. 17.—Brethren:  Re- 
member your prelates who have spoken the word of 
God to you: whose faith follow, considering the 
end of their conversation. Jesus Christ yesterduy 
and to-day: and the same for ever. Be not led 
away with various and strange doctrines. For it is 
best that the heart be established with grace, not 
with meats : which have not profited those that walk 
inthem. We have an altar, whereof they have no 

wer to eat who serve the tabernacle. For the 

ies of those beasts, whose blood is brought into 
the Holies by the high-priest for sin are burned with- 
out the camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might 
sanctify tlie peeple by his own blood, suffered with- 
Out the gate. Let us go forth therefore to him with- 
Dut the camp, bearing his reproach. For we have 
1ot here a lasting city, but we seek one that is to 
tome. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of 
raise always to God, that is to say, the fruit of lips 
sonfessing to his name. And do not forget to do 
zood and to impart; for by such sacrifices God's fa- 
your is obtained. Obey your prelates, and be sub- 
ject to them. For they watch, as being to render an 
account of your soils. 

GRAD. to Alleluia, as in Mass I. p. 461. 


598 7th DECEMBER, 


F. Therighteous man shall flourish like the palm 
tree ; he shall thrive like the cedar of Libanus, Alle. 

GOSPEL. Matt. xxv. us in Mass X. p. 482. 

OFFERT.—My truth and my mercy are with 
him: and in my name, his power shall be exalted. 

SECRET.—-Sanctify, we beseech thee, O Lord 
our God, those gifts which we offer thee on the fee- 
tival of our holy Bishop Nicholas: that our lives 
never swerve from truth, either in prosperity or ad- 
versity. Thro’. 

* COMM.—Once have I sworn by my hol name: 
his posterity shall remain for ever, and his throne as 
the sun befure me, and as the moon, perfect for ever, 
and as the faithful witness in heaven. 

P. COMM.—May the sacrifice we have partaken 
of, O Lord, on the solemnity of thy holy Bishop 
Nicholas, continually protect us. Thro’. 


VI. St AMBROSE, b. c. and D. 
All as in Mass XII. P. 485, except 
GRAD. Eccles. xliv.—Behold a great prelate, 
who in his days pleased God. V. There was none 
found like him in keeping the law of the Most High. 
Alleluia, Alleluia. V. The Lord hath sworn, and 
will not repent it: Thou art a priest for ever ace 
cording to the order of Melchisedech. Alleluia. 
OFFERT.—My truth, &c. as above. 
SECRET.—O almighty and eternal God, 
by the intercession of B. Ambrose, thy Confessor and 
Bishop, that the gifts we have offered to thy divine 
Majesty may procure for us eternal salvation. Thro’ 
* COMM.—~As above, Once have I sworn, &c. 
P. COMM. Sacramenta.—Grant, we beseech thee, 
O Almighty God, that having received the sacrament 
of our salvation, we may be ever assisted by the 
prayersof blessed Armbrose, y Confessor and Bisb- 
op, on whose festiwal we have offered Unis waschen 
to thy divine majesty. “Thre. 





Sth DECEMBER. — 539 


VIII. CONCEPTION of the D. V. MARY. 


(By changing the word Conception into Nativity, and 

girl Commem. of St. Adrian, m. by the Col- 
lect, &c. Presta, from Mass V. p. 482, this Mass 
also serves for the 8th September. 

INTROIT, Salve, p. 507. 

COLLECT. Famulis.—Grant, O Lord, we be- 
seech thee, to thy servants the gifts of thy heavenly 
grace: that as our redemption began in the delivery 
of the blessed Virgin, so in this solemnity of her 
Conception, [ Nativity] we may have an increase of 

. ro’. 

LESSON. Prov. viii, 22. 25. — The Lord poe- 
sessed me in the beginning of his ways, before he 
made any thing, from tlie beginning. I was set up 
from eternity, and of old before the earth was made. 
The depths were not as yct, and I was already con- 
ceived, neither had the fuuntains of waters as yet 
sprung out : the mountains with their huge bulk had 
not as yet been established: before the hills I was 
brought forth: he had not yet made the earth, nor 
the rivers, nor the poles of the world. When he 
prepared the heavens, I wasthere: when with a cer- 
tain law and compass he enclosed the depths: when 
he established the sky above, and poised the foun- 
tains of waters: when he compassed the sea with its 
bounds, and set a law to the waters, that they should 
bot pass their limits: when he balanced the founda- 
tion of the earth. I was with him forming all things, 
und was delighted every day, playing before him at 
all times, playing in the world: and my delight is to 
be with the children of men. Now, therefore, ye 
children, hear me, blessed are they that keep my 
ways. Hear instruction and be wise, and refuse it 
hot. Blessed is the man that heareth me, and that 
watcheth daily at my gates, and woiteth at the veta 


Yy 


530 &th DECEMBER. 


of my doors. IIe that sball find me shall find life. 
aud shall have salvation from the Lord. 

GRAD.—Thou art blessed, and worthy of our 
respeetz, O Mary the Virgin, who without prejudice 
to thy virginity, didst become the mother of the Ss 
viour. .Hl«luia, -Illeluia. V. Happy art thou, O holy 
Virgin Mary, and worthy of all praise; because 
from thee arose the Sun of Righteousness, Christ our 
God. - .dileluia. 

GOSPEL. Matt. i. 1. 16——The book of the 
generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the 
son of Abraham. Abraham begot Isaac. And Isaac 
hegot Jacob. And Jacob begot Judas and his brethren. 
And Judas begot Phares and Zara of Thamar. And 
Phares begot Esron. And Esron begot Aram. And 
Aram begot Aminidab. And Aminidab begot Nass 
son, And Naasson begot Salmon. And Salmon beget 
Booz of Rahab. And Booz begot Obed uf Ruth. 
And Obed begot Jesse. And Jesse begot David the 
king. And David the king begot Solomon, of her 
who had been the wife of Urias. And Solomon 
begot Roboam. And Roboam begot Abia. And 
Abia begot Asa. And Asa begot Josaphat. And 
Josaphat begot Joram. And Joram begot Oziss. 
And Ozias begot Joatham. And Joatham begot 
Achaz. And Achaz begot Ezechias. And Ezechiss 
begot Manasses. And Manasses begot Amon. And 
Amon begot Josias. And Josias begot Jechoniss 
and his brethren in the transmigration of' Babylon. 
And after the transmigration of Babylon, Jechoniss 
begot Salathiel. And Salathiel begot Zorobabel 
And Zorobabel begot Abiud. And Abiud begot 
Eliacim. And Eliacim begot Azor. And Azor be- 
got Sadoc. And Sadoc begot Achim. And Achim 
begot Eliud. And Eliud begot Eleazar. And Eles- 
zar hegot Matham. And Matham begot Jacob. And 
Jacoh begot Joseph, the husband of Mary, of whom 
was born Jesus, who is called Christ. 





llth anp 13th DECEMBER. 531 


OFFERT.—Blessed art thou, O Mary the Virgin, 
"who didst bear the Creator of all things. Thou 
Wroughtest forth him who made thee, and remainest 
& virgin for ever. 

: SECRET.—May the humanity of thy holy be- 
tten Son, O Lord, succour us, that lie, (who bein 
torn of a Virgin, diminished not, but consecrated 
her virginity) may free us, who celebrate the festival 
of her Conception [.Vahvity ] from our sins: and 
render our oblation acceptable to thee. Who. 
Comm. and P. Comin. as is the Votive Mass, p. 509. 


XI. St. DAMASUS, p. c. 
All as in Mass XI. p. 494, except 

COLLECT.  Eraudi.—Give ear, O Lord, to our 
prayers, and by the intercession of blessed Damasus, 
thy Confessor and Bishop, mercifully grant us par- 
don and peace. Thro’. 

GRADUAL and OFFERTORY, as in Mass X. 

p. 482. SECRET, as in Mass XX. p. 501. 

COMM. Mati. xxv.—Lord, thou didst deliver to 
me five talents: behold I have gained other five over 
and above. Well done good and faithful servant: 
bevause thou hast been faithful over a few things, I 
will place thee over many things, enter thou into the 
joy of thy Lord. 

P. COMM. Da quesumus.—Grant, we beseech 
thee, O Lord, that thy faithful may always celebrate 
with joy the festivals of thy saints, and ever be pro- 

by their prayers. Thro’. 


— Ee: 


XIII. St. LUCY, v. m. 
Introit, Collect and Epistle as in Mass XIX. p. 498. 
GRAD.—Thou hast loved justice and hated ini- 
quis. V. Therefore God, thy God, hath anointed 
ee with the oil of gjadness. Alleluia, Alleluia. 
y 


29 91st DECEMBER. 


V. Grace is poured abroad in thy lips: therefore 

bath God blessed thee. .Aileluia. 

GOSPEL. Offertory, Secret, and P. Comm. as ia 

Mass XX. p. 499. 

COMM.—-Princes have persecuted me without 

cause, and my heart hath trembled at thy words: 

but I will rejoice in thy conmandinents, like one 

who hath fouud rich spoils. 





XXI. St. THOMAS, ap. 
NY ROIT, Mihi autem, p. 524. 

COLLECT. Da nobis.—Grant, O Lord, we be- 
seech thee, that we inay rejoice on the solemnity of 
thy blessed Apostle Thomas; to the end that we 
may always have the assistance of his prayers, and 
zealously profess the faith he taught. 

EPISTLE. Ephes. ii. 19. 22.—Brethren: You 
are no more strangers and foreigners: but you are 
fellow-citizeus with the saints, and. the domestics of 
God, built upon the foundation of the apostles and 
prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cor 
ner-stone: in. whom all the building being framed 
together, groweth up into a holy temple in the Lord. 
In whom you also are built together into an habite- 
tion of God in the spirit. 

GRAD.—Thy friends, O God, are made exceed- 
ingly honourable, exceedingly mighty is their power. 
] will number them; and they shall be multiplied 
above the sand. Alleluia, Alleluia. 1. Rejoice in 
the Lord, O ye just: praise becometh the upright 
-Jileluta. 

GOSPEL. John xx. to * as on Low Sund. p. Hi 

OFFERT. Ps. xviii.——Their sound hath gore 
forth into all the earth: and their words unto the 
ends of the world. 

SECRIZT.—We pay, O Lord, the homage due to 
thee, humbly beseeching thee to preserve in us thy 


Sisi DECEMBER AND 2d JANUARY. 933 


qus by the intercession of blessed Thomas the 
e, 


on the day of whose glorious confession we 

a sacrifice of praise. Thro’. 
COMM.—Reach hither thy hand, and feel the 
int of the nails: and be not incredulous, but be- 


P. COMM. Adesto.—Assist us, O merciful God, 
ard vouchsafe, by the intercession of blessed Thomas 
the apostle, to preserve in us, what thou hast be- 
stowed upon us. Thro’. 


XXXI. St. SYLVESTER, p. c. 


INTROIT, Sacerdotes, & 484. Collect, Secret and 
P. Comm. as in p. 482, with Commemorations 
all the Festivals, from  Christmas-day in- 


EPISTLE. 2 Tim. iv. 1. 8. as tn p. 486. 


GRAD.—Behold a great Prelate, who in his days 
God. P. There was none found like him 
keeping the law of God. Allel. Allel. V. Ps. 1 
found my servant David: I have anointed him 
with my holy oil. Alleluia. 

GOSPEL. Luke xii. as in Mass XIII. p. 488. 
OFFERT. Ps. lxxxviii.—] have found David my 
servant: with my holy oil I have anointed him. My 
bend shall help him: and my arm shall strengthen 


m. 
COMM. Matt. xxiv. as in Mass XIII. p. 489. 


January Il. Octave-day of St. STEPHEN. 
All as on the Feast iself, p. 78, except 
COLLECT. Omnipolens.—O Almighty and eter- 
nal God, who didst consecrate the first fruits of mar- 
tyrdom in the blood of blessed Stephen the Levite : 
grant, we beseech thee, that he may intercede for us 
Yy3 


534 Sth amp 13th JANUARY. 


who begged mercy, even for his persecutors, of our 
Lord Jesus Christ thy Son. Who liveth. 





V. Octave of St. THOMAS of CANTERBURY. 
Masa as on his Feast, p. 85, with Commems. of the 
Eve of the Epiphahy, of the Sunday within the 
Octave of Christmas, and of St. Telesphorus, ly 
the Collect, &c. of Mass II. p. 464, &c. 
elt the end of Mass is read the following . 
GOSPEL of the Eve of the Epiphany. Matt. 
ii. I9. 23.—.2¢ that time: When Herod was dead, 
behold an angel of the Lord appeared in sleep to 
Joseph in Egypt, saying: Arise and take the child 
and his mother and go into the land of Israel. For 
they are dead that sought the life of the child. Who 
arose, and took the child and his mother, and came 
into the land of Israel. But hearing that Archelaw 
reigned in Judea in the room of Herod his father, 
he was afraid to go thither: and being warned in his 
sleep, retired into the quarters of Galilee. And 
coming he dwelt in a city called Nazaretb: that it 
might be fulfilled which was said by the prophets: 
that he shall be called a Nazarite. Deo gratias. 





January XIII. Octave-day of the EPIPHANY. 
sill as on the Feast, p. 89, except 


COLLECT. Deus cujus.—O God, whose only be- 
gotten Son" appeared in the substance of our flesh: 
grant, we beseech thee, that we may be interi 
reformed by him, whom we confess to have out 
ly taken our flesh on himself. Thro’. 

GOSPEL. John i. 29. 34. —.42t that time: Js 
saw Jesus coming to him, and he saith: Behold the 
Lamb of God, behold he who taketh away the si 
of the, world. "This is he of whom I said: after me 
cometh a man who is preferred before me: because 





13th anp 14th 3ANUARY. 535 


he was before me. And I knew him not, but that 
he may be made manifest in Israel, therefore am I 
come baptizing with water. And John gave testi- 
mony, saying: I saw the Spirit coming down as a 
dove from heaven, and he remained upon him. And 
I knew him not: but he who sent me to baptize 
with water, said to me: He upon whom thou shalt 
see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, 
he it is that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And 
I saw : and I gave testimony, that this is the Son of 


SECRET.—We offer sacrifice to thee, O Lord, 
in remembrance of the manifestation of thy Son: 
humbly beseeching thee, that as our Lord Jesus 
Christ is the author of what we offer, so be may 
fully receive the same. Who liveth. 

P. COMM.  Colesti lumine.—May thy heavenl 
light, we beseech thee, O Lord, go before us at all 
times and in al! places: that we may contemplate 
with a clear sight, and receive with due affection the 
mystery whereof thou hast been pleased we should 
partake. Thro’. 

N. B. After the Octave till Candlemas, the I1. and 
III. Collects, &c. are the same as those thus marked * 
p. p. 90. 52. and 53. 





XIV. St. HILARY, bp. c. 
‘All as in Mass XII. p. 485, with a Commem. of St. 
Felix, by the following Collect, &c. 

COLLECT. Concede.—Grant, we beseech thee, 
O Almighty God, that the examples of thy saints 
may excite us to the amendment of our lives: that 
as we celebrate their festivals, 80 we may imitate 
their virtues. Thro’. 

SECRET of the same.—Mercifully receive, O 
Lord the offerings consecrated to thee by the merits 


536 15th JANUARY. 


of blessed Felix thy Martyr, and grant they may be 
a continual support to us. ‘Thro’. 

P.COMM. Quesumus. Of the same.—We be- 
seech thee, O Lord, that, being fed by these holy 
mysteries of our salvation, we may be helped by the 
prayers of blessed Felix, thy Martyr, whose festival 
we celebrate. Thro’. 


XV. St. PAUL, the first Hermit. 
INTROIT, Justus ut palma, p. 489. 
COLLECT. Deus, qui nos.—O God, who dos 

comfort us by the yearly soleinnity of blessed Paul 
thy Confessor, mercifully grant that while we cele 
brate his festival, we may imitate his actions, Thro’. 


Intercessio of St. Maurus. COLLECT, p. 491. 


EPISTLE. Philip iii. 7. 12.——Brethren: The 
things that were gain to me, the same I have count- 
ed loss for Christ. Furthermore I count all things 
to be but loss for the excellent knowledge of Jesus 
Christ my Lord: for whom I have suffered the los 
of all things, and count them but as dung, that I 
may gain Christ: and may be found in him no 
having my justice, which is of the law, but that 
which isof the faith of Christ Jesus, which is of God, 
justice in faith : that I may know him, and the power 
of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his suffer- 
ings, being made conformable to his death, if by any 
means I may attain to the resurrection which is from 
the dead. Not as though I had already attained, of 
were already perfect: but I follow after, if I may 
by any means apprehend, wherein I am also appt 
hended by Christ Jesus. 

GRAD. Ps. xci.—'The just shall flourish like the 

alin-tree: he shall grow up like the cedar of Lt 
nus in the house of the Lord. V. To shew forth 
thy mercy in the morning, and thy truth in the nigh! 


16th JANUARY. 537 


Alleluia, Alleluia. The just shall bud as the lily, 
and shall flourish for ever before the Lord. Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. Matt. xi. 25. 30.— i that time: 
Jesus answered and sad : I confess to thee,O Fa- 
ther, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast 
hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast 
revealed them to little ones. Yea, Father; for so 
it hath seemed good in thy sight. All things are de- 
livered to me by my Father. And no one knoweth 
the Son, but the Father ; neither doth any one know 
the Father but the Son, and he to whom it shall 
please the Son to reveal him. Come to me, all you 
that labour, and are burdened, and I will refresh 
you. Take up my yoke upon you, and learn of me, 

we I am meek, and humble of heart: and you 
shall find rest to your souls. For my yoke is sweet, 
and my burden light. 

OFFERT. and SECRET as in Mass XIV. p. 491. 

COMM. Ps. lxiii.—The just shall rejoice in the 
Lord, and shall hope in him: and all the upright in 
heart shall be praised. 

P. COMM.—Refecti, as in Mass XIII. p. 489. 

Qf St. Maunvs, Protegat, as in Mass XV. * p. 492. 





XVI. St. MARCELLUS, p. m. 


Introit, Gradual, and Offert. as in Mass I. p. 461, &c. 
COLLECT. Preces.—Mercifully hear, O Lord, 

we beseech thee, the prayers of thy people, that we 

may be assisted by the merits of blessed Marcellus, 

thy Martyr and Bishop, the feast of whose sufferings 

we celebrate with joy. Thro’. 

EPISTLE and GOSPEL, from Mass Il. p. 464, 


SECRET.—Graciously receive, O God, we be- 
seech thee, the offerings we have made, snd, in 
sonsideration of the merits of blessed Marcellus, Wy 


538 18th JANUARY. 


Martyr and Bishop, grant they may procure for us 
the helps necessary to our salvation. Thro’. 
COMM. as on St. Damascus the 11th Dec. p.931. 
P. COMM.  Satiasti.—Thou hast fed, O Lord, 
thy family with these sacred oblations: ever there- 
fore comfort us by his intercession, whose feast we 
celebrate. Thro’. 


XVIII. St. PETER's CHAIR at ROME, &c. 
By omitting the COMM. of St. Prisca }, this Mess 

serves also for his Chair at Antioch, on the 22d 

February. 

INTROIT. Statuit, as in Mass I. p. 461. 


COLLECT. Deus, qui beato.—O God, who by 
delivering to the blessed apostle Peter the keys 
the kingdom of heaven, didst give him the power of 
binding and loosing : grant that, by his intercession, 
we may be freed from the bonds of our sins. Who 

ivest. 

Of St. Paur. Deus, qui multitudinem.—O God, 
who by the preaching of blessed Paul the Apostle, 
didst instruct the multitude of the Gentiles: grant, 
we beseech thee, that whilst we celebrate his niem- 
ory, we may find the effects of his prayers. Thro. 

+ Of St. Prisca. Da quesumus.—Grant, we be- 
seech thee, O Almighty God, that we who celebrate 
the memory of blessed Prisca, thy Virgin and Mar 
tyr, may find comfort on her yearly festival and im 
prove by the example of her great faith. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. 1 Pet. i. 1. 7.—Peter, an Apostle of 
Jesus Christ, to the strangers dispersed through 
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithyn, 
elect, according to the foreknowledge of God tbe 
Father, unto the sanctification of the Spirit, unto 
obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ: 
grace unto you aud peace be multiplied. Blessed be 
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, whe 





18th JANUARY. 539 


according to his great mercy hath regenerated us 
unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ 
from the dead, unto an inheritance incorruptible, and 
undefiled, and that cannot fade, reserved in heaven 
for you, who by the power of God are kept by faith 
unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time. 
Wherein you shall greatly rejoice, if now you must 
be for a little time made sorrowful in divers tempta- 
tions: that the trial of your faith (much more pre- 
cious than gold, which is tried by the fire) may be 
found unto praise, and glory, and honour, at the ap- 
pearing of Jesus Christ. 


GRAD. Ps. cxvi.—Let them exalt him in the 
thurch of the people ; and praise him in the chair of 
the ancients. V. Let the mercies of the Lord give 
glory to him: and his wonderful works to the 
hildren of men. Alleluia, Alleluia. WV. Thou art 
Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church. 
AMelura. 

TRACT. (After Septuagesima.) Thou art Peter, 
and upon this rock I will build my church and the 
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I 
will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. 
V. Whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be 
bound in heaven. V. And whatsoever thou shalt 
loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. 


GOSPEL.  .Matt. xvi. as on the 29th of June. 
Offert. Thou art, &c. as in the preceding Tract, to V. 


SECRET.—May the intercession, we beseech 
thee, O Lord, of Bishop Peter thy apostle, render the 
prayers and offerings of thy church acceptable to 
thee: that the mysteries we celebrate in his honour, 
may obtain for us the pardon of our sins. Thro’. 

)f St. Paut.—Sanctify, Q Lord, the offerings of 
thy people by the prayers of Paul thy apostle: that 
what is acceptable to thee, because by thee Wws0- 
uted, may become still more acceptable by Yos W- 
weession. 





QUIA 3ANVARY. 541 


SS. FABIAN and SEBASTIAN mm. 


DIT. as :n Mass VII. p. 475. 

ECT. Infirmitatem with ws Secret and 
» $5 the plural number, as in p. 462. 

CLE. Heb. xi. 33 39.—Brethren: The 
faith conquered kingdoms, wrought justice, 
promises, stopped the mouths of lions, 
| the violence of fire, escaped the edge of 
d, recovered strength from weakness, be- 
jant in battle, put to flight the armies of 
s: women received their dead raised to life 
Jut others were racked, not accepting de- 
, that they might find a better resurrection. 
rs Kad trial of mockeries and stripes, more- 
' of bands and prisons: they were stoned, 
e cut asunder, they were tempted they 
to death by the sword, they wan ered about 
~skins, and in goat-skins, being in want, 
L afflicted: of whom the world was not 
wandering in deserts, in mountains, and in 
| in caves of the earth. And all these being 
. by the testimony of faith, in Christ Jesus 


V. Exod. xv.—God is glorious in his saints, 
il in his majesty, and performeth prodigies. 
ight-hand, O Lord, is magnified in strength: 
t-hand, O Lord, hath slain the enemy. 
Alleluia. V. Thy saints, O God, shall bless 

publish the glory of thy kingdom. Alleluia. 
EL. Luke vi. as tn Mass VIII. p. 478. 
RT.—Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye 
i: and praise him all ye upright of heart. 
4. Luke vi.—À great many that were dis- 
d tormented by unclean spirits, came to him 
a virtue proceeded from him, and heal 


Z1 


her prayers. Thro’. 

LESSON, as in Mass XVI. p. 

GRAD.—Grace is spread on 
hath God blessed thee for ever. 
meekness, and righteousness, sk 
also lead thee on wonderfully. 
V. The five wise virgins took oil 
their lamps, and at midnight thy 
hold the bridegroom cometh, go 
Christ the Lord. Alleluia. 


After Septuag. instead of Allelui 
Tract, Veni Sponsa, which s 
Orrznr. are also taken from Mi 
SECRET.—Favourably recei 

ferings we make thee, and by | 

blessed Agnes, thy Virgin and 
bonds of our sins. Thro’. 

COMM.—The five wise virgin 

P. COMM. Refecti.—Being 
with this heavenly meat and dri: 
seech thee that we may be aided 
whose festival we have received | 
ries. ‘Thro’. 


23d and 24th JANUARY. 543 


SECRET.—We bring, as in Mass VIII. p. 479. 

P. COMM. Quesumus.—We beseech thee, O 
Almighty God, that by the intercession of thy blessed 
Martyrs Vincent and Anastasius, the heavenly food 
wo have received may defend us fiom all adversity. 


XXIII. St RAYMOND of PENNAFORT, c. 
All as in Mass XIII. p. 488, except 


COLLECT. Deus, qui beatum—O God, who 
didst make blessed Raymond an excellent minister 
ef the sacrament of penance, and didst miraculously 
eonduct him through the waves of the sea; grant, 
4 his intercession, that we may bring forth worthy 

its of penance, and be enabled to arrive at the 
port of eternal salvation. Thro’ 

mmem. of St. Emerentiana, by the Collect, In- 

entiam, with its Secret, and P. Comm. as in 

Mass XVII. p. 496, &c. 


XXIV. St. TIMOTHY, bp. m. 

Jill as in Mass I. p. 461. except 
EPISTLE. 1 Tim. vi. 11. 16.—Dear Brother : 
Pursue justice, godliness, faith, charity, patience, 
mildness. Fight the good fight of faith: lay hold on 
Mernal life, whereunto thou art called, and hast 
'onfessed a good confession before many witnesses. 
. charge thee before God, who quickeneth all things, 
nd before Christ Jesus, who gave testimony under 
*ontius Pilate, a good confession that thou keep 
he commandment without spot, blameless unto the 
oming of our Lord Jesus Christ, which in his times 
e shall shew, who is the Blessed, and only Mighty, 
xe King of kings, and Lord of lords: who only hath 
mnortality, and inhabiteth light inaccessible, whom 
© man hath seen nor can see; to whom be honour 

nd empire everlasting. a 
Z 


544 — 05th. JANUCART. 


XXV. CONVERSION of St. PAUL. 


INTROIT. 2 Tin. i.—1 know whom J have be- 
Jieved and I am certain that he is able to keep thet 
which I have committed unto him against that day. 
Ps. Lord thou hast próved me, and hast known me: 
ru post known iny sitting down, and my up-rising. 

. Glo 

COLLECT. Deus, qui—O God, who, by the 
preaching of blessed Paul thy Apostle, didst instruct 
the whole world; grant, we beseech thee, that we, 
who this day, honour his conversion, may, by hisex- 
ample, learn to come to thee. Thro’. 

Qf St. Peter, Deus, qui beato, as on the Feast of 
his Chair at Rome, the 18th of January, p. 538.. 
LESSON. Acts ix. 1. 22-—In these days: Baal 

breathing out threatenings and slaughter agaimet the 

disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest, and 
asked of hifn letters to Damascus, to the 

that if he found any men and women of this way, 

he might bring them bound to Jerusalem. a8 

he went on his journey, it came to pass that he drew 
nigh to Damascus: and suddenly a light from hee 
ven shined round about him. And falling on the 
ground he heard a voice saying to him: Saul, Seal, 
why persecutest thou me? Who said: Who att 
thou, Lord? And he said: I am Jesus of Nazareth, 
whom thou persecutest. Jt is hard for thee to kick 
against the goad. And he trembling and astonished, 
said: Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? Am 
the Lord said to him: Arise, and go into the cif, 
and there it shall be told thee what thou muet do. 

Now the men who went in company with him stood 

amazed, hearing indeed a voice, but seeing no ma. 

And Saul arose from the ground, and when his eye 

were opened he saw nothing. But they leading him 

by the hand, brought him to Damascus. be 

was there three days without sight, and he did 

neither eet nor dw. Now there was a certain dit 


Sth JANUARY. 545 


Damascus, named Ananias: and the Lord 
him in a vision: Ananias. And he said: 
I am here, Lord. And the Lord said to him: 
d go into the street that is called Strait, and 
e house of Judas, one named Saul of Tarsus. 
ld he prayeth. (And he saw a man named 
ias, coming in and putting his hands upon him, 
might recover his sight.) But Ananias an- 
: Lord, I have heard by many ofthis man, how 
evil he hath done to thy saints in Jerusalem: 
he hath authority from the chief priests to 
that invoke thy name. And the Lord said 
Go thy way, for this man is to me a vessel 
on, to carry my name before the Gentiles, and 
and the children of Israel. For I will shew 
im how great things he must suffer for my name’s 
And Ananias went his way, and entered into 
; and laying his hands upon him, he said : 
ul, the Lord Jesus hath sent me, he that 
to thee in the way as thou camest: that 
mayest receive thy sight, and be filled with the 
Holy Ghost. And immediately there fell upon his 
eyes as it were scales, and he received his sight: 
and rising up he was baptized. And when he ‘had 
taken meat, he was strengthened. And he was with 
the disciples that were at Damascus for some days. 
And immediately he preached Jesus in the syna- 
es, that he is the Son of God. And all that 
bim were astonished, and said: Is not this he 
Who persecuted in Jerusalem those who called upon 
this name: and came hither for that irtent that he 
might carry them bound to the chief priests? But 
Saul increased much more in strength, and confound- 
td the Jews who dwelt in Damascus, affirming that 
this is the Christ. 
GRAD. Gal. ii.—He who wrought in Peter to 
the apostleship, wrought in me, , among the 
Z 


d 
js 


nin 


FE 


I-» 
Be 


"HER 


il 


548 264i JANUARY. 


Gentiles: and they have k::own the grace of God that 
was given to me. V. The grace of God wes not 
fruitless in me: but Die grace always abideth in me. 
Alleluia, Alleluia. V. he great St. Paul was a 
chosen vessel, and truly worthy of honour: who slo 
deserves to be seatcd on a twelfth throne. Allelwia 
After Septuag. instead of the Alleluia and V. is said 

TRACT.—Thou, O holy Paul, the Apostle arta 
chosen vessel: thou art truly worthy of glory. F. 
Thou wast the preacher of truth and the ductor ofthe 
Gentiles in the faith and in the truth. JV. By thee 
all nations have known the grace of God. V. - 
cede for us to God who chose thee. 


GOSPEL. .Matt. xix. as in Mass XV. p. 492 

OFFERT. Ps. cxxxvii.— To me, O God, thy 
friends are made. exceedingly honourable: ther 
principality is exceedingly strengthened. 

SECR T. Sancify, &c. as p. 539. Of Sy. Purzs, 
May the intercession, &c. tb. 

COMM.—Verily I say to you: that you who heve 
forsaken all things and followed me, shall receive en 
hundred fold and obtain eternal life. 


P. COMM. Of St. PETER, May, &c. as on the 
18th instant, p. 540. 


XXVI. St. POLYCARP. bp. m. 
All as in Mass Il. p. 464, except 


EPISTLE. 1 John iii. 10. 16.—Most dearly &e- 
loved : Whosoever is not just, is not of God, nor he 
that loveth not his brother. For this is the declars- 
tion, which you have heard from the beginning, 
that you should love one another. Not as Cain, 
who was of the wicked one, and killed his brother. 
And wherefore did he kill him? Because his own 
works were wicked: and his brother’s just. Won 
der not, brethren, if the world hate you. We know 
that we have passed from deeth to life, because we 


27th AND 28th JANUARY. . 047 


love the brethren. He that loveth not abideth in 
death. Whosoever hateth his brother, is a murderer.. 
And you know that no murderer hath eternal life 
ebiding in himself. In this we have known the 
charity of God, because he hath laid down his life for 
ws: and we ought to lay down our lives for the bre- 


GOSPEL. Matt. x. and P. COMM. — Refecis, 
asta p. 469. 


XXVII. S. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM, bp. c. 


All as in Mass XII. p. 485, except ' 

COLLECT. Ecclesiam.—Mnay thy heavenly grace, 

we beseech thee, O Lord, enlarge the Church which 

thou hast been pleased to enlighten by the resplen- 

dent virtues and learniug of blessed John thy Con- 

femsor and Bishop. Thro’. 

GRAD.—Behold a great Prelate, who in his days 

God. V.'There was none found like him in 

ing the law of the Most High. Allel. Aliel. 

V. Blessed is the man who suffereth temptation, for 
when he hath been tried he shall receive a crown o 
life. Alleluia. , 


XXVIII. St. AGNES, v. m. a second time. 


INTROIT. Vultum tuum, p. 499. 

COLLECT. Deus, qui. God, who rejoicest 
us by the yearly solemnity of blessed Agnes, thy 
Virgin and Martyr; grant, we beseech thee, that we 
May imitate her life, to whose memory we pay this 

our. Thro’. 

EPISTLE, Gradual and Tract, as in p. 500. 

GOSPEL. Matt. xiii. as in p. 501. 

OFFERT.—Grace is spread on thy lips, therefore 
hath God blessed thee for ever.: 

SECRET.—May thy blessing, we beseech thee, O 
Lord, plentifully descend upon these our offerings, 
that through thy merey they may both sanctify us 





548 99th arp 90th JANUARY AND Ist FEBRUARY. 


and cause us to rejoice in the solemnity of thy mer 
tyrs. Thro’. 

COMM.—The kingdom of heaven is like toa mer- 
chant seeking good pearls, who having found one of 

t value, went and sold all his possessions and 

ught it. 

P.COMM. Sumpsimus.—Grant, we beseech thee, 
O Lord, that the votive mysteries we have received 
on this annual solemnity, may both succour us is 
this temporal life, and procure for us that which will 
have no end. Thro’. 


XXIX. St. FRANCIS de SALES. 
All as in Mass X. * p. 482, except 

COLLECT. Deus, qui. —b God, who for the al- 
vation of souls wast pleased that blessed Francis, thy 
Confessor and Bishop, should become all to all: 
mercifully grant, that, being plentifully enriched with 
the sweetness of thy charity, by following his diree- 
tions, and by the help of his merits, we may obtain 
life everlasting. Thro’. 





XXX. St. PETER NOLASCUS, c. 


All as in Mass XIV. & 489, except 
COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who, in imit- 
tion of thy charity, didst inspire blessed Peter to in- 
stitute a new order in the Church for the redemption 
of captives; grant, by his intercession, that bemg 
delivered from the slavery of sin, we may enjoy ever 
lasting liberty in our heavenly country. Thro’. 


SSE 


February Y. St. IGNATIUS, bp. m. 
INTROIT, Gal. vi—God forbid that | should 
lory save but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Chri: 
y whom the world is crucified to me, and I to the 
world. Ps. cxxxi. Remember David, O Lord, and 
all his meekness. V. Glory. 


Qd FEBRUARY. 549 


Cou. Sechs. and P. Comm. as in Mass I. p. 462. 
EPISTLE. Rom. viii. 35. 39.—Brethren: Who 
en shall separate us from the love of Christ ? shall 
bulation ? or distress? or famine? or nakedness? 
danger? or persecution ? or the sword? (As it is 
ritten: “For thy sake we are put to death all the 
y long. We are accounted as sheep for the 
wighter.”) But in all these things we overcome, 
cause of him that hath loved us. For I am sure 
at neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor princi- 
lities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things 
come, nor might, nor height, nor depth, nor any 
aer creature, shall be able to separate us from the 
ye of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. 
GRAD. Behold, as on January 27, p. 547. 
Alleluia, Alleluia, | V. Gal. ii.—With Christ I am 
jled to the cross: I live, now not 1, but Christ 
'eth in me. Alleluia. 
fler Septuag. instead of Alleluia and V. is said the 
TRACT, Desulerium, p. 462. 
GOSPEL. John xii. as on St. Laurence, Jug. 10. 
OFFERT.—Thou hast crowned, as in p. 467. 
COMM.—1 am the wheat of Christ: I am to be 
‘ound by the teeth of wild beasts, that I may be 
und pure bread. 


II. PURIFICATION of the B. V. MARY. 


HIS feast is kept, not only in remembrance of our 
Saviour's Presentation in the Temple forty days 
ter his birth, (in compliance with the law of Moses, 
ev. xii) but also in commemoration of H18 BLESSED 
(OTHER'S PURIFYING HERSELF, by offering that sa- 
ifice in the temple, which was prescribed by the 
me law. Its institution must be of an early date, 
nce we find mention made of it in the 5th century. 
y the distribution of the blessed candles, the faithfu] 
exhorted to be as piously disposed as holy Siwxox 
as when he took Christ in his arms, and prophesied 
iat he should become the LianmT of the Gentiles and 


550 Qd FEBRUARY. 


the crory of Israel. Let ustherefore receive the.can- 
dies from the hands of the Priest with a becoming piety, 
as an emblem of Christ, who is the light of our souls, and 
with him let us also offer up ourselves, as purified by 
his blood to his Eternal Father. 


At the BLESSING of the CANDLES. . 
The Lord be with you. K. And with thy spirit 
Let us pray. Domine sancte. 
Hoy Lord, Father Almighty and Eternal God, 
who didst create all things cut of nothing, 
and by the labour of the bees following thy com- 
mands, hast brought this liquor to the perfection of 
wax; and who, on this day, didst accomplish the 
desire of the righteous Simeon, we humbly beseech 
thee, that by the invocation of éhy most holy name, 
and by the intercession of blessed Mary, ever a vir- 
gin, whose festival we this day devoutly celebrate, 
and by the prayers of all thy saints, thou wouldst 
vouchsafe to bless fe and sanctify *f« these candles 
for the service of men, and for the good of their bodies 
and souls in all places ; and that thou wouldst please 
mercifully to hear from thy holy temple, and: from 
the throne of thy majesty, the prayers of this th 
people, who desire to carry them in their hands wi 
reverence, and with sacred hymns to praise thy 
name ; and shew mercy to all that cry out unto thee, 
whom thou hast redeemed by the precious blood of 
thy beloved Son: who liveth. #. Amen. 
Let us pray. | Omnipotens sempiterne Deus. 
ALMIGHTY and Eternal God, who on ths 
day wast pleased that thy only Son should be 
presented in the temple, and be received into the 
arms of holy Simeon: we humbly beseech thy mercy 
to bless »J« sanctify »f« and give the light of thy 
heavenly benediction to these candles, which we thy 
servants desire to carry in honour of thy name: that 
by offering them to thee, our Lord God, we may be 
inflamed with the fire of thy eweet love, and made 


- ——á 


2d FEBRUARY. 551 


worthy to be presented in the holy temple of th 

glory. Thro'thesame. AR. Amen. d , 
Let us pray. Domine Jesu. 
[,0R5 Jesus Christ, the true light, that enlighten- 
eth every man that cometh into the world: 
pour forth thy blessing »[« upon these candles, and 
sanctify »[« them by the light of thy grace: and grant 
in thy mercy, that as these candles, by their visible 
light, dispel the durkness of the night, so our hearts, 
burning with invisible fire, and enlightened by the 
of the Holy Ghost, may be delivered from all 
indness of sin: that the eye of our soul being 
ified, we may discern those things that are pleas- 
to thee, and beneficial to our souls: that after 
having finished the darksome passage of this life, we 
may come to never-fading joys through thee, O Jesus 
Christ, the Saviour of the world, who, in perfect 
Trinity lives. R. Amen. 


Let us pray. Omnipotens sempiterne. 
ALMIGHTY and Eternal God, who, by thy 
servant Moses, commandest the purest oil to 
be ‘prepared for lamps, continually to burn in thy 

nce, mercifully pour forth the grace of thy bless- 
ing »j« on these candles: that as they supply us with 
visible light, so, by thy assistance, the light of thy 
Spirit may never be wanting inwardly in our souls. 
Thro’. R. Amen. 


Let us pray. Domine Jesu. 

Lo Jesus Christ, who appearing amongst men 

in the substance of her flesh, wast pleased this 
tay to be presented in the temple by thy nts, 
and whom the venerable Simeon, enlightened by the 
Holy Ghost, publicly confessing, received in his arms, 
and blessed: mercifully grant, that, being inspired 
and taught by the grace of the same holy Spirit, we 
may sincerely acknowledge and faithfully love thee: 
who with God the Father, in the unity of the same 


Holy Spirit, lives, &c. R. Amen.. 


550 2d FEBRUARY. 


Here the Priest having put incense in the Censer 
rinkles the Candles with Holy Water, saying, 
prinkle, &c. p. xiii. withqu the Ps. A 

ing them he distributes them to the Faithful, whc 
receive them kneeling, first kissing the Candle 
and then the Hand of the Priest. During the 
Distribution of the Candles is sung, 


ANT. Lumen ad revelationem Gentium, et glo 

riam plebis tuc Israel. 
Canticre, Luke ii. 
UNC dimittis servum tuum Domine: * secur 
dum verbum tuum in pace. Ant. Lumen, &«. 

Quia viderunt oculi mei: * salutare tuum— 
Ant. Lumen, &c. 

Quod paresti * ante faciem omnium populorum 
Ant. Lumen, &c. 

Gloria Patri, &c. Ant. Lumen, &c. 

Sicut erat in principio, &c. Ant. Lumen, &c. 

Then ts sung the following 

Ant. Exurge Domine adjuva nos: et libera nos 
propter nomen tuum. Ps. Deus auribus nostris andi- 
vimus ; patres nostri annuntiaverunt nobis. P. Glors. 

Ant, Exurge, to Ps. 
After Septuag. token this Festival does not fall a6 

Sunday, is said 
P. Flectamus genua. AR. Levate. 

PRAYER.  Exraudi.—Give ear, we beseech thee, 
O Lord, to thy people; that what we outwardly 
perform by this yearly devotion, we may inw 
obtain the effects of, by the light of thy grace. Thre. 


n. 

Ht Mass the Candles are held lighted during the Got 
pel, and from the Consecration, fill after the Com 
munion, 

INTROIT, * Suscepimus, as in p. 411, 

COLLECT. Omnipolens.—O Almighty and Eter- 
nal God, we humbly beseech thy .divime majesty, 
that as thy only Son in the substance of our 


Dd repavaary. 559 


18 this day presented in the temple, so our souls, 
ing perfectly cleansed, may become a pure obla- 
m and presented to thee, ‘Thro’. 

LESSON. Mal. iii. 1. 4. — Thus saith the Lord 
xd: Behold I send my angel, and he shall prepare 
p way before my face. And presently the Lord 
10m you seek, and the angel of the Testament 
som you desire, shall come to his temple. Behold 
cometh, saith the Lord of hosts: and who shall 
able to think of the day of his coming ? and who 
all stand to see him? For he is like a refining 
e, and like the fuller’s herb: and he shall sit refin- 
gand cleansing the silver, and he shall purify the 
as of Levi, and shall refine them as gold, and as 
ver, and they shall offer sacrifices to the Lord in 
stice. -And the sacrifice of Judea and Jerusalem 
all please the Lord, as in the days of old, and in 
8 ancient years: saith the Lord Almighty. 
GRAD. Ps. xlvii.—We have received thy mercy 
God, in.the midst of thy temple ; according to thy 
ue, O God, so also is thy praise unto the ends of 
eearth. V. As we have heard, so have we seen 
| the city of our God, on his holy mountain. .4l- 
luia, Alleluia. V. The old man carried thg Child, 
ad the Child governed the old man. Alleluia. 


c Septuag. instead of Alleluia and V. is said 

CT. Nune dimitis.—Now thou dost dis- 
ties thy servant, O Lord, according to thy word, in 
mace. Because my eyes have seen thy salvation. 
Which thou hast Prepared before the face of all peo- 
l& A light to the revelation of the Gentiles, and 


he of thy people Israel. 

dosPEL. Lue ii, 92. 32, — — At that time: 
\fter the days of the purification of Mary, accord- 
M to the law of Moses, were accomplished, they 
amied Jesus to Jerusalem, to present him to the 
£ed. As it is written in the law of the Lord, Eve 
tale opening the womb shal be called holy to the Lord. 





4th AND. 5th resnvany. 555 
—— IV. St. ANDREW CORSINI, bp. c. 
Alb as in Mass X*. p, 482, except 


P 
^ COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who in every 
furnishest the Church with fresh examples of 
2 grant thy faithful so closely to imitate bless- 
Andrew, thy Confessor and. Bishop, as to be, one 
spartans in] his lis reward. Thro’ 
: 
: V. Bt AGATHA, v. in. 
sin | L p. 493, except 


... INTROIT. Lets us rejoice in the Lord, and. cele- 
brate. this festival in. pens of blessed Agatha the 
"Martyr, for whose martyrdom ihe angels rejoice, 
and join in tie praises ol the Bon of Gad. Pe. Ny 

Jh uttered a good word: Y speak my works 





"here «are not many wise aecord- 
iot man; might Ed not many noble : 
0 chosen, 

ree wise > en the. weak 
chosen, that he may 
and the base things of the 
“world, and the things. that are contemptible hath 
God chosen, and things that are not, that he might 
bring to nought abipgs that are, that no flesh should 
[4 in his sight. f him are you in Christ 
is, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and 
justice, and Bpoctiiceign, and redemption: "wo 

pur is written, He that yt may ee in the 


. GRAD. 

looks: God is in Us and C shall not fail. 
swift running stream rej i 

Most High hath consi 





556 5th FEBRUARY. 


Alleluia. V. Y spoke of thy testimonies before kings, 
and I was not ashamed. Alleluia. 

After Septuag. instead of Alleluia and V. is said 

TRACT, Qus seminant, p. 476. 

GOSPEL. Matt. xix. 3. 19. — E that ime: 
The Pharisees came to Jesus tempting him, and my- 
ing: Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife 
for every cause? Who answering, said to them: 
Have ye not read, that he who made man from the 
beginning, made ihem male and female? And he 
said: For this cause shall a man leave father and 
mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and they two 
shall be in one flesh. Therefore now they are not two, 
but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined to- 
gether, let no man put asunder. They say to him: 
Why did Moses command to give a bill of divorce, and 
to put away? He saith to them: Because Moses, 
by reason of the hardness of your heart, permitted 
you to put away your wives: but from the begin- 
ning it was notso. And I say to you, that whosoever 
shall put away his wife, except it be for fornication, 
and shall marry another, committeth adultery ; and 
he that shall marry her that is put away, committeth 
adultery. His disciples say unto him: If the case 
of a man with his wife be so, it is not expedient to 
marry. Who said tothem: All men take not this 
word, but they to whom it is given. For there are 
eunuchs, who were born so from their mother* 
womb: and there are eunuchs, who were made so 
by men: and there are eunuchs, who have made 
themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven. He 
that can take, let him take it. 

COMM.— He who vouchsafed to heal all my 
wounds, and restore my breast to my body, is the 
living God, whom I call upon. 


Sth, 10th anp 142k resruaRY. 557 


VIII. St. JOHN of MATHA, c. 
ll as in. Mass XIII. p. 488, except 
COLLECT. Deus.—O God, who by Holy John 
was pleased under thy heavenly directions to insti- 
ate the Order of the Most Holy Trinity, for the re- 
lemption of captives out ofthe hands ofthe Saracens: 
m" we beseech thee, that by E» merits we may 
delivered, by thy grace, from all captivity o 
bedy and mind. Thro’. . 


X. 8t. SCHOLASTICA, v. 
All as in Mass XIX. p. 498, except 
COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who to recom- 
wend to us innocence of life, wast pleased to let the 
inl of thy blessed Virgin Scholastica ascend to hea- 
wa in the shape of a dove: grant by her merits and 


ayers, that we may lead innocent lives here, and 
trend to eternal joys hereafter. ‘Thro’. 





XIV. St. VALENTINE, pr. and m. 


All as in Mass III. p. 466, except 
. COLLECT. Presta.—Grant, we beseech th 
O Almighty God, that we who solemnize the festival 
blessed Valentine, thy Martyr, may, by his instruc- 
tion be delivered from all the evils that threaten us. 


SECRET.—Be appeased, O Lord, we beseech 
thee, with the offerings we have made, and by the 
IMercession of blessed Valentine, thy Martyr, defend 
ws from all dangers. Thro’. * 

P. COMM. Sit nobis.—May this divine sacrament 
wrengthen us, O Lord, both in body and soul, that 
by the intercession of blessed Valentine, thy Martyr, 
we may receive the effects of what we celebrate. 


3A3 


558 Q4th on VWth FEBRUARY. 


XXIV. or XXV. St. MATTHIAS, ap. 
INTROIT, Mihi autem, as in p. 594. 


COLLECT. Deus.—O God, who didst add bless 
ed Matthias to the number of thy Apostles, grant, 
we beseech thee, that by his prayers we may be ever 
sensible of the effects of thy mercy. Thro’. 

LESSON. Acts i. 15. 26.— In those days: 
Peter rising up in the midst of the brethren, sau: 
(now the number of persons together was about a 
hundred and twenty) Men brethren, the scripture 
must needs be fulfilled which the Holy Ghost spoke 
before by the mouth of David concerning Judas, who 
was the leader of them that apprehended Jesus: who 
was numbered with us, and had obtained of this 
ministry. And he indeed hath a field of 
the reward of iniquity, and being hanged, burs 
asunder in the midst: and all his bowels gushed out 
And it became known to all the inhabitants of Jerv- 
salem: so that the same field was called in tbeir 
tongue Haceldama, that is to say, the field of 
blood. For it is written in the book of Psalms: 
Let their habitation become desolate, and let there ke 
none to dwell therein. And his bishopric let another 
take. Wherefore of these men who have con- 
panied with us, all the time that the Lord Jesus 
came in and went out among us, beginning from the 
baptism of John until the day wherein he was takes 
up from us, one of these must be made a witnell 
with us of his resurrection. And they appointed tw», 
Joseph, called Barsabas, who was surnamed Justus, 
and Matthias. And praying they said: Thou, Lord, 
who knowest he hearts of all men, shew whether of 
these two thou hast chosen, to take the place of this 
ministry and apostleship, from which Judas beth 
by transgression fallen, that he might go to his own 
place. And they gave them lots, and the lot 


| 


2d MARCH. 990 
pon Matthias and he was numbered with the eleven 


postles. 

GRAD. Ps. cxxxviii.—Thy friends, O God. are 
3ade exceedingly honourable: their principality is 
xceedingly strengthened. V. 1 will number them, 
ad they shall be multiplied above the sand. 

TRACT, Desiderium anime, p. 462. 

.GOSPEL. Mait. xi. as on 15th January, p. 537. 

.OFFERT. Ps. xliv.—Thou shalt make them 

rinces over all the earth : they shall remember thy 
O Lord, throughout all generations. 

SECRET.— Grant, O Lord, that (the prayer of 
lesmed Matthias thy apostle, accompanying the offer- 
igs we make to thy hol name) we may be both 
eansed from our sins, and defended thereby. Thro’. 


COMM. Matt. xix.—You who have followed me, 
sal) p on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of 


wael. 

P. COMM. Presta.—Grant, we beseech thee, 
| Almighty God, that by virtue of the sacrament 
have received, and the intercession of blessed 
[atthias, thy apostle, we may obtain the pardon of 
ur sins and peace. Thro’. 


March YI. St. CHAD, Bishop of Litchfield. 
All as in Mass XI. p. 484, except 


COLLECT. Omnipotens.—Almighty and eternal 
who rejoicest us this day in the observation of 
ve festival of blessed Chad, thy confessor and bishop, 
re humbly beseech thy clemency, that, as we de- 
outly observe his solemnity, we may through his in- 
srceasion obtain the reward of eternal life. Thro’. 
SECRET. Be favourable, O Lord, to our 
rayers: and grant, by the intercession of blessed 
shad, thy confessor and bishop, that by assisting at 
hese mysteries, we may be delivered from all sin, 
nd purified by thy grace. Thro’. 





Sth anv 10th wanc. 561 


in them all: for this wisdom went before me, 
and I knew not that she was the mother of them all. 
T have learned without guile, and communi- 





2 
a ne 
TX. St. FRANCES, w. 

MIL as in Mass XXI. p. 502, except 
COLLECT. Deus—O God, who amongst other 
privileges of thy grace didst honour blessed Frances, 
thy handmaid, with the familiar company of Angels: 
grant, we beseech th e, by her prayers, that we also 

may be admitted into their society, 'Thro. 


» ‘Thro’, 





‘xiii —The just cried and the 
delivered them out of all 
bless the Lord at all 


‘we may experience 

thee forum Tür 
EPISTLE, Heb. 

| GRAD. Ps. exxxi 


rejoice, O ye just; und glory 


ve^ 





562 llth anv 12th ARCH. * 


SECRET. — Mercifully look down, O Lord, o 
the sacrifice we offer thee: and grant, by the inter- 
cession of thy martyrs, that it may increase our de- 
votion, and avail to our salvation. Thro’. 

M.—Mait. xii—Whoever shall do the wil 
of my Father, that is in heaven: he is my brother 
and sister, and mother, saith the Lord. 

P. COMM. Quesumus.—We beseech thee, O Al 
mighty God, that we may one day obtain the effects 
of that salvation, of which we have regeived the 
pledge in these mysteries. ‘Thro’. 





XI. St. JOHN of GOD. 
All as in Mass XIII. p. 488, except 

COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who didst grant 
thy servant John, being inflamed with the fire of th 
love, to walk without hurt through the midst 
flames, and by him institute a new order in thy 
Church: grant, by his merits, that the fire of thy 
charity may cure our diseased souls, and obtain for 


us eternal remedies. 
GOSPEL. Matt. xxii. as in p. 432. 


XII. St. GREGORY, p. c. 

INTROJT, Sacerdotes tui, Mass XI. p. 484. 

COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who hast re- 
warded the soul of blessed Gregory, thy servant, with 
eternal bliss: mercifully grant that we who are op 
pressed by the weight of our sins, may find relief by 
his intercession. ‘Thro’. 

EPISTLE. 2 Tim. as in Mass XII. p. 486. 

GRAD.—The Lord hath sworn, and he will net 
repent, thou art a priest for ever according to 
order of Melchisedech. V. The Lord said to my 
Lord, sit thou at my right-hand. 

TRACT, Beatus vir, as in p. 465. 





17th anp 19th MARCH. 563 


GOSPEL, Matt. v. as in p. 487. 

SECRET.—Grant, we beseech thee, O Lord, by 
the intercession of blessed Gregory,that this sacrifice 
anay be beneficial to us, by the offering of which 
thou hast been pleased to cancel the sins of the world. 


COMM.—This is the prudent and faithful servant, 
‘whom thé Lord placed over his family, to give them 
their measure of wheat in due season. 


P. COMM. Deus, qui.—O God, who didst equal 
blessed Gregory, thy Bishop, to the rest of thy 
saints in merit: mercifully grant, that as we cele- 
brate his memory, we may also follow his example. 

ro’. 


XVII. St. PATRICK, ap. and patron of Ireland. 
All as in Mass X.* p. 482, except 
COLLECT. Deus, qui —D God, who wast pleas- 
ed to send blessed Patrick thy Bishop and Confessor. 
to preach thy glory to the Gentiles: grant, that by 
bis merits and intercession we may, through thy 
erre, be enabled to keep thy commandments.— 





XIX. St. JOSEPH, c. 

INTROIT, Justus ut palma, Mass XIV. ». 489. 

COLLECT.  Sanctissime.——Grant, we beseech 
thee, O Lord, that we may be assisted by the merits 
of the spouse of thy most Holy Virgin Mother, and 
that what we cannot obtain through our own weak- 
ness, may be gran:ed us by his prayers. Who. 
Lesson, Eccles. xlv. p. 491. Grad. Ps. xx. p. 492, and 

T. act, Ps. cxi. p. 465. 

GOSPEL. Matt. i. 18. 21.—When Mary, the 
mother of Jesus was espoused to Joseph, before 
they came tozether, she was found with child of the 
Holy Ghost. Whereupon Joseph her husband, being 










25th mance. 505. 


gout: Sancta.—May the holy mysteries we 
ü O Lord, protect us by their efficacy, 

oligl the Intercesmicn of blessed Cuthbert, 

or and bishop the lustre of whose life shined so 

ly, preserve us in peace and holiness. Thro’. 





XV. ANNUNCIATION of the B. V. M. 


ROIT, Vultum tuum, Mass X X. p. 499. 
Tor the Colle Seeret, and P. Conim. see. the 
Collet, Sey on the fret Sunday of Advent, 


SON See Th Lesson, Is. vii. 10, 16. p. 59. 
D.—Grace is spread on thy lips: therefore 
the Lord blessed thee for =i thy 
-meekness and. righteousness, right 
"lead thee on iA ege 4 

CT, Ps. xliv.—Audi jii p.498 


f Easter, instead of 

c, is said Alleluia, of Ai ; in VE a Sir 

All aad Hail M art gn Abe 
leluia, il Mary, full o gucci 

ds with thee + preme od rd pea iq 

a. V. A Sucker of Jesse hath budded: a 
‘irgin hath brought forth mim who is God and 

‘man: God hath femore panne i ee his 














was 

at his saying, and thought with herself 

fea ota anit had Bea's Al 
3B 


566 2d APBIL. 


the angel said to her: Fear not, Mary, for thou 
hast found grace with God. Behold thou shalt coe 
ceive in thy womb, and shalt bring forth a sm 
and thou shalt call his name Jesus. He shall be 
great, and shall be called the Son of the Most High, 
and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of 
David his father: and he shall reign in the housed 
Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be se 
end. And Mary said to the angel: How shall tha 
be done, because I know not man? And the 
answering, said to her: The Holy Ghost shall com 
upon thee, and the power of the Most High shall over- 
shadow thee. And therefore also the Holy which 
shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. 
And behold thy cousin Elizabeth she also hath con- 
ceived a son in her old age; and this is the six 
month with her that is called barren: because ne 
word shall be impossible with God. And Mary seid: 
Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it done to me 
according to thy word. 

OFFERT. Luke i—Hail Mary full of grace, the 
Lord is with thee: blessed art thou amongst wome, 
and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. 

COMM. Isaiah vii.—Behold a virgin shall car 
ceive and bring forth a son, and his name shall be 
called Emmanuel. 





Apru Il. St. FRANCIS of PAULA, c. 


All as in Mass XIV. p. 489, except 


COLLECT. Deus, humilium.—O God, wh 
exaltest the humble, and didst raise blessed Frenos 
to the glory of thy saints: grant, we beseech thee, 
through his intercession, that by following his & 
ample, we may happily obtain the rewards thou 
promised to the humble. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. Phil. iii. as on January 15, p. 99. 





3d ann 5th apnit..: 587. 


SECRET.—May the offerings, O Lord, of thy 

evout people, which we lay upon thy altars, by the 
ierits of blessed Francis, be advantageous to us and 
leasing to thee. Thro’. 
JP. COMM. Sumpia.—May the heavenly sacra- 
ents, O Lord, which we have received, through 
e prayers of blessed Francis, secure for us all ne- 
esnry help, as well for this life as for that which 
to come. Thro’. 


III. St. RICHARD, bp. of Chichester, c. 
All as in Mass X. p. 482, except 


COLLECT. Deus qui.—O God, who hast en- 
mtened thy Church by the merits and resplendent 
iracles of blessed Richard, thy confessor and bishop, 
ant that we thy servants may, through his inter- 
esion, obtain eternal glory. Thro’. 

SECRET.—Grant, we beseech thee, merciful God, 
at the gifts we have offered in the sight of thy 
vine Majesty, may, by the prayers of blessed 
ichard, thy confessor and bishop, obtain for us the 
ace of living holily and obtaining eternal glory. 


P. COMM. Hoc sacro sancta.—May these holy 
ysteries, O Lord, of which blessed Richard, thy 
mfessor and bishop is the dispenser, confer on us 
eir salutary effects. Thro’. 


V. St. VINCENT FERRERIUS, c. 


vill as in Mass XIII. p. 488, except 
COLLECT. Deus.—O God, who wast pleased 
enlighten thy Church by the virtues and preaching 
‘blessed Vincent, thy confessor: grant, that we thy 
rvants may be instructed by his example, aud by 
8 prayers, delivered from a evil. Thro’, 


568 llth anp 13th APRIL. 


XI. 8t. LEO, p. c. D. 
Jl as in Mass XII. p. 445, except 


LESSON. Eccles. xliv. and xlv. p. 482. 
GOSPEL. Matt. xvi. as on the Feast of 8S. 
Peter and Paul, June 29, p. 608. 


XIII. St. HERMENEGILD, m. 


All as in Mass III. p. 466, except 


COLLECT. Deus.—O.God, by whose holy spit 
. blessed Hermenegild, thy martyr, was taught to des 
pise an earthly for a heavenly crown: grant we be 
geech thee, that, by his example, we may learn t» 
despise temporal things, and fix our hearts on thor 
which are eternal. Thro’. 

GOSPEL. Luke xiv. 26. 33.—At that time: 
Jesus saith to the multitude: If any man come to me, 
and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and 
children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own 
life also, he cannot be my disciple. And whosoever 
doth not carry his cross and come after me, cannot 
be my disciple. For which of you having a mind to 
build a tower, doth not first sit down and reckon 
the charges that are necessary, whether he have 
wherewithal to finish it. Lest after he hath laid the 
foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that see 
it begin to mock him, saying: This man began te 
build, and was not able to finish. Or what king 
about to go and make war against another king 
not first sit down and think, whether he bea 
ten thousand to meet him that with twenty thot 
cometh against him. Or else while the other is yet 
afar off he sendeth an embassy, and desireth condi- 
tions of peace. So likewise every one of you 
doth 10t renounce all that he pousesseth, cannot be 
my disciple. . 


14th, 17th anp 99d APBIL. 800 


XIV. St. TIBURTIUS, &c. mm. 


lll as in Mass VI. p. 473, except 

COLLECT. Presta.—Grant, we beseech theo, 
) Almighty God, that we who solemnize the festival 
fthy holy Martyrs, Tiburtius, Valerian, and Maxi- 
jus, may likewise imitate their virtues. Thro’. 

LESSON. Misd. and GOSPEL. John, from p. 471. 

SECRET.—We beseech thee, O Lord, that the 
scrifice which we offer thee in honour of the tri- 
mphs of thy Martyrs, may loose the bonds of our 
ins, and procure us the gifts of thy mercy. Thro’. 

P. COMM. Sacro munere.—Being filled with th 
eavenly gifts, we humbly beseech thee, O Lord, 
sat what we perform as an homage due to thee, 
wy avail us to salvation. ‘Thro’. 





XVII. St. ANICETE, p. m. 


AN as in Mass V. p. 470, except 
GOSPEL. John xvi 20. 32.— — 4t that time: 
sus said to his disciples: Amen, amen I say. to you, 
at you shall lament and weep, but the world shall 
joice: and you shall be made sorrowful, but your 
rrow shall be turned into joy. A woman, when 
ie is in labour hath sorrow, because her hour is :* 
ye: but when she hath brought forth the child, 
ie remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that 
man is brought into the world. So also you now 
deed have sorrow, but [ will see you again, and 
sur hearts shall rejoice: and your joy no man shall 
ke from you. 


XXII. SS. SOTER and CAIUS, bps. mm. 


All as in Mass VI. p. 473, except 


LESSON. poc. xix. 1. 9.—/n those days: I 
ohn heard as it were the goice of many multitudes 





@Ath AND 25th APRIL. , $71 


P. COMM. Supplices. We humbly beseeeh thee, 
O Almighty God, that those whom thou hast refresh- 
ed with thy sacraments, may, by the intercession of 

George, thy Martyr, by a life well-pleasing 
to thee, worthily serve thee. Thro’. 


XXIV. St. FIDELIS, m. 
All as in Mass V. p. 470, except 


COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who didst fill 
the heart of blessed Fidelis with the fire of seraphic 
love ; and whilst he laboured in the propagation of 
the true faith, didst honour him with the crown of 
martyrdom and the gift of miracles: grant, we be- 
peech thee, that by his merits and intercession, we 
may be so confirmed by thy grace, as to be found 
ith ful in thy service even unto death. Thro’. 


XXV. St. MARK, the Evangelist. 


DREADFUL plague having broke out at Rome, 
anno 589, which carried off a great number of 
the people, and among the rest Pope Pelagius, who then 
sat in St. Peter’s Chair, St. Gregory his successor ap- 
pointed public prayers for appeasing the anger of God, 
the happy effects of which became so evident by the 
immediate cessation thereof, that the same pious custom 
has been ever since continued. Wherefore, since by 
our repeated transgressions we also have just reason to 
recate the scourges of divine vengeance, let us this 
day humble ourselves by prayer and abstinence before 
the throne of mercy, beseeching God to preserve us 
from all pestilential distempers, forgive us our sins; 
and grant his blessing on the fruit of the earth. 

INTROIT, Protexisti, as in p. 470. 

COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who didst raise 
blessed Mark, thy evangelist, to the honourable com- 
mission of preaching the gospel: grant, we beseech 
thee, that we may ever receive benefit from his in- 
structions, and be defended by his prayers. ‘Thro’. 


572 e Uk APRIL. 


LESSON. Ezek. i. 10. 14.—The likeness of the 
four living creatures was this: there was the face of 
a man, and the face of a lion on the right side of all 
the four ; and the face of an ox on the left side of all 
the four ; and the face of an eagle over all the four. 
And their faces and their wings were stretched up- 
ward : two wings of every one were joined, and two 
covered their bodies. And every one of them went 
straight forward: whither the impulse of the spirit 
was to go, thither they went, and they turned not 
when they went. And as for the likeness of the living 
creatures, their appearance was like that of burni 
coals of fire, and like the appearance of lamps. This 
was the vision running to aud fro in the midst of the 
living creatures, a bright fire, and lightning goi 
forth from the fire. And the living creatures ran an 
returned like flashes of lightning. 

Alleluia, Alleluia. The heavens, O Lord, declare 
thy wonders, and the fulfilling of thy promise in the 
assembly of the saints. Alleluia. 

GOSPEL. Luke x. 1. 9.——4t that time: The 
Lord appointed other seventy-two ; and he sent them 
two and two before his face Into every city and place 
whither he himself was to come. And he said to 
them: the harvest indeed is great, but the labourers 
are few. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harves, 
that he send labourers unto his harvest. Go: behold 
I send you as lambs among wolves. Carry neithet 
purse, nor scrip, nor shoes; and salute no man by 
the way. Into whatsoever house you enter, firi 
say: Peace be to this house, and if the son of petet 
be there, your peace shall rest upon him: but if not. 
it shall return to you. And in the same house re- 
main, eating and drinking such things as they have. 
For the labourer is worthy of his hire. Remove no 
from’ house to house. And into what city soevtT 
you enter, and they receive you, eat such things # 
are set before you ; and heal the sick that are thereil 


. 26th AND 29th Arie. 573. 


‘ind say to them: the kingdom of God is come nigh. 
unto you. Creno. "ur 
+ RET.— Bringing thee our offerings, O Lord. 
‘on this solemnity of blessed Mark, the evangelist we 
ibly beseech thee, that as the preaching of the 
ospel raised him to glory, so his intercession may 
ie us both in word and deed, well pleasing to 
thee. Thro’. —— 5 
COMM. Ps. Ixi "he jut man, &e. p. 472. 
— P. COMM.  Tribwant nobis.—May thy sacred 
Bypeics O Lord, an us continual help, se as 
; the prayers of blessed Mark, thy evangelist, they’ 
| ba [ond us from all adversity, "hro? 
i For the Litanies, see Rogation Days, p. 859. 


XXVL SS. CLETUS & MARCELLINE, bps. mm. 
» <All as in Mass VI. p. 473, except 
COLLECT, Beatorum.—Grant, O. Lord, that the 
glorious confession of thy blessed martyrs and bish~ 
‘ops, Cletus and Marcelline, may strengthen us, and 
their pious intercession continually defend us. Thro’, 
Comm. of St. George. by the Collect, &cz p. 571. 








XXIX. St. PETER, m. 
All. as in Mass XV. p. 470, except 

COLLECT. Presta.—Grant, we beseech thee, 
0 Almighty God, that we may with true zeal profess 
the faith of blessed Peter thy martyr, for the pro- 
Regation whereof he was crowned. with a glorious 
Thro’, Là 
"i Commem. of St. George, p. 570. 

SECRET.—Pavourably regard, O Lond the pray: 
‘ers we offer thee, and by the intercession of blessed. 
Peter, thy martyr, continually protect the defenders 
ofthe faith. Thro. 

-. P. COMM, Fideles.—May the sacraments we have 
received, O Lord, preserve thy faithful, and. by the 


r 








94. war. 95 


for us, Jesus saith to him: So longatime 

been with you : and have you not known me? 
Pip. he that seeth me seeth the Father also. | How 
sayest thou, Shew us the Father? Do you not be- 
ES. that I am in the Father, and the Fothor in me ? 
speak not of myself. 

e, he. doth the works. 


0 lug atime have I been 
T me? "ir e 


“ness, | cel i a tae 





576 9d mar. 


the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of 
Christ Jesus. But we have this treasure in earthen 
vessels, that the excellency may be of the power of 
God, aud not of us. In all things we suffer tribu- 
Jation, but are not distressed: we are straitened, 
but are not destitute: we suffer persecution, but are 
not forsaken: we are cast down, but we perish not: 
always bearing about in our body the mortification 
of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may he made 
manifest in our bodies. For we who live are always 
delivered unto death for Jesus sake: that the lit 
also of Jesus may be made manifest in our morta 
flesh. So then death worketh in us, but life in 
you. But having the same spirit of faith, as it 8 
written : I believed, for which cause 1 have 
we also believe, for which cause we speak also: 
knowing that he who raised up Jesus, will raise us 
up also with Jesus, and place us with you. 

Alleluia, Alleluia. Thou art a priest for ever sc- 
cording to the order of Melchisedech. Allelwe 
V. Blessed is the man that endureth temptation: 
for when he hath been proved, he shall receive the 
crown of life. Alleluia. 


GOSPEL. Matt. x. 23. 33.—— Jt that tim: 
Jesus said to hig disciples: When they shall perse- 
cute you in this city flee into another. Amen I sy 
to you, you shall not finish all the cities of Isreel: 
till the Son of Man come. The disciple is no 
above the master, nor the servant above his 
It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master. 
and the servant as his lord. If they have called tb 
good man of the house Beelzebub, how much more 
*hem of his household ? Therefore fear them not 

"or nothing is covered that shall not be revealed, 
."r hid that shall not be known. ‘That which ! 
vell you in the dark, speak ye in the light : and tht 
which you hear in the ear, preach ye upon the house 
tops And fear ye not them that kill the body, t&d 


: 93d nx. 55 


not able to kill the soul : but rather fear bim that 

destroy both soul and body into hell. Cagno. 

—. OFFERT.—I have found David my servant : with 
holy oil have I anointed him: for my band shall 

Mh hin, nd my arm shall strengthen. a hime, Mibi: 








The FINDING of the HOLY CROSS, 
. INTROIT. Nos autem, Gal, vi. as in p. 271. 
pound ei 
cae o Bis Lal Cross, wast leased 
w the wonders of thy passion: grant, that 
“the ransom paid on that saving a wn eet we may 
EU ais obey ite pote 


dulus, and Juvenalis, Confessor, 
aera ‘we beseech thee, 
Almighty God, that we who celebrate the festival 
‘saints, Alexander, Eventius, Theodulus, and 
li may by their i intercesion | be delivered 
ati misfortunes. 
| EPISTLE. Phil. ii. 5. Presale veld Letthis 
mind be in you, whieh was also in Christ Jesus; who 
in the form of God, thought it not robbery to 
jaal with God : but em) himself, taking the 
sof a servant, being made in the likeness of mi 
habit found asa man. He humbled hi: 


cewapcrinienpery EN eran 
eile 


wee) 












REDO. | 

ERT. Ps. Pr ortis Therighn hind of ihe Lord 

strength, the right-hand of the Lord 

me: I shall not die, but live ; and shall 

the works of. the Lord. Alleluia. 

'RET.—Favourably, O Lord, look down on 

ifice we offer thee, that it may deliver us 

the miseries of war, and surely fix us under 

r that by the standard of thy Son's 
Mrs uy CNIPN BM assaults of the 

Thro’. 

T. Of SS. Avexanner, Sc. 

blessing wwe besoech thee, O ord pon Jag coy 

which, throu; 


id upon these 
bunty, sanctify us and, fill us with joy in 
nity of thy saints. Thro’. " 
&rAcE. Qui salutem humani generis, p. xxx. 
MM.—By the. sign of the cross deliver us, 
| og all our. ing gis vi pal 

Repleti—Bein: with the 
E "Sr NN ened with th ie spiritual cup, 
smooch thee, O Almighty God, to ‘from 
those, whom, by thy Son’s eross, (the 
Besbades, for the redemption of the c» 
panera? to Vw "Thro'. 








IV. St. MONICA. 
| EE pnt Gl 


| cmd and help of phis 


in tho with m 
[oae ase 











Gt, 7th; AD Oth war. 


nay have eternal life comnitinicated to us by the 
ri ent we have received at thy holy table, .. 
supported the temporal life of. blessed Cathe: 


thy virgin. ‘Thro’. 


478, is 
‘flourish Tike 
‘up like the cedar of 
ous shall bud forth 


and P. Comm. Rf 


n pp. 4:2, 473, 





E 
- VIL. St. STANISLAUS. bp. ni 


. St GREGORY NAZIANZEN, bp. c. 
^ Villas in Mass XII. p.485, except — 
ON. Eccles. xxxix. U. 14,—'The just man 
give his heart to resort early to the 
him, and he will pray in the sight of the M. 
h. He will open his mouth in prayer, and will 
3C3 








TH ano 12th mar. 583 
(000 Xt. PIU, Pope Cont 
me NOIL Mies Xp. Ae Eee 


"COLLECT. Deus, God, who read 
10 raise blessed Pius to the dignity of chief bishop, 
in order to depress the enemies of thy church, and 
Totoro the divine worship: make us by thy grace, 
igen all that concerneth thy enm that 
ape t the treacherous designs of our ene- 

tnd rejoice in everlasting peace. Thro’. 





uia: to deliver their souls 
r helper and protector. 
ice in the ye just: 


‘ the blessed solemni 


le | mo 
and ever implore 


COMM. P%. xxxii.- he in the Lord, O 
fighteous ones. Alleluia. It beoometlithe uen. 
to join in his praises. lleluia. : 





584 14th, 16th, 17th, awp 18th mar. 


P. COMM. Quesumus, Domine.—We beseech 
thee, O Lord, by the prayers of thy blessed martyrs, 
Nereus, Achilleus, Domitilla, and Pancratius, that 
the holy mysteries we have received may render thee 
more and more favourable to us. Thro’. 





XIV. St. BONIFACE, m. 


All as in Mass V. p. 470, except 
COLLECT. Da, quesumus.—Grant, we beseech 
thee, O Almighty God, that we who celebrate the 
festival of blessed Boniface, thy martyr, may, by 
hie prayers, find the effects of thy divine assistance. 
Thro’. ] 





XVI. St. UBALDUS, bp. c. 
All as in Mass X. * p. 482, except 
COLLECT. Auriltum.—Help us, O Lord, we 
beseech thee, in thy mercy : and t, by the inter- 
cession of blessed Ubaldus, thy bishop and confessor, 
that we may be defended by thy right hand agains 
all the snares of the devil. Thro’. 


XVII. St. PASCHAL BAYLON. 


All as in Mass XIII. p. 488, except 


COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who didst adom 
blessed Paschal, thy confessor, with an admi 
love of the sacred mysteries of thy body and blood: 
grant, we beseech thee, that we may be made wor- 
thy partakers of the same spiritual nourishmest 
which he so abundantly received from this divine 
banquet. Thro’. 








XVIII. St. VENANTIUS, m. 


All as 4n Mass III. p. 466, except 
COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who hast cot- 


this the triumph of blessed Venantius, 
H ae el bear ie prayers of thy peo- 


e the constancy of his faith. “Thro”. uta 
IBPEL. John xv. 1. 7. as in p. 471. 
CRET, — Grant, O. Almighty t the 
tof Venantius may render this oblation 
table to thee: that we, assisted a 
bs partakers of his glory. a 
| |. Sumpsimus.—Having received, O 
the sacrament of eternal life, we. Tur 
pe that by the intercession. ve ae 
ds, thy mi , it may procure us 





K. Bt. DUNSTAN, c: abp. of Canterbury. 


CRET.—Receive, we. beseech thee, O Lord, 
ferings thy supplant servants ae Pit thee 
is solemnity of blessed Dunstan, thy c: 

ishop, requesting that, under his age 
ey may be defended from the snares all 
'emies, : 

‘COMM. Beati.—Assist Oo the 
of blessed Dunstan, thy eee » ; 
Sen we have partaken of thy sacra- 








XX. gt BERNARDINE, c. 
- All. ag in Mass XII. p. 488, except ^— 
forth into the heart of blessed Bernardiue, 








© 26th axp QWth may. ‘387 


Bond Mand grant, by his par ve may 
ited o: rien 
Of Sk Uanan, LIE 


me 
XXVL St. AUGUSTIN, ap. of England. 
fice 





‘met » Augustin first vreichdp oF 

ie gospel to the English natioh, grant, we beseech 

“thee, that we may be assisted by his prayers in hea- 
yen, whose merits we honour on earth. ‘Thro’, 

of St. E with 

from. 470, 


‘ings we ‘have aac ‘may 
by which we venei 


accep " 
confessor and bishop, and call i 
ice the wonderful means by which we obtained 
ou id life. Thro’. - ^ 
c by: 


Tee ‘which we hi 

of blessed Augustin, thy confessor and bishop, pro- 
ect us: and may we e ever be filled with and hunger 
after the same. Thro’. 


"e 





XXVIL St. PHILIP NERDS, e. 
rc lll as in Mass XIII. p. 481, except) 
d RR Deus.—O' God, who hast raised © 
be cess ae tt confessor, to the gl of the 
int, that we who celel his 
fava wal joy iy improve by his example: 


Cone, &e. ofS Avivergr a snd of 
St. Jobn, p. m. from Mass V. p. 4 








er 
8th AND 9th sone. 589 
[VIH. St. WILLIAM, Atclibishop of York, e. 


5. All-as in Mase XI. p. 484, except 
LLECT. Deus, qui—O God, who rojoicest 





/T.—Sanctify, O Lord, the offerings we 
made, and through the intercession of bl 
iam, thy confessor and bishop, cleanse us from 
stains of our sins, Thro’. 
_P, COMM.—We humbly beseech thee, O Al- 
God, that those whom thou refreshest with 
faint dy c pA zm ue ps3 
conféssor and bishop, by a holy li 
oriily serve thee. ‘Thro’. ji 


|IX. SS. PRIMUS and FELICIANUS, mm. 
J ~All as in Mass VIII. p. 477, except 

‘COLLECT. Fuc.—Grant, O Lord, we beseech 
lee, that we may always follow the exaunple of thy 
ly Primus and. Felicianus, and. by their 
CO reet their protection. Thro’, » 
I 's. xxxviii. — The heavens shall confess 
y wonders, O Lord, and thy truth in the church of 
e saints. PF. The mercies of the Lord I will sing 
r ever, from generation to generation. Villeluia, 
Welwia. V. These were truly brothers who triumph- 
Lover the iniquity of the world, followed. Christ, 
ire now in possession of the glorious kingdom of 








amon, m m was us 
cott ee call and Lucius 
emt Manahen who was foster-brother of. 


T Prork-whexsanss  T/hàve (teken’ thee MR 
they fasting and praying, and imposing their hands 
upon them, sent them away. 
— GRAD. Ps. xviii,—Their sound hath gone forth 
into all the earth : and their words unto the ends of 
the world. . . The heavens shew forth the plory of 
God: and the firmament declareth the work of his 
hands. Alleluia, Alleluia. — V. Y have chosen you out 
of the world, that you should go and should brin, 
forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain. 
GOSPEL. Matt. x. 16. 22.——4t that fimo 
Jesus said to his disciples: Behold 1 send you as 
sheep in the midst of wolves. Be ye therefore wise. 
asserpents and simple as doves, But beware of 
men. For they will deliver you up in councils, and 
vu anti Ey you in their synagogues. And 
vernors, and. before 
my sake, ie a testimony to them and to the 
fey me but when they shall deliver you up, take 
no thought how or what qo speak: for it shall be 
given you in that hour what to speak. | For it is not 
you that speak, but tbe Spirit of your Father that 


speaketh in you. ‘The brother also shall deliver uy 
the ber ari and ae hae the son: and 
» children. rise inus against ts, 
shall put them And, you wd Ve Vah 
"D 2 


—— 


590 1h so wx. 


by all men for my name's sake: but he that shall 
persevere to the end, he shall be saved. Crepo. 

OFFERT.—Thou shalt nsake them princes over 
all the earth : they shall remember thy name, O Lord, 
from generation to generation. 

SECRET.—Sanctify, O Lord, the offerings we 
have made, and by the intercession of blessed Barne- 
bas, the apostle, cleanse us from the stains of our 
sins. Thro’. 

COMM.—You, who have followed me, shall sit 
on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. 

P. COMM. Supplices.—We humbly beseech thee, 
O Almighty God, that those whom thou refreshest 
with. thy sacraments, may, by the intercession of 
blessed Barnabas, thy apostle, worthily please thee 
in their conduct of life. Thro’. 





XII. St. JOHN A FACUNDO, c. 


All as in Mass XIII. p. 488, except 

COLLECT. Deus auctor.—O God, the author of 
peace and lover of charity, who gavest to blessed 
John, thy confessor, the extraordinary grace of re- 
conciling those who were at variance: grant, by his 
merits and intercession, that being well-grounded in 
thy charity, we may be by no temptations separated 
from thee. Thro’. 

COLLECT, (Sanctorum) of SS. Basiripzs, fc. 
mm.—Grant, O Lord, that the festival of thy holy 
martyrs, Basilides, Cyrinus, Nabor, and Nazarius, 
may be a comfort to us, and that our devotion my 
bring forth the fruit that has made them blessed for 
ever. Thro’, 

SECRET. (Of the same.)—In veneration of the 
blood of thy holy martyrs, Basilides, Cyrinus, Nabor, 
and Nazarius, we solemnly bring these offerings 
O Lord, to celebrate.thy wonders by whom so gret 
a victory was obtained. Thro’. 


, (— 390 axo MI vox. 53 


P. COMM. (Semper): Of the 
loco mede pendere 
; holy martyrs, Basilides, Cyrinus, Nabor, and 
iiis, may ever be sensible of the effects of their 
intercession. Thro’. ton wr 


— " 
_ -XHL. St. ANTHONY of PADUA, c: 
Alas in Mass XIIT. p. 488, except | 

"COLLECT. Ecclesiam.—May this solemnity, O. 
God, of blessed Anthony, thy confessor, be a com- 
fort to thy church : that thy people may never want 
the assistance of thy grace, and at length come to 
the possession of eerial joys. Thro’ 

ISTLE. 1 Cor. iv. as in p. 490. - 
GRAD.—The jost man shall fourish like the palm- 

free, he shall thrive like the cedar of Libanus in the 
honse of the Lord. "To publish thy mercies in the 
morning, and thy truth by night. Meluia, Alleluia. 
V. "The Lord loved him, and adorned’ him: he 
clothed him with a robe of glory. Alleluia. ) 
"BECRET.—May this oblátion, O Lord, avail tothe 
salvation of th people, for whom thou wast pleased, 
to fa living host to thy Father. Who. 
-P.COMM. Divinis.—Being filled, O Lord, with 
these heavenly gifts, we beseech thee, that by the. 
merits and intercession of blessed Anthony, thy Con- 
fessor, we may be sensible of the effects of thy saving 
sacrifice. Thro’, 











m XIV. St. BASIL, c D. ! 


Introit and Epistle, as in Mass XII. p. 485. Collect, 
Exaudi, with its Secret and P. Comm. the Offer- 
‘tory also and P. Comm. as in Mass XL. p.484. — 
- GRAD.—The mouth of the righteous man shall 
utter wisdom, and his tongue speak judgment. 
V. The law of God is in his heart, and his feet. 
not be triptup. Alleluia, Mleluia, — V. Vase Sum. | 
ie d 3D3. a mA 





" 








‘18th JUNE. . 505 
¢ Lord a new canticle let his praise be in 
church of tho suints.- ehuioy lu ^ 

‘© Lord, shall bless thee: they shall publi 


ki Iuia. ri lal 
L. Luke x. 16, 20.—JAt that time: Jesus. 





jiseth me, despiseth him that sent 
ie seventy-two returned with joy, saying: 
the devils also are subject to us in thy name. 
he said to them: I saw Satan like lighting 
from heaven. Behold, I have given jou power 
upon serpents, and scorpions, and upon all 
power of the enemy : and riothing shall hurt you. 
Yet rejoice not in this, that spirits are j 
fo you: but rejoice in this, that your names are 
mim in heaven. 1 
‘ERT. Ps.lxv.—God is wonderful, p. 477. 
. BECRET.—As the offerings we have made, O 
1 in honour of thy saints, testify the glory of the 
power: so may they procure us the of 
‘thy salvation. Thro’. 

‘COMM.—The souls of the righteous are in the 
[issckof God, and tbe tormébre of wickediueet bal 
mot touch them. In the sight of the unwise they 

T to die : but they are now in peace. T 
| P. COMM. Repleti.—Being filed, O Lord, with 
hath been solemnly blessed, we beseech thee, 
that by the intercession of thy blessed: martyrs, 
|Virtus Modestus, and Crescentia, this healing sacra- 
Ecc be profitable to both our souls bodies. 









M 
XVIIL SS. MARK and MARCELLIAN, mm. | 


ee 
' d nus. 
ELLE ier od at ws he tg 
the festival of thy holy inartyrs, Mark and Marcellian. 





me 
19th ap. 20th yoxx. 597 


SECRET. Sanetify, O Lord, the offerings con- 
secrated to thee, and, being roe. thereby, mer- 
eifully look down upon us, by the intercession of 
blessed Mark and Marcellian, thy martyrs. ‘Thro’. 
COMM. Malt. xxv.—Amen, I say to you: as 
long as you did it to one of these my least brethren, 
you did it to me: come, ye blessed of my Father, 
Bosses you the kingdom prepared for you from the 
COMM. Sultans —Being filed, O Lord 
" COMM. Salwaris.—Reing filled, O 
ith this thy saving sacrifice, we humbly beseech 
that, by the intercession, of thy holy martyrs, 
and Marcellian, we may be renewed by the 
effects thereof, Thro’. 





"XIX. St. JULIANA de FALCONERIS, v. 
Alas in Mass XIX. p. 498, 

COLLECT. Deus qui.—O God, who vouchsafedst 
to refresh blessed Juliana, thy virgin, in a miraculous 
manner, with the precious pods of thy Son in her 
last sickness; grant, we beseech thee, hyd merits 
and intercession, that we also, in our conflict, 
may be so refreshed and strengthened with the same, 
as to be brought to our heavenly country, 
Commem. of SS. Gervasius and Protasius, by the _ 

Collect, Deus qui, with ils Secret and P. Comm. 

"as in Mass IX. p. 479. 





XX. St. SYLVERIUS. p. m. 
All as in Mass I. p. 461, except 
EPISTLE. Jude i. 17. 21—Dearly beloved: 
Be mindful of the words which have been spol 
before by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who 
told you, that in the last time there should come 
mockery walking according to theit own desees in 
ungodliness. These are they, who separate Yen 


598 22d anp 23d sone. 


selves ; sensual men, having not the spirit. But m 
my beloved, building yourselves upon your most holy 
faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep yourselves 
in the love of God, waiting for the mercy of our 
Lord Jesus Christ unto life everlasting. 


XXII. St. ALBAN, Protomartyr of England. 
All as in Mass IIT. p. 466, except 


COLLECT. Deus qui.—O God, who hast con- 
secrated this day by the martyrdom of blessed Alban: 
grant, that as we annually rejoice in the celebratioa 
of his festival, we may be continually favoured with 
his assistance. ‘Thro’. 

GOSPEL. Matt. xxvi. as in Mass II. p. 465. 

SECRET. As we praise thee, O Lord, in vene- 
rating thy blessed martyr, Alban; so, we beseech 
thee, through this pious offering of atonement, that 
he would always be our intercessor. Thro’. 

COMM. Ut tua.—That thy sacraments, 0 
Lord, may cleanse us from sin, and preserve in us 
the fervour of charity, grant, we beseech thy Divine 
Majesty, that we may be always assisted by the in- 
tercession of blessed Alban, thy martyr. Thro’. 





XXIII. VIGIL of St. JOHN BAPTIST. % 
INTROIT. Luke i.—Fear not, Zacharias, tby 
prayer is heard, and thy wife, Elizabeth, shall bear 
thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John: He 
shall be great before the Lord, and be filled with the 
Holy Ghost, even from his mother’s womb: and 
many shall rejoice in his nativity. Psalm xx. In 
thy might, O Lord, shall the king rejoice: and he 
shat exult exceedingly at being saved by thee. 
. Glory. 
COLLECT. Presta, umus.—Grant, we be- 
seech thee, O Almighty God, that thy people may 
walk in the way of salvation ; and, by following the 


| 93d yowz. 599 


;of blessed John, the forerunner, 
to whom hi our 
[ss diy als Who lives 


LESSON. Je. i. 4. 10.—In those days: 

‘of the Lord came to me, saying: Before I rare 

| thee in the bowels of my mother, T knew thee: 
"before thou camest forth out of the womb T 
Nord thee, and made thee a prophet unto the 

And T said: iin ah, Lord God: be- 

d I cannot speak, for I am a child. And the 
said to me: Say not: I am a child: for thou 

to all that I shall send thee: and wbatever 

^ ll command thee, thou shalt speak, Be not 
E at their presence: for I am with thee to de- 
‘thee, saith the Lord. And the Lord pot forth 

his hand, and touched my mouth: and the rd said. 
Ens Behold I have given my words in thy mouth: 
T have set thee this day over the nations, and over 
Kingdoms, to root up, and to pull down, and’ to 

waste, and to destroy, and to build, and to plant, 

‘saith the Lord Almig! 

GRAD. John i.—' ere was a man sent from God 
‘whose name was John. V. He came to bear testi- 
‘mony of the light, and to prepare for the Lord a per- 
fect le. 

MODE gj i 5. 17—Tbere was. n the 





iie qon to 4 custom of the 
E: ‘it was his lot to offer incense, 
uple of the Lord: and. all. the mul 












PAR some, 601 
^ «opened veio ror 
| to praise. the an to 

6 thon the Moot High. V. » M 
LECT. Deus God, who 
o soured thia day by ihe birth of bleased John 
+ grant that thy people. may rejoice in 
and guide them in the way of salya- 


IN. Is, xlix, 1. 7.—Give ear, ye islands, 
en se penplo from afar. The Lord hath 
ie. womb, from the bowels of my 

her he hath been mindful of my name. And 

made my mouth like a sharp sword: in 
dow of his hand he hath protected me, and hath 
| made me as a chosen arrow : in. his quiver he- hatlt 

Rei ie wt cep e AR 

israel, for in thee, wi s 1 
[c cop that formed me from the womb to be 
ant: Behold, I have given thee to be the 
of the Gentiles, that thou — be my salva- 
even to the farthest of the earth. 

ill see, and princes shall rise up and adore for 

sake, and for the Holy One of Israel who hath 


^" 5| sinl 
Jer. i—Before I formed thee in the 

I knew thee : and before thou. camest. forth 

he womb. I sanctified thee, |... The 
hand and touched my mouth: and. to 
me: Jlleuia, Alleluia. V. Thou child, shalt be call- 
LIT D opin wa thou shalt go be+ 








Lord to prepare his ways, Alleluia. 
i PEL. Luke i. 57. 68.—Elizabeth's full 

ig delivered was come, and. she brought. 
ES TR n E Noa POR 

Fs is great 10; 

and.tbey /ecngreflsto eh her. JA ad t camo 10 
pass that on the eighth day they came to circumcise. 
gueiiiiipendetuey called iis yaa hates 
dee 












afforded both an example and. to our. 
mess, in order to enable us to walk in the road. 
tion : grant us so to revere the merits of the 
Abbot William, that we may feel the benefit 
suffrages, and tread in hissteps. Thro’. — 
E- picts 
XXVI. 88, JOHN and PAUL, mm. 
NTROIT. Ps.xxxiii —Many are the afifictions 
ie just, but out of them all will the Lord deliver 
ie Lord keepeth all their bones, not one of 
shall be broken. Ps, I will bless the Lord at 
his praise shall be always in my mouth. 


* f 
CT. Quasumus.—We beseech thee, O Al- 
hty God, that we may receive this day redoubled 
om the glorious solemnity ofthe blessed martyrs, 
in and Paul, who in their faith and. sufferin, 
brothers, Thro. 
Eccles. xliv. 10.15.—These were men 
/, whose godly deeds have not failed: good 
zs continue with their seed, their posterity are a 
inheritance, and their seed hath stood in the 
nants: and their children for their sakes 
er: their seed and their glory shall not be for- 
"Their bodies are buried in peace, and their’ 
liveth unto generation and generation. Let 
shew forth their wisdom, and the 














ly TS, i 
over the iniquity of the world, followed zt 
of the glorious kingdom 


GOSPEL. Luke xii. 1. 8—At that time: Jesus 
‘said to his disciples : Beware ye of the leaven of the 


m 


004 26th JUNE. 


Pharisces, which is hypocrisy. For there is nothing 
covered, that shall not be revealed: nor hidden, that 
shall not be known. For whatsoever things you 
have spoken in darkness, shall be published in the 
light : and that which you have spoken in the ear in 
the chambers, shall be preached on the house-tops 
And I say to you, my friends : Be not afraid of them 
that kill the body, and after that have no more that 
they can do. But I will shew you whom ye 
fear: fear ye him who after he hath killed, bah © 
power to cast into hell. Yea I say to you, fear him. 
Arc not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and net 
one of them is forgotten before God? Yea the very 
hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not 
therefore : you are of more value than many sparrows. 
And I say to you, whosoever shall confess me before 
men, him shall the Son of Man also confess before 
the angels of God. 

OFFERT. Ps. v.—All they that love thy name 
shall glory in thee: for thou, O Lord, wit bless 
the just: Ó Lord, thou hast crowned us as with the 
shield of thy good will. 

SECRET.—Mercifully receive, O Lord, the offer 
ings consecrated to thee by the merita of thy holy 
martyrs, John and Paul: and grant they may be to 
us a continual support. Thro’. 

COMM.  Wisd. iii—Though in the sight of men 
they suffered torments, God bath tried them: # 
gold in the furnace he hath proved them, and as 3 
victim of holocaust he hath received them. 

P. COMM. Sumpsimus.—Having received, O Lord, 
thy divine sacraments on the festival of thy holy 
martyrs John and Paul: grant, we beseech thee, 
that what we here celebrate in time, we may hert- 
after receive in a happy eternity. Thro’. 


‘27th aww 28th UNE. 
" XXVII. St. LEO, p. c. 


lll as in Mass Xl. p. 484, except 


re and at the Secret and P. Comm. is made a 
~~ Commem. of St. John Baptist; and also of the 
ll of SS. Peter and Paul as below. 
EL, Matt, xxv. as in p. 482. 

T RET. Grant, we iuscoch thee, O Lord, 
intercession of blessed Leo, that this oblation 
be available to us, by the offering of which thou 
pleased to blot out the sins of the whole world. 


- P. COMM. Deus, qui anina.—O God, who hast 
) on the soul of thy servant Leo, the rewards 
piness: mercifully Pus that we, who 

our sins, may, by 


hay 
oed wit the weight ol 
intercession, find relief. Thro’. 


XXVIII. VIGIL of S8. PETER and PAUL, 
SINTROIT. John xxi—The Lord raid to Peter 
when thou wast younger, thou didst gird thyself, and 
didst walk where thou wouldst ; but when thou shalt 
be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands and ano- 
ther shall gird thee, and lead thee whither thou 
wouldst not: and this he said, si fying by what 
death he should glorify God. Pp. The eavens shew 
forth the esp or QN :and the firmament declareth 
the works of his hands. V. Glory. 

COLLECT. Prasta—Grant, we beseech thee, 
0 Almighty God, that we whom thou hast founded 
on the rock of the apostolic faith, may be never 
shaken by any patie 2 











29th sug. 607 


say to thee, when thou wast youn; 
E vod "elt and didst ‘walk rin e 

: but when thou'shalt be old, thou shalt 

y hands, and another shall gird thee, 

whither thon wouldst ‘not, "This he 


ou Kno O Lord, that 1 love thee, 
DUE P. T 





| INTRO! 
‘OW I know in very "UG Scio vere quia 
NS that the Lord 2M misit i pt 
sent his. angel and gelum tia -et eripuit 
d me out of the me de maru Herodis, et 
of Herod, and from de’ omni expectatione 
n: Daan ectation of the plebis Judworum, 
lle oí hie Jews. —— ii, 
Pu hou prov: 
hast known 


;ECT. 
secrated this 
apostles in by er 
may in all things follow deir! ei dicis by 
was laid the foundation of religion. 








av 


30th suNRL 602) 
GOSPEL.» Mott, xvi, 13. 19.—At that times, 
came into the quarters of. Cesarea. Phillipiz, 


and hie asked his disciples saying: Whom. do ien. 
aap fier che Bon of Man is? But they said: Some, 


Rome or one of the prophets, Jesus saith, 
them: it whom opu sie ea "Simon: 
Peter answered and said : ‘Thou art Christ the Son, 


living God. And Jesus answering, said to him) 
Bleed art thou Simon Bar-Jona ; because flesh and. 
blood hath not revealed it to thee, but m ped 
who isin heaven. And [say to thee: "That thou: 
will build my: 





all adver, tart Por. of ay, 
coms whom thou hast nourished with 


|o OA Uim n Re Lb 
XXX. COMMEMORATION of Bt PAUL. | 
MIL ct ox January 25, p. B, wih a Commem. 


1 Lf 
©) St.John the 601 except bw lie 
EPISTLE. zit ei ON cm ». bos] 


SER iced ie de poet eid, NO. 





610 30th sUNE. 


ched by me, is not according to man. For 
neither did I receive it of man, nor did I learn it; 
but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. For you have 
of my conversion in time past in the Jews re- 

ügion: how that beyond measure I persecuted the 

urch of God, and wasted it, and I made progres 
in the Jews’ religion above many of my equals in my 
own nation, being more abundantly zealous for the 
traditions of my fathers, But when it pleased hi 
who separated me from my mother's womb, 
called me by his grace, to reveal his Son in me, that 
I might preach him among the Gentiles, immediately 
I condescended not to flesh and blood. Neither went 
I to Jerusalem to the apostles who were before me: 
but I went into Arabia, and again I returned to 
Damascus. Then, after three years, I went to Jeru- 
salem to see Peter, and I tarried with bim fifteen 
days: but other of the apostles I saw none: saving 
James the brother of the Lord. Now the things 
which I write to you; behold before God I lie not. 

Alleluia, Alleluia. V. O holy apostle Paul, preacher 
of the truth, and doctor of the Gentiles, intercede for 
us. Alleluia. 

GOSPEL. Matt. x. as on the 11th of June p. 591. 


OFFERT. Ps. cxxxviii—To me thy friends, 0 
God, are made exceedingly honourable: their princi- 
pali is exceedingly strengthened. 

COMM. Matt. xix.—Amen, 1 say to you: that 
you who have forsaken all things, and followed 
shall receive an hundred fold, and shall possess life 
everlasting. 

P. COMM. Perceptis.—Having received, O Lord, 
these holy mysteries, we humbly beseech thee, by the 
intercession of thy blessed apostle Paul, that what 
we have celebrated in thanksgiving for the glory be- 
stowed upon him, may be a remedy to us. Thro’. 


3d avrx. ex 


JuylL VISITATION of the B.V.M. 


Introit, Grad. Offert. Comm. and P. Comm. as in. 
the Votive Mass, Salve, p. 507. The Collect, &e. 
as on. December 8, p. 529. with Commems. of SS. 

_ Peter and Paul, as on June 99, p. 607. 

Eom. a oF SS. Processus and Martinian, mm. 
COLLEC dui 0 Got whe br ie 
gos eriogeet did holy martyrs ied 
ian, art pleased to protect and defend. us: 
wwe may improve by their example, and find 
comfort in their prayers. 
EUN Cant. ii. , DA Behold he cometh, 
wee upon the mountains, skipping over the hills, 
loved is like a roe or a young hart. Behold 

x standeth behind our wall, looking Egi i] 

windows, looking through the lattices. 

my beloved speaketh to me: Arise, make haste, my 

my dove, my beautiful one, and come. For 
rinter is now past, the rain is over and gone. The 

Towers have appeared in our land, the time of prun- 

nee the voies of the turtle is Pen d in = 
1 the fig-tree hath put forth her green 

a án flower yield their sweet ‘mel A ‘Ate m 

love, my beautiful one, and come. My dove 

clefis of the rock, in the hollow places of the wall, 

shew me thy face,let thy voice sound in my ear: 

for thy voice is sweet, and thy face comely. 
GOSPEL. dete oF .62. Cakpo, 








fecti. —1 nourished by the 

qenicetin ot ie holy holy xd m of 

that nd. ve peu wit ith pio devotion, iyi 
wl we wil 

ss certain means of obtaining our salvation. Thro* 


4 





^ 


| 


612 Qd souy. 


Within the OCTAVE of SS. PETER and PAUL. 


Introit, Mihi autem, p. 524. Collect, &c. as on 
June 29, p. 607. 


LESSON. Acts v. 12. 16.—Jn those days: By the 
hands of the apostles were many signs and wonders 
wrought among the people. And they were all with 
one accord in Solomon’s porch.’ But of the rest no 
man durst join himself to them: but the people mag 
nified them. And the multitude of men and women 
that believed in the Lord was more increased: inse- 
much, that they brought forth the sick into the streets, 
and laid them on beds and couches, that when Peter 
came, his shadow, at least, might overshadow any of 
them, and they might be delivered from their in- 
firmities. And there came also together to Jerusalem 
a multitude out of the neighbouring cities, bringing 
sick persons, and such as were troubled with un- 
clean spirits; who were all healed. 

GRAD. Ps. xliv.—Thou shalt make them princes 
over all the earth: they shall remember thy name, 
O Lord. V. Instead of thy fathers sons are born to 
thee: therefore shall people praise thee. Alleluia, 
eMleluia. V. Y have prayed for thee, Peter, thet 
thy faith fail not: and when thou art converted, 
strengthen thy brethren. Alleluta. 

GOSPEL. Mait. xix. as in p. 492. 

COMM.—You who have followed me shall st 
upon thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Iersel. 





: VI. OCTAVE of SS. PETER and PAUL 
. INTROIT.—Sapientiam, as inp. 477. 
COLLECT. Deus, cujus.—O God, whose right 
hand saved blessed Peter from being drowned whilt 
he walked upon the sea, and delivered his fellow 
apostle Paul from the bottom thegeof, when he had 
heen a third time shipwrecked: mercifully hear us, 


GIR xoc. 613 


Ond granit, that by the merits of both, we may obtain 

Phappy eternity. ‘Thro’. HIP PS, 
LESSON, Eccles. sliv, as in p. 603. 
GRAD.—The souls of tho just are in the hand of 

Bou, andthe torment of tbe wicked sll not touch 


Ec 
Sarno. 
3F 








8th ann 10th sony. 615 


— — WHL St. ELIZABETH, w, 

$i Ml as in Mass XXL. p. 509, except 
E irrinas 0 Ve merciful 
wi de Rest nll ier admirable endowments, 
i go blessed: imas with the: gift. of 
Inking ware case: : grant, by her prayers, irs, that after 
ig enj ee shi we humbly crave in 
p life, we be recei ved into erpeiasing 

TT MM ig ad : 


iie met 





X. The! Ro eem SS. RU- 


"INTROLT. Ps. cxii.— Praise tlie Lord, ye elil- 
dren, wn pai yo te pang ofthe Lop si maketh 
‘a müp to di in a house ‘the jo: 
eoe rof children: pie eaa to the momen the 
from hen now and for ever. 
: DILECTE s b lory. 


Pr rant, we beseech thee, 
Seeley, if Gog, that 25 we have been Erg 
of these gl d martyrs in tlie profes- 
Fa of thy ena H mesi their kind- 
in recommen. din us iere hy. 
DU PESSON N. : as in pa Racin 
‘iti, ~Our souls hath been eliver- 
3 Li & sparrow out of the snare of the fowlers. 
F. The snare is broken, and we are delivered.” 
S help. is in the name of the Lord, who made 
heaven and earth. "Alleluia, etii V. These were 
zuly brothers, who triumphed over the iniquity of 
a rena followed Christ, and are now "o 
the glorious kingdom of pen pier *Jlleluia. 
GOSPEL. Mail. xii, 46, 


sa ee pasos pale ili 


speak to him. And one said to him: 
au and thy bso ve without tuy 








4th asp 15th sony. em 


Commem. of SS. Nabor and Felix, p. : 
COLLECT. 'esla.—Grant, we beseech thee, 
'O Lord, that as we make a yearly commemoration 
of these thy holy martyrs: 80 we may always be 
partakers of their intercession, 'Thro’, 
a BECRET- Gran, hd ‘beseech thee, O Lard) ‘hit 
ie offerings of thy people may be acceptable to thee « 
sah the jnteccession.nf.thy, hols oancontnte 
and Felix: and that they may be rendered worthy 
ie merits of those, in honour of whose triumplis 
are offered to thy holy name. ‘Thro’. 
COMM. .Vataliliis.—Being refreshed, by virtue 
of the sacrament we have received on the festival o! 
thy saints, we beseech thee, O Lord, that we may 
eternally enjoy the good things wherewith thou bast 
now been pleased to cherish us... Thro’. 





— 
XIV. St. BONAVENTURE, bp. c. and D. 


ment F. The law of 


bis steps shall not be supplanted. Alleluia, Alleluia. 
V. The Lord hath sworn and he will not repent. 
‘Thou art a priest for ever according to the order of 





XV. St. SWITHIN, bp. of Winchester, c. 
ip All as in Mass XI. p. 484, except 
"COLLECT. Omnipotens.—A mighty and eternal 
God, who hast made this day honourable by the 
celebration of the festival of blessed Swithin, thy 
confessor and bishop, grant to thy church that we 





618, 16th anp 1th 3uxy. 


may obtain lieaven through his intercession, whose 
memory we venerate on earth. Thro’. 

SECRET.—Look down, we beseech thee, O Lord, 
on thy people who approach thy sacraments on ths 
festival of blessed Swithin, thy confessor and bishop, 
and grant that what they offer in honour of thy name, 
may, by his prayers, avail to the pardon of their sins. 
"Thro'. 

P.COMM. Pignus.—Having received the 
of eternal life, we beseech thee, O Lord, that 
the intercession of blessed Swithin, thy confessor 
bishop, we may hereafter openly partake of what we 
have now sacramentally received. Thro’. 





XVI. B. V. M. of MOUNT CARMEL. 
All as in the Votive Mass, Salve, p. 507, except 


COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who hast ho- 
noured the order of the Carmelites with the singular 
title of the blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of God: 
mercifully grant that we who solemnize this her 
commemoration, may by the aid of her prayers ar- 
rive at eternal happiness. ‘Thro’. 





XVIL St OSMUND, bp. of Salisbury, c. 


lll as in Mass X. * p. 482, except 


COLLECT. Onnipotens.—Almighty and eternal 
God, who rejoicest us on this festival of blessed Os 
mund, thy confessor and bjshop, we humbly beeeech 
thy clemency, that as we devoutly celebrate his s 
lemnity, we may obtain through his prayers, the 
glory of eternal life. Thro’. 

SECRET.—Sanctify we beseech thee, O Lord, 
our offerings through the merits and intercession 
blessed Osmund, that they may be changed into the 
body and blood of thy Son Jesus Christ, and avail to 
the salvation of our souls. Thro’, 


Isth sory. 619. 


P.COMM. Sumptis—Having received thy. sa- 
ered gifts, we beseech thee, O Lord, that by their 
We may imitate the example of blessed Os- 

ad, thy confessor and bishop, and thereby obtain 


eternal joys. ‘Thro’. - 

XVIIL St. CAMILLUS de LELLIS,c. 8 
AINTROYT.—No man hath greater love, than io 
lay down his. life for hi fri Blessed is he 





uy 


the hour of death, 
Th 


Epistle, John iii. 
“in Mass XI. pp. 484, 485. 
. John xv. 12. 16,—At that time, Jesus. 
said to his disciples : his is my commandment, that 
love one another, as I have loved you. Greater 
x than this no man hath, that a man lay down his, 
life for his friends. You are my friends, if you do 
the things that I command you... I will not now call 
servants : for the servant knoweth not what the 
Lord doth. But I have called you friends: because 
all things whatsoever I have heard of my Father, I 
have made known to you. You have not chosen 
me; but I have chosen you; and have inted - 
you, that you should go, and should bring forth fruit ; 
and your fruit should remain: that whatsoever you. 
Sisi sek of the Father in my name, he may give 





20th sony. e 


LLECT. Deus, misercordiarum,——O God, 
'ather of mercies : grant, by the merits and in- 
ion of blessed. Jerome, whom thou wast pleased. 
hans, that 

ion, by 

ildren. 


iyi 
‘thy light break fe 
shall genit "justice, 

fac WEM shall ro. thee 
and ie Lord shall hear: 


ot noti 
pour out th: FHA tha Dh shalt satisfy the 
afflicted soul, then shall thy Ke itrise up in darkness, 
: shall be. Gelert _And the 


unde 
F^. He 
hath distributed, he hath given iy poor: fiat juss 
Nice remainet | for ever, ^ eluia.. 
GOSPEL. Matt. xix. 13. 99. — At that that time: 
Some little children ene s presented to him, that he. 
= E. 








] 9st anv 22d suxx. 623. t 


Jerome, thy Confessor, may. also. follow his 
e, and thereby obtain an ample reward in 
ven. Thro’. 







XXI. St. HENRY, Emperor. ] 

| © Alt as in Mass XII. Os justi, p. 488, except 
COLLECT. Deus, qui—O God, who didst this 
day remove blessed Henry thy confessor from his. 

| earthly throne to an eternal kingdom: we humbly 
beseech thee, that as by the assistance of thy grace, 
he was proof against all the temptations of the world: 
fo wo may follow bis example in withstanding all 

| the flatteries of this world, and serve thee with clean. 
hearts. Thro’. * 


en 








XXIL St. MARY MAGDALEN. 


V INTROIT. Me expectaverunt, as in p. 496. — 
COLLECT. Beate Marie.—Grant, O Lord, we 

mmy be assisted by the prayers of blessed Mary 

Magdalen: at whose request thou wast pleased to | 

raise Lazarus from the dead, after he had been four 
ys in the grave. Who liveth, 

ISSON. Cant. iii. 2. 5. viii. 6, 7.—I will rise 
and will go about the in the streets and the 
broad ways, I will seek him whom my soul loveth : 
Y ht [d and I found him not. The watchmen 
who keep the city found me. Have you seen him 
"whom my soulloveth? When I had a little. pues 

"them, 1 found him whom my soul loveth; 

dim, and I will not let him go, till I bring” 

‘into mother’s house, and into the chamber 
that me. I adjure you, O daughters of © 
Jerusalem, by the roes and harts of the , that’ 
stir not Up, nor wake my beloved till she 
[ros i.) Put me asa seal upon thy heart, asa 
‘upon thy arm: for love is strong as death: 











n L: 
23d sun, (625 


ISTLE. 1 Peter v. 1. 11.—Dearly beloved: 
ancients that are among you, I beseech’ who 
m myself also an ancient and à witness of the suf- 
eur as also a partaker wire 
is to be revealed in time to come. Feed the 
flock of God, which is among you, taking eare of i 
not by constraint, but deer accordin, Tie x 
aad ‘not for filthy lucre’s sake, but voluntarily: neither 
it over the clergy, but. being ma made a pat- 
Ea the flock from the heart. id when the 
‘Prince of pastors shall appear, you shall receive a~ 
never-fadin; conet ywn of glory. In like manner ye 
subject to the ancients. And do ye 
lihirate humility one to another, for eee d re- 
sisteth the pro: bled therefore uller n kaa oe 
Be you humbled therefore under the mighty hand of 
y hat he may exalt you in the time of visita- 
tion ‘casting all your care upon him, for he hath 
care of you. Be sober and watch: because your ad- 
belo devil, as a roaring lion goeth ah about see 
m he may devour: whom 
; knowing that the same affliction be befalls your 
brethren who are in the world. But the God of all 
Ma hath called us unto eternal glory in 
Jesus, after you have suffered a little, will 
foo i you, and confirm you, and establish. 
him be glory and empire for ever and ever. 


AGRAD. Pe. Ixxxviii, to Mleluia, as in p. 462. 
¥. The Lord hath sworn, and he will not repent: 
"Thou art a Re per ever according to the order of 

cli. 

- GOSPEL. Luke xxii. 24. 30.—J4t that time: 
‘There arose a strife among the disciples, which of 
them should seem to be greater. And Jesus said to 
them: The kings of the Gentiles lord it over them: 

they that have power over them, are called be- 
i Butyou pa Lass greater. 





| a 


with to be covered, with these we are content, For 

that will become rich, fall into temptation, 

nd into the snare of the devil, and into many ün- 

le and hurtful desires which drown men into 

ction and perdition. For the desire of money 

the root of all, evils; which some coveting have 

‘erred from the faith, and have entangled themselves 

(m many sorrows. But thou, O man of God, fy these 

ings, and pursue justice, godliness, faith, charity, 

ence, mildness, Fight the good fight of faith, 

Tey bola ‘on eternal life. 

n GOSPEL. Matt. xxv. as in p. 482. 


s. XXV. St. JAMES, ap. : 
— INTROIT.—Mibi autem, as in p. 524. 

- COLLECT, Esto, Domine.—Sunctify, O Lord, 
(and preserve thy people; that being assisted by 
James, thy Apostle, they may please thee in their 


of life, and always serve thee with asteadfast 
ith. Thro’. 


mem. of St. Cumisroruzn, m. by the Collect, 
&c. as in Mass III. p. 466. 

_ LESSON, 1 Cor. iv. 9. 15.—Brethren: lthink 
that God hath set forth us apostles, the Inst, as it 
were men appointed to death : because we are made 
a spectacle to the world, and to angels, and to. men. 
. We are fools for Christ's sake, but you are wise in 

Christ: we are weak, but you are strong: you are 

honourable, but we without honour, Even unto 
“this hour we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, 

and are buffetted, and have no fixed abode. An 
we labour working with our own hands: we are 
led, and we loa owe ee persecuted, and we 
ffer it. We are blasphemed, and we entreat: we 
are made as the refuse of this world, the offscour- 
ing of all even until now. T write not these things 
| io confound you ; but I admonish you as my dear- 
est children: for if you have ten thousand instructors 
3G2 
| 





la. 





28th soy. 629 


“cua te 
rant that, by t 
mother ‘of her who bore 
st, it increase our 
a 
“thy lips 
r ever and ever. 


P. COMM. —Being fed by these hea- 


Netcast, Otis 
yenly mysteries, Grant Lord, that we may ob- 
oral salvation, ope intercession of B. Andi, 


o make choice of to be the. 
thy Son. ‘Thro’: 





843 








30th sony. i 631 
- XXX. 88. ABDON and SENNEN, inm. 


JIntroit, Grad. fo Alleluia, and. Offert. as in Mass. VII 


Aj thy: abun: 
nnen with 


from ral pore Thro’. 


—Brethren: Let us 
fot, in much 


RET. cm as in 
i: The 


the greatness of thy arm, 
possession of the children of them: that have 
it to death. — 
IMM. Per huj y virtue of this m: 
“tery, O ‘Lord, may our vices be destroyed, and bj. i 
oes dei d holy en Abdon and Sennen, 
‘our just desires fulfilled. D 





632 Slst JULY AND Ist AvGvUsT. 
XXXI. St. IGNATIUS, Confessor. 


INTROIT. to Ps. as in p. 94.—Ps. All who love 
thy name shall glory in thee: because thou wilt bless 
the righteous man. V. Glory. 

COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who for the 
increase of the glory of thy holy naine, wast pleased, 
by blessed Ignatius, to strengthen thy Church mi- 
litant with a new supply: grant, that being aided by 
his prayers, during our warfare on earth, we may 80 
imitate his virtues, as to be happily crowned with 
him in heaven. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. 2 Tim. as in p. 468. 

GRAD. Ps. xci.—The just man, &c. p. 488. 

GOSPEL. Luke x. as on St. Mark, the 25th April 

OFFERT. Ps. lxxxvi.—My truth and my mercy 
shall be with him: and in my name his horn shall be 


' exalted. 


SECRET.—May the charitable prayers of blessed 
Ignatius, O Lord, accompany our oblation: that 
the holy mysteries wherein thou hast established the 
fountain of all holiness, may also sanctify us in truth. 

ro’. 

COMM. Luke xii—I am come to cast fire on the 
earth, and what will I, but that it be kindled ? 

P. COMM. Laudis— May the sacrifice of praise, 
O Lord, which we have offered thee with thanks- 
giving for holy Ignatius, cause us to arrive, by his 
intercession, at that happy state where we may per- 
petually praise thy majesty. Thro’. 





August 1. St. PETER’s CHAINS. 


All as on the 29th of June, p. 607, except 


COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who deliveredst 
blessed Peter the Apostle from his chains, and st 
him untouched at liberty, deliver us, we 


9d AND 4th AUGUsT. 633 


from the bonds of our sins, and mercifully j 
Sora nectall evil, eie 4 





IL St. STEPHEN, p m. 
will clothe his priests 
s shall rejoice with ex- 
remember David 
and 


COLLECT. "e zt nosy enin 


LESSON. Acts xx. 17. 21 
e [iletu. si 3 Serie oa 


ure] when they were come to 
him, and were together, he said to them: You 
know, from the first day that I came into Asia, in 
what manner 1 have | been with you for all the oak 1 


ich befell me by the con: bares 
ve kept back nothing that was 


iow I 
profitable to you, bu here preached it to you, and. 
taught dm pul m house to house: tes- 


owe an entiles penance towards 
ai faith in our ] Jesus Christ. 
“Grad, Eccl. p. 4t 
Sec as in 


(Lord thou dida) as on the 231. fuly p. 596. 
siis 





488. 

" God, who hast en- 
lightened thy ry uie etinént icine agi 
preaching of blessed ‘Doinine} thy Confessor : grant 
that by his prayers we may be provided against all 
temporal necessies, and daily improve in all spirit- 

ual good. ro’, 
EPISTLE. 2 Tim. as in p. 496. 
. GRAD.—The just shall iousoh like the Har 
wee: he shall En up like the cedar of Lil 








me 


when we made known to pores the power and pre- 
“sence of our Lord Jesus Christ: but having been 
inade eye-witness of his majesty. For,he received 
fr x the Father honour and glory: this voice 
‘coming down to him from the excellent glory, This 
36 my beloaed Son in whom T have pleased myself, Mar 
ye ham. And this voice we heard brought from hea- 
when we were with him in the holy mount. 
And we have the more prophetical word: whereunto 
you do well to attend, as to a light that shineth in a 
ark place, until the day dawn, and the day-star 
arise in your hearts, » 

GRAD. Ps.xliv.—Thou art beautiful above the 
sons of men: grace is poured abroad in thy lips. 
V. My heart bara uttered a good word; T speak 
amy works to the king. Alleluia, Jllleluia. V. He is 
the brightness of eternal light; the unspotted mirror 
and the image of his goodness. Alleluia. ^ 

GOSPEL. Matt, xvii. as in p. 147. - 

OFFERT. Ps.cxi.—Glory and wealth shall be in 
his honse: and his justice remaineth for ever and 
ever. Alleluia, Alleluia, 

SECRET.—Sanctify, we beseech thee, O Lord, 
our oblations, by the glorious transfiguration of thine 
only begotten Son : and, by the splendour of his light, 
cleanse us from the stains of our sins. Thro’. 

Puzracr, Quia per incarnati, p. xxx.' v 

COMM. Matt. xvii.—Tell not the vision you 
have seen to any one, till the Son of Man Vries ol 
the dead. , 

P,COMM. Presia.— Grant, we beseech thee, 
© Almiglity God, that our minds being enlight- 
ened, we may comprehend the mysteries we cele- 

brate on the solemnity of the Transfiguration of thy 
Son. Thro’ be 
4 xk 








' 





B aveust. C 63 


ihave believed. For you, brethren, are be- 
\lowers of thé churches of God which are in 
in Christ Jesus: for you also have suffered 
'e things from your own iris Mere ph ee as 
ve from the Jews: who both killed 

| gun and have ot ile e ee 
tased and are adversaries to all men : 

ding usto speak to the Gentiles, that they 
horrea: sins always: forte wrath 
is come upon them to the end. 
Ps. xxxiii—Fear the Lord all ye 

[4 there is no want to them. That fon li 
y that seek the Lord shall not he deprived of 
d. Alleluia, Alleluia. V. Wisd. Wi. The 
18 shall shine, and shall run as firé among the 
or ever. Alleluia. 

PEL. Mark xvi. 15. 18,—/At that times 





s p follow them that believe: in mj 
ey shall cast out devils: they shall 
w tongues: they shall take up serpents: and. 
shall drink any y deadly thing, it shall not hurt. 
hey shall lay their hands upon the sick, and 


JT. Ps, xxxi.—Be glad in the Lord and 
oy, ge righteous: amd praise him, ull ye 


[ET.— May our devotion, O Lord, be 
vail us ro ‘eal atic peche Li 
| Whose festival we pay it to thee. 

. Ps.xvi.— These miracles shall accom- 











10th avausr. 639 


to the tee new canticle: sing to the 


Enable ‘us, we beseech 
extinguish in ou ourselves the 


who: Lawrence 
janiphed over. kj and. the pe isibseed 
EL E acu 


e earth. 


n 


P le to aed all grace 
"having all sufficiency 
ry good work. 
He hath dispersed. abroad, he hath 
4 his remaineth for: ever. 
bread. bs lüply" a 
ve you to eat and will rm r 
cn geri of the [Reip 


stem 


Tere Bem wre 
the sign of the cross gavo 


es Amen, amen, I say to 

ain of wheat falling into the 

eth alone. But if it die, it 

frigo forth m it. He that loveth his life, 
[3 be that hateth his life in this world, 


ife eternal. If any man minister 
im follow mez and where I 


3n2 








14th AvGUST eu 


SÉCRET.—Receive, O Lord, our offerings on this? 
of thy saints: and may their bearing witness 
hy truth advance our salvation. "ro: 
: 4 torum.—Let the participa: 
USER Galstncots 0 rode uitiis 
firm us in the. iiA us ‘Thro’. 


aM 





: n 
d, who hast pleased 
Mary, and in her to 
eseech thee, that being 
we may with comfort 

Who livest. 


Collect, &c. of END. on his Feast, p. 639. 


u 
Collect, &. of St. F; olus Ha it Mae XIII. p. 488. 
LESSON. Eccles. xxiv. 93.—As the vine I have ^ 
brought nh a pleasant odour: and my flowers are 
the 


iof honour and riches. Tam the mother of 
fair love, and of fear, and of knowledge, and of holy 
hope. In me is al Il grace of the way and of the 
truth. In me is all hope of life and of virtue. Come 
ever to me, all ye 


and be filled with 
my fruits. For my spirit is sweet above honey, and 
my inheritance above honey and the honey-comb. 
My memory is unto everlasting generations. ‘Th 

that eat me, shall yet hunger; and they that drink 
me, shall yet thirst. He that hearkeneth to me, shall 
not he confounded : and they that work by me, shall 
not sin, They that explain me, shall have life ever- 


ane, L 
GRAD.—Thou art blessed, to Allel. as in p. 507. 
GOSPEL. Luke xi. as in p. 508. 
SECRET May We fee o. 
lay the 
p oUpprgc epo e 
thee, whom thou didst pu T of this present world, 


o 
iat desire me, 








T] 15th aueust. , e 


| not cease to be, and in the dwelling place 
Hoe before him. Aad Twas so 1 
in Sion, and in the holy city likewise I 

my power was in Jerusalem, And I took 
‘in an honourable people, and in the portion of my 
his inheritance, and my abode is in the full as- 
‘sembly of saints, I was exalted like. a cedar in Li- 
banus, and asa cypress tree on mount Sion, . I was 
exalted like a Pia tree in Cades, and asa rose 
plant in Jericho: as a fair olive tree in the plains, 
renee Pede by the water in the streets, was 
exalted. I gave a sweet smell like cinnamon, and 
aromatical balm: like the myrrh I yielded a sweet 


odour. 
GRAD. Ps. xliv.—Because of thy truth and meek- 
and justice, and thy right hand shall conduct 
hee wonderfully. V, Hear, O daughter, and sce and 
be attentive: for the king is taken with uty. 
‘Alleluia, Alleluia, — V. Assumpta est Maria in colum, 
eaurcitus angelorum. Alleluia, F. Mary is 
up into heaven, and all the host of angels are 

Ljoy. Alleluia. 

/SPEL. Luke x. 38. 42.—At that time; 
Jesus entered into a certain town; and a egrtain 
‘woman named Martha, received him into her house, 
And she had a sister called Mary. Who sitting also 
at the Lord's feet, heard his word. But Martha 
was bu about much serving. Who stood and said: 
Lord, hast thou no care that my sister hath left me 
‘alone to serve? Speak to her therefore, that she. 
me. And the Lord answering, said to her: M: 
TEAM art er ER troubled po 
many things. But one thin; necessary. 
vec the best part, which shall not e taken 

D her. TEE : má 
FFERT.—Mary is taken up into heaven, 
npe rejoice, and join in the praises of the Lord. 


+ We 





m 


1 


l7lh AveusT. | 645, 


elma virginis, hic famulis confer salulis opem....F.. 
Joachim, boly husband of Anne, father of the holy 
Virgin, obtain for us in this life what is necessary 
PUCOSPEL. An the Bh of De 4 
-" . Matt. ias on c. Pos 
- OFFERT. Pe, vii.— Thou hast crowned ioe 
© Lord, with glory and honour, and hast set him 
over the works of thy hands, a 
-SECRET.—Favourably receive, O most mereifill 
‘God, the sacrifice offered to thy Majesty in honour 
of the holy peri Joachim, father of the Virgin 
Mary: that by the intercession of him, of his spouse, 
and of their blessed daughter, we may obtain pardon 
of all our sins, and eternal glory. Thro’. 3 
COMM.— This is the faithful and prudent 
whom the Lord hath placed over his fumily, to give 
their measure of wheat in due season, " 
P. COMM. Quesumus.—Grant, we beseech thee, 
O Almighty God, by the merits and prayers of bless- 
ed Jonchim, the father of her who bore thy beloved 
Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, that the sacrament which 
we have received may make us worthy of being as- 
sisted by thy grace in this life, and of partaking of 
eternal glory in the world to come. Thro’. — 
‘The Gospel of the Sunday is read at the end of Mass. 
fester 
XVII. OCTAVE of 8t. LAWRENGE, m. Y d 
INTROIT. Ps. xvi.—Thou hast proved my heart, 
© Lord, and visited it by night: thou hast tried me 
[4 fire, and iniquity hath not been found in me. 
. Hear, O Lord, my justice: attend to my sup- 
plication. | '. Glory. " 
"COLLECT. Excita—Raise up, O Lord, in thy 
church, that spirit which blessed Lawrence obeyed : 
that-being filled with the same, we may zealously 
love what.he loved, and practice what he taught. 
"Thro’.—in unity of the same. 
^» Conuzcr, &c. of the Assumption, p. 642, , 








- 
22d aveust,, 5 eu 


tiful God, who hast granted blessed Jane Frances, 
nflamed with the love of thee, a wonderful degree 
itude through all the paths of life, and wast 
through her, to adorn thy church with a new 
pring: grant, by her merits and prayers, that we 
sensible of our weakness, confide in thy strength, 
nay overcome all adversities with the help of thy 
ieavenly grace. Thro’. 
| Commem. of the Assumption, p. 642: 
SECRET.— May these offerings, we beseech thee 
9 Lord, enkindle in us the fire of. "ux love, which 
nurned so vehemently in the heart of blessed Frances, 
md m med it with the flames of everlasting char- 
2 Thro’. 
P. COMM.  Spirilum.—Infuse into us, O 
he spirit of thy love, that by the prayers of. 
fane Frances, thou wouldst cause those whom thou: 
rast fed with the bread of heaven to despise whatever 
s earthly, and follow thee with pure minds. Thro’. 





— XXII. OCTAVE of the ASSUMPTION, 

as on the Feast, p. 649, with the following Com- 
s peus of HB. (TrapR T, [Ted 
| COLLECT, arüiun.-Help ws O Lordy in thy 
nercy, y the intercession of thy martyrs, 
Tymothy, Hyppolite and Symphorian, shelter us un. 
ler the protedtion of thy goodness. ‘Thro’ i 

‘ /T.—May the offerings, O Lord, of thy de- 
rout dde be acceptable to the in honour of m 

wl merits ave 

Rote T rh d d QOL 
P. COMM. Divini muneris.—Being abundant 
fed with thy divine gif, we beseech thee, O. Lord. 
our God, that, by Ligeris blessed. 
pue s " 
thereof, ‘Thro! " 


hel Aene 





" - 25th Aveusr. eu 


Simon who is called Zelotes, and Jude the brother of 
/Jumes and Judas Iscariot who was the traitor. And 
‘coming down with them, he stood in a plain place, 
‘and the company of his disciples, and a very y great 
"multitude of people from all Judea and Jerusalem, 
“and the sea-coast of Tyre and Sidon, who were come 
‘to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases. And 
they that were troubled with unclean spirits were 
‘eured. And all the multitude sought to touch’ him, 
for virtue went out from him, and healed all. Orepo. 
OFFERT. Ps. cxxxviii—To me, thy friends, O. 
God are made exceedingly honourable: their prinei- 
{pic i excondingly strengthened: 
SECRET.—Grant, we beseech thee, O Lord, that 
as we E gab pes va ay e^ = 
‘mew, we may be partakers of thy benefits, 
intercession, in whose honour we offer thee ‘he sa- 
‘erifice of praise. Thro’. ^ 
COMM. Matt. xix.—You, who bave followed 
me, shall sit on seats, judging the twelve tribes of 
"Terael, saith the Lord. 
P. COMM. Sumptum.—Grant, O Lord, we be- 
'seech thee, that the pledge of our eternal issues] 
ion 











which we have received, may, by the intercessi 
thy apostle Bartholomew, procure for us the neces- 
‘sary assistance for this life, and for that which is to 
‘come. Thro’. P 





XXV. St. LEWIS, King and e. 
Mill as in Mass XIU. p. 488, except 
COLLECT. "Deus, qui.—Ó Goll, who removedst 
blessed Lewis thy confessor, from an earthly kingdom 
to ee ae, Reaseal see ema graph we be- 
seech thee, lis virtues and prayers, that we may 
i SF the King o Kings, 


‘be received into the company 


Jesus Au EU only Son. P4 im aiid € 
Lesson, Ji x. as in p. 466. a; ". 
Aessem, ME cet Gp dH 


| | 





26th aw QZth aveusr. 6 
with him, and in my name shall his horn be 


"SECRET.— Grant, we bescech thee, © Almighty 
[ Confessor, blessed Lewis, despising 
vorld, studied only to please 

is prayers may render us 


yr and bp. we may re- 
| his example. Thro. 


I. St. JOSEPH CALASANCTIUS, c. 


Ty. 
LLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who, by blessed 

; didst provide for thy church new helps by 
struction of youth in the spirit of understanding 


Y it, we beseech thee, that by his ex- 
" old er heniton, we may both so aet and 
us lees an eternal reward, ‘Thro’ 
" 








29th accuse. 


XXIX. DECOLLATION of St. J. BAPTIST. 


.. INTROIT. Ps. cxviii. as in p. 
| to pi 
i di Hos mei 


that the venerable solemnity 
iptist, thy precursor and. mar- 
he ser thy saving aid. 


P e saying: Gird up thy 
a and arise, and speak to them all that I com- 
mand thee. Be not afraid at their presence: for I 
on Sud jiener to fear their countenance, For 
haye made thee this day a fortified eity, 

a Bee of iron, and a wall of brass, over all the 
tothe ki of Juda, to the princes thereof, 

and to the p , and to the people of the land. 


‘ht against thee, and shall not pre- 
ith thee, saith the Lord, to dover 


 486.— 
Jy; and 


i-um sent and pé ‘Johny und ‘bound Tus 
prison for the sake of Herodias the wife of Philip. 

"i brother, because he had married her. For John 
uo to Herod: It is not lawful for thee to have thy 
Ps wife. Now Herodias laid snares for him: 

and was desirous to put him to death, and could not. 
For Herod feared John, knowing him to be a just 
‘and holy man: and kept him, and when he heard 
he did many things: and he heard him willing- 

And when a convenient day was come, Herod 
‘made a supper for his rin day, for the princes, and 








1st ano 2d sePrEMBER. 655 


abundantly favoured with the dew of heavenly 
Saad beautify the Indies with her purity p 
Se crant that we thy servants, following the 
fume of her ‘ee become an. 
to Christ. 

— COLLECT, &c- p "ru. Majestatem. —We 
ily beseech thy Majesty, O Lord, that as in ce- 
ing the festivals of t the. sainte, thou fillest us 

: 80 thou Vpuen vue to pro- 
yore. 


bly regard, O Lord, 
y peopl ple, a and pals make them sensible 
effects of * whet . they celebrate with a 
dew mind in p pay saints. aay 


'OMM. (Of ib} -Being fed, Ó 
Ain thy berteoly u rae d 
ie intercession Es saint s, that we may always 
remain thankful. 'T 





COLLECT. Deus, qui. 
blessed Raymond, deem onfessor, wonderfully emi- 
ment by redeeming the faithful out of captivity: 
grant, by his prayers iit being freed from the bonds 
of sin, we may cheerfully perform what is most 
pleasing to thee. ‘Thro’. 





lL St. STEPHEN, King and e. 
i1 All as in Mass XIII. p. 488, except 
COLLECT. Concede.—Grant to thy church, 
God, that as blessed Stephen, thy confes- 
sor, while he reigned on earth, enlarged her bounds, 
$0 being now ow jous in heaven, he may be 


GOSPEL. Za Luke xix. as on the 25th Aug. p. 630. 











ls 90. AND 11th seerENBER. 657 
— 


that eat me shall yet hunger: and they that 
ink me shall yet thirst.” He that hearkeneth to me, 
ll not be confounded: and they that work by me, 
not sin. They that explain me, shall have life 
everlasting. » 
_GRAD.—Thou art blessed, and worthy of our re~ 
sspeets, O Mary, the Virgin, who without prejudice 
“to thy virginity, didst become the Mother of the 
Saviour. V. O Virgin Mother of God! he became 
man, and was shut up in thy womb, whom the whole 
world cannot contain, leluia, Alleluia. 
V. Post partum Virgo inviolala permansisti: Dei 
renitrix, intercede pro nobis. | V. er child-birth 
yu didst remain a pure Virgin: O Mother of God, 
intercede for us. Neluia, 
SPEL.—Luke i. as on the 25th Mareb, p. 565, 
Sus Secret, Comm. and P. Comm. as. in the 
Votive Mass, p. 507. AE the end of Mass is read. 
the Gosrn of the Sunday. 


IX. COMMEM. of S.—GORGONIUS, m. 

COLLECT.  Sanctus.— May the intercession, O. 
Lord, of blessed Gorgonius, thy martyr, bring com- 
fort to thy people; and fill tliem with spiritual joy. 
on this his sacred festival, Thro’, 

SECRET.—May the offerings of us thy serv: 

O Lord, be acceptable to thee, 5 the intercession o 
blessed. Gorgonius thy martyr. 

P. COMM. Familiam.—Grant, O «God, that thy 
servants may taste and be fed with eternal joys : and 
by the example of thy martyr. Gorgonius, be conti- 
nually replenished with the good odour of thy Son 
Christ. ho liveth. i 











* XI. COMMEM. of SS. PROTUS, &c, min. 

COLLECT. Beatorum.—We beseech thee, O 
Lord, that the constancy of thy holy martyrs, Protua 
and Hyacinth, may be an encouragement to us in 


| 
| 





wer 
es SEPTEMBER. | 650 


overtake you not. And he that walketh in darkness 
knoweth not whither he goeth. Whilst you have 
| the light, believe in the Tight, hat you may be the 
children of light. Cazpo. 

OFFERT.—Defend, O Lord, th: le; by the 
of the Cross, from the snares of their enemies; 
ebd may do thee laudable service, and our sacri- 

po acceptable. Alleluia. 

SEC] icing about to be nourished by the 
body and pm of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom 
the standard of the Cross was blgssed : we beseech 
thee, O Lord our God, that we may eternally enjoy 
the salutary effects of that precious Cross, which we 
have the haj an iness to reverence. Thro’, 

- PREFACE.— Qui salutem, p. xxx. 

COMM.—By the sign of the Cross, deliver us, O 

from all our enemies, 

. P. COMM. Adesto.—Assist us, O Lord our God, 
and by virtue of the Holy Cross, defend those from 
all danger whom thou case with joy, to render it 
the honour it deserves. 


XV. OCTAVE of the NATIVITY of B.M. V. 
Abas on the Conception, p. 529, with the following 
it. 


Commem. of St. Nicomedes. 





COLLECT. Adesto—Be merciful, O Lord, to thy 


ut being improved by the singular virtues 
Nicomedes thy martyr, they may have the 


Cie, assistance of his prayers, for the obtaining 


EER T Facourab See 
'RET.— Favourably receive; 


we offer, and may the prayers of blessed Ni 


EGON. Puri them Say e to thee. Tv 
Tord Du by 














mM arem 
cum) cedem 
7X Dime 
sar ve very! 











18th anv 20th, sEPTEMBER. 661 

oot. -XVIIL St. JOSEPH a Cupertine, c. 
^»; INTROIT. Eccles, i.—The love of God is honour- 
Able wisdom, and they to whom she shall shew her- 
‘self, love her by the sight and. by the knowledge of 
‘her great works. Ps. How lovely are thy tabernacles, 
© Lord of Hosts! My soul longeth and fainteth for 

courts of the Lord. .. V, Glory. 
© COLLECT. Deus, qui—O God, who: wast 
to draw all things to thy only begotten Son, 
raised on high: mereifülly grant that, by the 
/meritsand example of thy seraphie confessor, Joseph, 
being raised above all earthly desires, we may arrive 
athim. Who liveth. 

EPISTLE, 1 Cor. xiii. as in p. 111. 

GRAD. Ps. xx.—'Thou hast prevented him, O 
Lord, with blessings of sweetness; thon hast set ‘on 
his head a crown of precious stones. V. He asked 
life of thee, and thou hast given him length of days 
forever and ever. | /lllel. Alle. V. The eye of. 
-Lord looked kindly on him: he lifted. him from his 
humble state, and raised up his head, Alleluia, 

-GOSPEL. Matt. xxii. as in p. 446. 
« OFFERT. Ps. xxxiv.—But when they were trou 
blesome to me I was clothed with haircloth, I hum- 
‘bled my soul with fasting: and my prayer shall be 
turned into Aie 5 ? 
 BECRET.-We offer thee, O Lord, in honour oft 
saints, a sacrifice of praise, by which we hope to. be 
-delivered from all present and future evils. ‘Thro’. 
© COMM. Ps.—I am poor and sorrowful : thy salva- 
© God; hath set me up: Iwill prise the name of 

with a canticle : and I will magnify him in praise. 
COMM.  Rofeci as in p. 489. 














18th ann 20th surremner. 601 

(1-7 XVIIL St. JOSEPH a Cupertine, c. .. 

Le OLT. Eccles. i—The love of God is honour- 
wisdom, and they to whom she shall shew her- 
love her by the si, si and by the knowledge of. 
great works. Ps. How lovely are thy tabernacles, 

Lord of Hosts! My soul longeth and fainteth for 

courts of the Lord. . V. Glory. 

^ €OLLECT. Deus, qui.——O: God, who wast 

a to draw all things to thy only Son, 

raised on high: mereifülly grant by the 

“merits and example of thy seraphic confessor, J 

raised above all earthly desires, we may arrive 
athim. Who liveth. 

|J EPISTLE, 1 Cor. xiii. as in p. 111. 

GRAD. Po. xx.— Tou: hast prevented him, O 
Lord, with blessings of sweetness; thou hast set on 
-his head a crown of peecinus stones, V. He asked 
life of thee, and thou hast given him length of da 
for ever and ever. Allel, Mel. V. The eye of 
Lord looked kindly on him: he lifted him from his 
humble state, and raised up his head.) Alleluia, 

GOSPEL. Matt. xxii. as in p, 446. 

OFFERT. Ps. xxxiv.—But when they were trou 
‘blesome tome I was clothed with haircloth, I hum- 
‘bled my soul with fasting: and my prayer shall be 
turned into my bosom. 
 SECRET.--We offer thee, O Lord, in honour ofthy 
saints, a sacrifice of praise, by which we hope to be 
delivered from all present and future evils. ‘Thro’. 

-. COMM. Ps.—I am poor and sorrowful: thy salya- 

ys Ag set me up: will CURA ate, 


‘with acanticle : and I will magnify him in praise, 
TP. COMM. Reject, as in p. 480. 


xx. SS. EUSTACHIUS and Companions, mm. 
as m Mass VIII. p. 477, with a Commem. of St. 


ah rag ng mpl te elo as 















92d sePTEMBER. |. 663 


they that are ill Go then and learn what this meau- 
eth. I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. For 1 am 
not come to call the just, but sinner& ' CREDO. 
OFTERT.-T! ah on his ead werown of 
ious stones: he asked life of thee, and thou didst. 
Frnt ‘una him, eda e 


holy mysteries, we be 

tercession of the blessed apostle and evangelist Mat- 

thew, that we have celebrated in thanksgiving 
towed on him, may be a remedy to 





* 


COLLECT. Deus qui.—O God, by whose gifts 
the blessed bishop Thomas became eminent for 
charity towards the poor: we beseech thee by [ 
intercession plentifully to pour forth the riches of thy 

me those who call upon thee, ‘Thro’. 








{ 


‘27th ann 28th SEPTEMBER. 605 


XXVII. SS. COSMAS and DAMIAN, mm. 


lll as in Mass VIII. p. 477, except 

COLLECT. Prasta.—Grant, we beseech thee, 
© Almighty God, that celebrating the festival of thy 
holy martyrs, Cosmas and Damian, we may, by their 
intereession, be delivered from all impen: ling evils. 
Thro’. A 

GRAD.— The just cried out, &e. p. 480, to 

V. These were truly brothers, who have triumphed 
over the iniquity of the world, followed Christ, and 
p in possession of the glorious Eng of heaven, 


iii — They have given the odios 
Lord, to be meat for the fowls of 





XXVII. St. WENCESLAUS, m. 


All as in Mass TIT. p. 466, except 
COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who by a 
jous Hay aad was li to remove blessed. 


'enceslaus from an earth] M ig ae to the king- 
dom of heaven: gants Ya. his prayers, we may 





666 20th sEPTEMBER. 


be preserved from all adversity, and at length sd- 
mitted to partake of the same glory. Thro’. 
GOSPEL. Matt. xvi. asin p. 465, 





XXIX. DEDICATION of St. MICHAEL, 
And also for the Feast of his Apparition 8th May. 
INTROIT. Ps. cii.—Bless the Lord, all ye his 

angels: you that are mighty in strength, and ex- 
ecute his word, hearkening to the voice of his orders. 
Alllel. Allel. Ps. Bless the Lord, O! my soul: le 
all that is within me praise his holy name. V. Glory. 
COLLECT. Deus qui.—O God, who, by a won- 
derful order, hast regulated the employments of angels 
and men: grant that those who are always minister- 
ing before thee in heaven, may defend our lives here 
on earth. Thro’, 

LESSON. Rev. i. 1. 5.—JIn those days: God 
gave unto him to make known to his servants the 
things which must shortly come to pass: and signi 
fied, sending by his angel to his servant Jolin: who 
hath given testimony to the word of God, and the tes- 
timony of Jesus Christ, what things soever he hath 
seen. Blessed is he, that readeth amd heareth the 
words of this prophecy: and keepeth these things 
which are written in it. For the time is at hand. John 
to the seven churches which are in Asia. Grace be 
unto you and peace from him that is, and that was, 
and that is to come, and from the seven spirits which 
are before his throne ; and from Jesus Christ, who is 
the faithful witness, the first begotten of the dead, and 
the prince of the kings of the earth, who hath loved 
us; and hath washed us from our sins in his own 
»lood. . 

GRAD. Ps. cii.—Bless the Lord, all ye his angels: 
you that are mighty in strength: and execute his 
word. V. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and let all 
that is within me praise his holy name.* Allel. Alld 


20th serremBer. vo 667 


F. Holy Michael the Archangel, defend us in the 
battle : that we may not perish in the dreadful j 

ment. Alleluia, Allelui [INU B. On'the vi 

a and after + is add- 

shook, and the earth trembled, when 

he es 7 cane down from heaven, 


lom of heave 

le child, set him in. 
Amen I say to you, 
: as little chil- 


aren, er ini lom of hea- 
T goes himself as 
thie Tittle child, he hist in the kingdom of 
ee “he that ive. one such little 
child in my nam x Bat he that shall 
Seung te ice little ones Si ae in me, 
it were bet | that a mill-stone should be 
(a Ca al and that he should be drown- 
mele the depth of the sea. Wo to the world because 
sania Foi must needs be that scandals 
yas but ‘theless wo to that man by whom 
the scandal cometh. And if thy hand or thy foot 
scandalize thee, cut it off, and cast itfrom thee. It 
is better for thee to go into life maimed. or lame, 
than haying hands or two feet, to be cast. into 
everlasting Aud if thy eye scandalize thee, 
pluck it out, and cast it from thee, It is better for 
[s having one eye to enter into dis than having 
two eyes to be cast into hell fire... See that you des- 
pise not one of these little ones: for I say my OU, 
that their angels in heaven always see the my 
Fatber who is in heaven. 
—An angel stood on the 
of the temple, having in his hand a 
and much incense was given him: and the smoke 








94 ocrosen. 680 


tained for us the rewards of eternal salvation : grant, 

"we beseech thee, that meditating on these mysteries 

in the most holy Ro: of the B. V. M. we may imi- 
de come to the mind 
ue B 





: y 
ouvert p vide ce, hath been pleased to appoint 
th: r our guardians: mereifilly hear 

rant we may rest secure under 
on, oi or ee aa 


nd my angel, who shall 


) thee in thy journey, and 
lee that I have prepared. 
n, and li ear his voice, and do 
MN contemned : for he will not 
hast sinned, and my name is in 
jou wilt hear his voice, and do all 
an enemy to thy enemies, and 
de afflict thee. And my angel 


tole i.—God hath given his angels 
diio oe over | thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. V. 
Tn their hands they v ‘bear thee up, lest thou dash 
thy foot against. Alleluia, Alleluia. V. Bless 
the Lord, all ye his ! hosts: ‘ou ministers of his that 
do his will, praise the Loi Alleluia. 

GOSPEL. Matt. as on Michaelmas-day, p. 667. 

OFFERT. Bless the Lord, all ye his angels: you 
ministers of his that do his will, be. 





670 3d anp 4th OCTOBER. 


SECRET.—Favourably receive, O Lord, the gifts 
which we offer thee in honour of thy holy angels: 
and mercifully grant that, by their continual protec- 
tion, we may be delivered from present dangers, and 
obtain eternal life. Thro’. 

COMM.—Bless the Lord, all ye angels of the 
Lord: sing a hymn to his praise, and extol him for 
ever. Alleluia. 

P. COMM. Sumpsimus.—Having joyfully receiv- 
ed, O Lord, the divine mysteries on this festival of 
thy holy angels: we beseech thee, that, by their in- 
tercession, we may always be delivered from the 
snares of our enemies, and fortified against all adver- 
sities. Thro’. 


III. St. THOMAS, bp. of HEREFORD, c. 


All as in Mass XI. p. 484, except 
COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who hast adorn- 
ed thy church with the angelical purity and virtues 
of thy blessed Bp. 'Thomas: grant that we thy ser- 
vants may, by his merits and prayers, be associated 

with the heavenly host of angels. Thro’. 





IV. St. FRANCIS of Assisium, c. 

INTROIT. Gal. vi.—But God forbid that I 
should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, by whom the world is crucified to me, and I 
to the world. Ps. I cried to the Lord with my voice: 
with my voice I made supplication to the Lord 
V. Glory. 

COLLECT. Deus, qu.—O God, who by the 
exemplary virtues of blessed Francis, didst enlarge 
thy church by a new offspring: grant we may fo 
low him in despising the things of this world, and be 
blessed in the perpetual enjoyment of thy heavenly 
grace. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. Gal. vi. 14. 18.—Brethren: God 
forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our 


m 
‘Sth AND. 6th ocronEn. 671 


Lord Jesus Christ; by whom the world is crucified to 
“me, and I to the world. - For in Christ Jesus neither 
circumcision availeth any thing; nor uncireumcision, 
but a ngw creature. And wi osoever shall follow 
this rule, peace on them, and mercy, and upon the 
Jsrael of God. From henceforth let no man be 
troublesome to me, For I bear the marks of the 
Lord Jesus in my body, The grace of our Lord 
Jesus Christ be with your spirit, rie Amen. 
RAD. |. Ps. xxxvi. as in p. 

\P.. Francis, poor and humble, (TT rich into hea- 
ven, and is honoured with celestial hymns.  Allel. . 

GOSPEL. Matt. xi. as on the 15th Jan. p. 537. * 

'OFFERT. Ps. boxviii.—My truth and my mercy 
are with him, and in my name shall his horn be ex- 


SECRET.—Sanetify. the gifts dedicated to thee, 
© Lord : and by the intercession of blessed Francis, 
arch us from every stain of sin. Thro’. 
"MM. — Luke xii.— This is the faithful and. wise 
servant, whom the Lord hath placed over his family, 
to f£" them their measure of wheat in due season. 
COMM. Ecclesiam.—We. beseech poet iM 
Lord, that. thy heavenly grace. may increase. 
church, which thou hast vouchsafed to venlghte ve e" 
the glorious merits ahd example of blessed d 
thy confessor. ‘Thro’. 











V. 8S. PLACIDUS end COMPANIONS, mm. 
All. as in Mass 1X. 479, except the Coll 

a LN IS eee yer 

pp. A78, 479. 








XI. St. BRUNO, c. 
filas ip Mam XU 488, 
Los fn Mae XIII. p. 4 EET 


COLLE 
we may be assisted rr s holy prayers rode Oeteioed 






9h ocrowER. LH 


bean Son bast revealed secrets. 
idget: grant, through emu ed A 1 
Sion, that we thy servants may ee Te 
opened of i of thy, f, evs ne, Arr. Thro’. 
EPISTLE, 1 on Ath af Mays, 







it 
GOSPEL. Matisse as in p. 50) 





IX. SS. DIONYSIUS; &e,mm. ^. 
Alas in Mass VIL p. 477, except 
ELECT. Deus, qui—O God, who didst this 
Support blessed, Dionysius, thy martyr mu Hie 
th the gift of constancy in his sufferings: and 
join to him Rusticus and ELI to spread. 
a ar, af wd the ani grant, we. ps 
at, after t| fa example, we may. e 
things of this Yd: and fear none of its 


“TESSON,. "Acts xvii, 2—In tee d : Paul, 
standing im the midst of Areoy oa e men. 
fane I perceive. that in wyRC you are 
ious. For passing by and seei ioni 
Ban pi » on which was 
s yd um "d “woe v 
to ud 





out 


De on 
made y world Pi ^i (P 





12th, 13th AND 14th octonn. 675 


GRAD. Ps.xx.—Lord, thon hast prevented, f. 
(Gosret, Matt. xix. and Orrent. Ps. xx. uo 





XH. St. WILFRID, Archbishop of York. c. 


except 
CT. God, by whose grace 
the blessed bishop Wilftid became illustrious for the 
splendour of his merit ra t, we beseech thee, that 
‘we always may we defen ed by bis patronage, under 
whose instructions we | EY 


heave 
s [oHm thee, O Almighty 
nts with the light of thy 
fer thee may wile, 


een taught to aspire 


ionis. seing iens on 
mption, we humbly im] 
oe th rough the | Toe and n 


"o peda jy confessor, we may 
T al salvation. ‘Thro’. 


re except 
- Deus qui.—O Re who hast erowned 
K ig lands thy confessor, with a dia- 
dem of glory ; t that we eis honour him in 
such a manner Sarat as to hereafter reign with 
dim in heaven. - 





XIV. 8t, CALISTUS, p. m. 
All as in Mass II. p. 464, except 
COLLECT. Deus qui—O | God, who seest that 
we faint under our own infirmities: mercifully grant, 
that the examples of the: saints may raise us up i 
the sincere love of aren X vill 








\- 18th. ocromxn. 677 


of the cross: grant, by her merits and example, that 
we also may Pais to tread under our feet the fading: 
pleasures of this world, and to overcome all that 
Standeth in the Arat rot our salvation, by embracing 
thy cross, | Wh 
Collect, Re. of | Stl Hiowann, as in p. 675. 
ài 





COLLECT. Interve imn the holy evangelise 
Luke, we beseech thee, O o intercede for us, who 
continually bore the mortification of the cross in his 

f. Thro’. 
Brethren : Thanks 
x same carefülness for 
you in the heart of Titu 
exhortation : but being more careful, of his own will 
he went unto you. have sent also with him the 
brother, whose praise is in the gospel through all the 
churches: sid: Ex ‘only, but he was also or- 
EN; hes companion of our travels, for 
whi oa jinistered by us to the glory, 
and our determined will: Losing ile 
y blame us in th 
which is administer t For mi recess 
may be good not on God, but also. 
men. And es hae sent with them our brother m 
whom we have diligent in many thin 
now much more nt, with much con ista in 
'ou, either for Titus, who is my companion and fel- 
Tabane towards you, or onr brethren, the 
apostles of the churches, the glory of Christ. Where- 
fore shew ye to them, in the t of the churches, 
the evidence of your charity, and of our boasting on 
your bebalf. ; 
pun Ps. xviii. end June, NAA 
GOSPEL. Luke niat onthe So April, p.972. 








994 ocronzn. 679 


not celebrate them as we ought, we vies rviur 

aim ut this duty with all humility. ‘Thro’ 

Here, as also at the Secret and P. Comm. is mail a 

Commen. of St Hranios, fron Mass XV. 
EPISTLE. 1 C 

Secret and one 





l. hut pori 3 the science 
of the saints after the example of blessed John thy 
confessor, and shewing mercy to others, we may, by 
his m rit obtain mercy of thee, Thro’. 

EPISTLE. James ii. 12. 17.—Speak ye, and so 
do, as being to be judged by the law of liberty: For 
o CERAM qua mercy to him that hath not done 
mercy. mei xülteth itself above judgment, 
What M ka my brethren, if a man say he 
hath faith, but hath not works? Shall faith be able 
to save him? And if a brother^or sister be naked, 
and want daily food: and one of you say to them? 
Go in peace, be you warmed and filled: 
them not those thiiigs that are necessary 
what sball it "ape o faith also, if it have. mot 
works, is dead in itself. 

GRAD. Ps. cvi.—Let the mercies of the Lord gi 

to him, aud his wonderful works to the chil 

en. PF. For he hath satisfied the empty soul: 

hath filled the hungry soul with ae 
kon Allel, V. He hath opened his 





680 2th OCTOBER. 


Theedy; and stretched out his hands to the poor. 
Alleluia. 

GOSPEL. Luke xii. as in Mass XIII p. 488. 

SECRET.—Favourably receive, we beseech 
O Lord, these offerings by the intercession o 
blessed John, thy Confessor, and grant, that loving 
thee above all things, and all mankind for thy sake, 
we may please thee; both in heart and action. 
Thro’. 

COMM. Luke vi.—Give and it shall be given 
to you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken 
together, and running over, shall they give into your 


m. ¢ 
P. COMM. Pretiosi.—Being deliciously fed, O 
Lord, with thy precious body and blood, we humbly 
entreat thy mercy, that by the merits of blessed 
John, thy Confessor, we may so imitate his charity, 
as to be associated to him in glory. Thro’. 


XXV. St. JOHN of BEVERLEY, abp. of York. 
All as in Mass XI. p. 484, except 


COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who didst con- 
secrate this day to the honour of blessed John, thy 
Confessor and Bishop, grant that thy church may 
truly rejoice on his festival ; that, assisted by his me- 
rits and example, we may obtain mercy. Thro’ 

Of SS. Chrysanthus, &c. (Beatorum.)—May the 
prayers, O Lord, we beseech thee, of thy holy 
martyrs, Chrysanthus and Daria, be assisting to us; 
that we may be happily sensible of the effects oftheir 
charity, whose memories we honour on this festival. 

ro’. 

SECRET.—Mayest thou mercifully receive, 0 
Lord, this gift from our hands: and through the 
prayers of blessed John thy Confessor and Bishop, 
absolve us from all our sins. Thro’. 


Qf SS. Chrysanthus, &c.—May the offerings of 


27h octowen, el 


ping people, O Lord, be pleasing to thee, which 
mnly offered to thee.on the fe hy holy mar 
e COMI S and Daria, Thro’ 
Sunctificati. Being satietified by 
di. SO mysteries, we beseech thee, O: 
ae. is thou hast placed us tinder the patronage of 
léssed Jolin, thy | Confer a and Bishop, we may be 
rs. 


help pad By pl aye 
0f S; Chrysa v (Mystic) Being ve. 
fies! hn Lord, by the holy mysteries, which are 
he and desire 5 Sve beseeel V 





GIL of S8. SIMON and JUDE, 
All as in Mass VII. p. 475, except 
COLLECT. C oncede.—Grant, we beseech thee 
o Almighty God, that as we are preparing to cele- 
brate the ere solemnity of thy Apostles Simon 
and Jude; their prayers to thy divin Morey 
in our bel T ve may be truly disposed for the 
‘ceiving of thy heavenly blessings, Th 
OS SPISTLE. as in Mass XIV. p. 490, 
GRAD. Ps. pou: ge, O Lord, the blood. 
of thy ain, veu tiii V.* "l'hey have. 
‘en the dead bodies of thy servants to be ineat for 
fowls of the nir; the flesh of thy saints for the 
beasts of the earth, , 
GOSPEL. John xv. as in Mass V. p. 471. 
OFFERT.. Ps. cxlix.—The saints shall Roe in 
glory: they shall be joyful in their beds mee 
Pines of God shall be in their mouth, i 
SECRET.—Being conscious that the gifts, 
we offer thee on the vigil of thy holy apostles Sinon 


and Jude, are hindered from being secet 
thee, by our guilty conscience; we 





Fr -— 
‘28th ocromER. =~ 683 


Jesus said to his disciples: These things T command 
you, that you love one another. If the world hate 
you, know ye that it hath hated me before you. | If 
you bad been of the world, the world would love 
its own: but because you are not of the world, but 
Lhaye chosen you out of the world, therefore the 
‘world hateth you. Remember my word that I said 
to you: The servant is not greater than his master. 
If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute 
you: if they have kept my word, they will keep 

ours also. But all these things they will do to you 

r my name’s sake: because they, know, not him. 
that sent me. If I had not come, and spoken to 
them, they would not have sin: but now they have 
no excuse for their sin. He that hateth me, hateth 
my Father also. If I had not done among them the 
works that no other man hath done, they would not. 
haye sin: but now they have both seen and hated. 
both me and my Father. But that the word maybe 
fulfilled, which is written in their law: They hated 

it cause. CREDO. 

OFFERT. Ps. xviii—Their sound hath gone 
forth into all the earth: and their words unto the 
ends of the world. 

SECRET.—We, O Lord, honouring the immor- 
tal glory of the blessed Apostles Simon and Jude, 
humbly beseech thee, that being purified by these 
sacred mysteries, we may more worthily celebrate 
their festival. Thro’. " 

COMM.—You who have followed me, shall sit 
on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. 

P.COMM. Perceptis.—Having received sa 
cred mysteries, we humbly beseech thee, O 
that by the intercession of thy blessed Apostles, Si- 
mon and Jude, the sacrifice we offer on their 
rable passion, may become a remedy to us. ‘Thro’, - 


684 2th ann 3lst ocTOBER. 


‘ XXIX. VENERABLE BEDE, c. 
All asin Mass XIII. p. 488, except 


COLLECT. Da nobis——O God, who hast en- 
lightened thy church by the learning of blessed Bede, 
thy Confessor and Doctor, mercifully grant that we 
thy servants may be always enlightened by his wis- 
dom, and assisted by his merits. Thro’. 


XXXI. The VIGIL of ALL SAINTS. 


INTROIT.  Wisd. iiii—The saints shall judge 
nations, and rule over people; and the Lord 
their God shall reign for ever. Ps. xxxii. Rejoice 
in the Lord, O ye just: praise becometh the upright. 


V. Glory. 

COLLECT. Domine.—O Lord God, plentifully 
pour down upon us thy grace; that we may one day 
partake of their bliss, whose glorious solemnity we 
are now preparing to celebrate. Thro’, 

LESSO . Rev. v. 6. 12—In those days: Be- 
hold I, John, saw in the midst of the throne, and 
of the four living creatures, and in the midst of the 
ancients, a Lamb standing as it were slain, having 
seven horns and seven eyes: which are the seven 
spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth. And he 
came, and took the book out of the right hand of 
him that sat on the throne. And when he had 
opened the book, the four living creatures and the 
four and twenty ancients fell down before the Lamb, 
having every one of them harps, and golden vials full 
of odours, which are the prayers of the saints. And 
they sung a new canticle, saying: Thou art wortby, 
O Lord, to take the book, ‘and to open the seals 
thereof: because thou wast slain, and hast redeemed 
us to God, in thy blood; out of every tribe, and 
tongue, and people, and nation. And hast made 
us to our God a ki 


ingdom and priests, and we shall 


let NovEMBER 665 


reign on the earth. And I beheld, and I heard the 
voice of many angels round about the throne, and 
the living creatures and the ancients: and the num- 
ber of them was thousands of theusiends, saying, 
with a loud voice: The Lamb that was slain is wor- 
thy to receive power and divinity, and wisdom, and 
strength, and honour, and glory, and benediction, 
for ever and ever.’ Amen. 

GRAD. Ps. cxlix.—The saints shall exult in 
glory: they shall rejoice in their beds. V. Sing to 

e Lord a new canticle: let his praise be in the 
church of the seints. 

'" GOSPEL. Luke vi. as tn p. 478. 

OFFERT. Ps. cxlviii.—Tt? saints shall rejoice in 
glory: they shall be joyful in their beds: the high 
praises of God shall be in their mouth. 

SECRET.—We cover thy altar, O Lord, with 
our offerings: grant, we beseech thee, that they 
may procure for us eternal salvation, by the inter- 
cession of all thy saints, whose festival we are pre- 
paring to celebrate. ‘Thro’. 

COMM. Wisd. iii.—The souls of the just are in 
the hand of God, and the torment of the wicked 
shall not touch them: in the sight of the unwise 
they deemed to die, but they are in peace. 

P. COMM. Sacramentis.—Having with joy re- 
ceived, O Lord, these sacraments on the vigil of that 
festival, which we are desirous of celebrating: "os 
that we may be assisted by their prayers, i in Ww 
memory those mysteries are offered. 


JVevember 1. FEAST OF ALL SAINTS. 


! 
INTROIT. 


ET us all rejoice m Audeamus omnes in 
the Lord, and cele, M Domino, diem fts- 


brate this festival in ho- 
nour of all the saints, on 
whose solemnity the an- 

ls rejoice and praise the 
Bon of God. 

Ps. Rejoice in the Lord 
O ye just: praise becom- 
eth the upright. 

V. Glory. 


lst NOVEMBER. 


tum celebrantes sub he 
nore sanctorum omnium 
de quorum solemnitate 
gaudent Angeli, et collau- 
dant Filium Dei. 

^ Ps. Exultate justi in 
Domino, rectos decet col- 
laudatio. 

V. Gloria. 


COLLECT. Omnipotens.—Alinighty and eternal 
God, by whose favour we honour on one solemnity 
the merits of all thy saints: grant we may obtain a 
plentiful blessing of thy so much desired mercy, 
since we have so many petitioners in our be 
Thro’. 

LESSON. Rev. vii. 2. 12.—In those days: Be- 
hold I, John, saw another angel ascending from the 
rising of the sun, having the sign of the living God: 
and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels, to 
whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea, 
saying: Hurt not the earth, nor the sea, nor the 
trees, till we have signed the servants of our God in 
their foreheads. And I heard the number of them 
that were signed, an hundred forty-four thousand 
were signed, of every tribe of the children of Israel. 
Of the tribe of Juda, were twelve thousand signed: 
Of the tribe of Ruben, twelve thousand signed: Of 
the tribe of Gad, twelve thousand signed: Of the 
tribe of Aser, twelve thousand signed: Of the tribe 
of Nephthali, twelve thousand signed : Of the tribe of 
Manasses, twelve thousand signed: Of the tribe of ' 
Simeon, twelve thousand signed : Of the tribe of Levi, 


twelve thousand signed: 
twelve thousand signed: 
twelve thousand signed: 
twelve thousand signed: 
twelve thousand signed. 
multitude, which no map 


Of the tribe of Issachar, 
Of the tribe of Zebulon, 
Of the tribe of Joseph, 
Of the tribe of Benjamin, 
After this I saw a 

could number, of all na- 


Ist NOVEMBER. 687 


tions and tribes, and peoples and tongues: standing 
before the throne and in sight of the Lamb, 
clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands 
and they cried with a loud voice, saying: Salvation 
to our God whositteth upon the throne, and to the 
Lamb. And all the angels stood round about the 
throne, and the ancients, and the four living crea- 
tures : and they fell down before the throne upon their 
faces, and adored God, saying: Amen. Benediction, 
and gloty, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, honour, 
and power, and strength to our God for ever and 
ever. Amen. 


GRAD. Ps. xxxiii—Fear the Lord all ye his 
saints: for there is no want to them that fear him. : 
V. They that seek the Lord shall abound with all 
good. Alleluia, Alleluia. V. Matt. xi. Venile ad 
me omnes qui laboratis et onerati estis, et ego refi- 
citm vos. Alleluia. V. Come to me all you that 
labour and are burdened, and I will refresh you. 
dlleluia. 


GOSPEL. Matt. v. 1. 19.—.4t that time: 
Jesus seeing the multitude, went up into a niountain, 
and when he was set down, his disciples came unto 
him. And opening his mouth he taught them, say- 
ing: Blessed are the poor in spirit for their's is the 
kingdom of heaven. Blessed are the ineck: for they 
shall possess the land. Blessed are they that mourn 
for they shall be comforted. Blessed are they that 
hunger and thirst after justice: for they shall have 
their fill. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall 
obtain mercy. Blessed are the clean of heart: for 
they shall see God. Blessed are the peace makers : 
for they shall be called the children of God.  Blcesed 
are they that suffer persecution for justice sake: for 
their’s is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye 
when they shall revile you, and persecute you, and 
speak all that is evil against you, untruly, for my 
E 3M2 . 


* 


686 9d NOVEMBER. 


suke; be glad and rejoice, for your reward is very 
eat in heaven. Crepo. 

OFFERT. Wisd.iii.— The souls of the just arein 
the hand of God, and the torment of death shall not 
touch the:n. In the sight of the unwise they seemed 
to die: Lut they are in peace. Alleluia. 

SECRET.—We bring to thee, O Lord, the offer- 

ings of our devotion: and may they be acceptable to 
thee in honour of thy saints, and, by thy merey, avail- 
able to our salvation. Thro’. 
- COMM. Matt. v—Blessed are the -lean of 
heart; for they shall see God. Blessed are the 
peace makers: for they shall be called the children 
of God. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for 
righteousness sake: for theirs is the kingdom of 
heaven. 

P. COMM. Da, quesumus.—Grant, O Lord, we 
beseech thee, that thy faithful people may always. 
joyfully honour thy saints ; and ever be protected by 
their prayers. Thro’. 


Il. COMMEM. of the FAITHFUL, departed. 


All as in the Mass (Requiem) p. 510. except th Col- 
lect, Fidelium, with ws Secret and P. COMM, as 
an the Common Mass. p. 518, and what fo:lows. 
EPISTLE. 1 Cor. xv. 51. 57.—Brethren: Be- 

hold I tell you a mystery: We shall indeed all rise 

again : but we shall not all be changed. In a moment 
in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet: for 
the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall rise again 
incorruptible: and we shall be changed. For this 
cqrruptible must put on incorruption ; and this mor- 
tal must put on immortality. And when this mor.il 
hath put on immortality, then shall come to the 
saying that is written: Death is swa'lowed up tn 
vtcb ry. O grave, here is thy victory? O death, 
where ts thy sting? Now the sting of death is sin, 


e 


\ 
9d AND 4th wovemMBER. 9099 


and the strength of sin 1s the law. But thanks be to 
God who hath given us the victory through our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

GOSPEL. John v. 25. 29.—At that time: Jesus 
satd to the mullitude of the Jews: Amen, amen I say 
unto you, that the hour cometh, and now is, when 
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and 
they that hear shall live. For as the Father hath . 
life in himself; so he hath given to the Son also to 
have life in himself: and he hath given him power 
to do judgment, because he is the Son of Man. 
Wonder not at this, for the hour cometh wherein all 
that are in the graves shall hear the voice of the Son 
of God. And they that have done good things shall 
come forth unto the resurrection of life: but they that 
have done evil, unto the resurrection of judgment. 


III. St. WINEFRID, v. m. . 
Ail as in Mass XVII. p. 496, except 

COLLECT.  Ezawdi.—Hear us, O God our Sa- 
viour: and as we rejoice on the festival of blessed 
Winefrid, thy virgin and martyr, so we may improve 
in the love of piety and devotion. Thro’. 

SECRET.—Favourably look down on our offer- 
ings, O Lord, and by the intercession of B. Winefrid, 
thy v. and m. loosen the chains of our sins. Thro’. 

P. COMM. Placeant.—Let the performance of 
our homage be pleasing to thee,O Almighty God: 
that the holy mysteries we have received may, by the 
intercession of blessed Winefrid, thy virgin and mar- 
tyr, reconcile us to thy grace, and cause us to rejoice 
in eternal happiness. Thro’. 





IV. St. CHARLES BORROMEUS, bp. c. 


All as in Mass X. * p. 482, except 
COLLECT.  Ecclesiam.—Preserve thy Church, 
O Lord, under the continual protection of blessed 
Charles, thy c. and bp. that ns he was eminent for 


900 ^ Sth AND Oth NOVEMBER. 


the discharge of the pastoral duty, so his prayers may 
make us zealous in the love of thy holy name. Thro. 
COLLECT. (Presta.) Y St. Vitalis, &c.—Grant, 
we beseech: thee, O Lord, that we who keep the so- 
lemnity of thy holy martyrs, Vitalis and Agricola, 
may be helped by their prayers. Thro’. 
Secret and P. Comm. of SS. Vitalis, &c. as in p. 481. 
eo 


VHI. OCTAVE-DAY of ALL SAINTS. 


All as on the Feast, p. 685, with a Comme. of the . 
Four Crowned Martyrs. 

COLLECT. Presta.—Grant, we beseech thee, 
O Almighty God, that as we have been informed of 
the constancy of the glorious martyrs in the profession 
of thy faith, so we may experience their kindness in 
recommending us to thy mercy. Thro’. 

SECRET. (Of the same.) May thy plentiful bles- 
sing, O Lord, descend upon our offerings, which, by 
the intercession of thy martyrs, may render them 
well pleasing to thee, and make them the sacrament 
of our redemption. Thro’. 

P. COMM. Celestibus.—Being refreshed with 
these heavenly and joyful mysteries, we humbly be- 
seeth thee, O Lord, that we may enjoy their protec- 
tion, in whose triumphs we glory. Thro’. 





IX. DEDICATION of our Savrour’s CHUBCB. 
All as in the Anniversary Mass, p. 504. 

COLLECT. (Deus, qui) of St. Theodore—O 
God, who comfortest and protectest us by the glori- 
ous confession of blessed Theodore, thy martyr: 
grant we may be strengthened by his example, and 
assisted by his prayers. ‘Thro’. 

SECRET. Of the same.—Receive, O Lord, the 
prayers, together with the offerings of thy faithful 
people : and grant, by theintercession of B. Theodore, 
tby martyr, that by these acts of piety and devotion, 
we may arrive at the glory of heaven. Thro’. 


10th AND 12th NOVEMBER. 601 


P. COMM. Presta. Of the same.—Grant us, we 
beseech thee, O Lord, by the intercession of blessed 
Theodore, thy martyr, to receive with a pure mind, 
what we have taken with our mouths. Thro’. 


X. St. ANDREW AVELLINE, c. 


All as in Mass XIII. p. 488, except 

COLLECT.  Deus,qui.—O God, who disposedst 
the heart of B. Andrew, thy c. by the arduous vow 
of daily advancing in virtue, to ascend by wonderful 
steps to thee; grant, by his merits and intercession, 
that we may so far partake of the same grace, as to 
continually advance towards perfection, and be hap- 
pily brought to an eminent degree of glory. Thro’. 

COLLECT. Of SS. Tryphon. Fac nvs.—Grant, 
O Lord, we beseech thee, that we may always fol- 
low the example of thy holy martyrs, 'Tryphon, 
Respicius, and Nympha, and by their prayers daily 
experience their protection. Thro’, 

SECRET. Of the same.—We bring thee, O Lord, 
the offerings of our devotion: and may they be ac- 
ceptable to thee in honour of thy saints, and by thy 
mercy available to our salvation. Thro’. 

P. COMM. Presta. Of the same.—Grant, we 
beseech thee, O Lord, by the intercession of thy holy 
martyrs Tryphon, Respicius, and Nympha, that what 
we have taken with our mouths, we may reccive 
with a pure soül. Thro’. 


XI. St. MARTIN, bp. c. 


All as in Mass X.* p. 482, except 
COLLECT. Jeus,qui.—O God, who seest that 
we rely not on our own strength: inercifully grant, 
by the prayers of blessed Martin, thy c. and bp. that 
we may be defended against all adversity. Thro’. 
Commem. of St. Mennas, by the Collect, Secret and 
. P. Comm. of Mass III. p. 466. 


602 12th NOVEMBER. 


GRAD.—Behold a great prelate, who in his da 
leased God. V. ‘There was none found like him m 
eeping the law of the Most High. Alleluia, Alleluta. 

V. 'The blessed man, holy Martin, bishop of Tours, 
died: whom'the Angels, Archangels, Thrones, Do- 
minations, and Powers received. Alleluia. 

GOSPEL. Luke xi. 33. 36.—At that time: Jesus 
said to his disciples: No man lighteth a candle, and 
putteth it in a hidden place, nor under a bushel, but 
upon a candlestick, that they that come in may see 
the light. The light of thy body is thy eye. If thy 
eye be single, thy whole body will be lightsome: but 
if it be evil, thy body will also be darksome. Take 
heed therefore, that the light which is in thee be not 
darkness. |f then thy whole body be light, some, 
having no part of darkness: the whole shall be light- 
some, and as a bright lamp shall enlighten thee. 

OFFERT.—My truth and my mercy shall be 
with him: and in my name shall his horn be exalted. 

SECRET.—Grant, O merciful God, that this sev- 
ing oblation may free us from all our sins, and defend 
us from all adversities. Thro’. 

COMM.—Biessed is the servant whom the Lord, 
when he cometh, shall find watching. Amen, I say 
to you, he shall set him over all he hath, 

. COMM. Presta.—Grant, we beseech thee, 
O Lord our God, that these sacraments may avail to 
our salvation, by the intercession of those, on whose 
feast we have with solemnity offered them. Thro’. 





XII. St. MARTIN, p. m. 
All as in Mass II. p. 4:4, except 
EPISTLE. 1 Peter, iv. 13.—Dearly Beloved: W 
you partake of the sufferings of Christ, rejoice, that 
when his glory shall be revealed, you may also be 
glad with exceeding joy. If you be reproached for 
the name of Christ, you shall be blessed : for thet 


13th anp 14th NOVEMBER. 698 


which is of the honour, glory, and power of God, 
aud that which is his spirit, resteth upon you. But 
let none of you suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or a 
railer, or a coveter of other men'sthings. But if as 
a Christian, let him not be ashamed: but let him 
glorify God in his name. For the time is that judg- 
inent should begin at the house of God. And if 
first at us, what shall be the end of them that believe 
not the gospel of God? And if the just man shall 
scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the 
sinner appear? Wherefore let them also that suffer 
according to the will of God, commend their souls 
in good deeds to the faithful Creator. 
OSPEL. Luke xiv. as in p. 463. 


XIII. St. DIDACUS, c. 


All as in Mass XIV. p. 489, except 

COLLECT. Omnipotens.—O Almighty and eter- 
nal God, who, by a wonderful providence, makest 
choice of the weak things of this world to confound 
the strong: mercifully grant, that, being perfected in 
all humility, we may be raised by the prayers of thy 
holy Confessor, blessed Didacus, to the everlasting 
glory of heaven.  'l'liro*. 


XIV. SL. ERCONWALD, bp. of London, c. 
All as in Mass XI. p. 484, except 

COLLECT. Omnipotens.—Almighty and eternal 
Gcd, who rejoicest us on this festival of B. Ercon- 
wald, thy c. and bp.: we humbly beseech thy cle- 
inency, that whilst we devoutly celebrate his solem- 
nity, we may, by his intercession, obtain the means 
uf arriving at eternal happiness. Thro’. 

SECRET.—Be favourable, O Lord, to our pray- 
ers, and by the intercession of B. Erconwald, thy 
c. and bp. grant, that whilst we venerate thy hea- 
venly :acraments, we may be free from sin, and 


cleanscd and purified by thy grace. Thro’. 





19th ann 20th NOVEMBER. 605 


cellency of his merits and brilliancy of his miracles: 
grint, we beseech thee, that the lustre of his virtues 
may excite us to an imitation of his actions. ‘Fhro’ 

SECRET.—May the prayers, O Lord, of B. Hugh, 
thy c. and bp. accompany the gifts we now offer 
thee ; that by the aid of his prayers and intercession, 
we may obtain both grace and glory. Thro’. 

P. COMM.—May this oblation of our service be 
pleasing to thee, O Lord, by the intercession of B. 

ugh, thy c. and bp. lest our guilt should exclude us 
from the benefit of this heavenly sacrament. Thro’. . 


XIX. St. ELIZABETH, w. 
All as in Mass XXI. p. 502, except 
COLLECT. Tuorum.—Enlighten the hearts of 
thy faithful, O most merciful God, and by the prayers 
of blessed Elizabeth, grant we may despise the pleas- 
ing things of this world, and ever be refreshed with 
the comforts of heaven. Thro’. 


XX. St. EDMUND, King and m. 
All as in Mass III. p. 466, except 

COLLECT. Deus, ineffabilis.—O God, of un- 

speakabe mercy, who by the death of blessed King 

und hast made him victorious over his enemies: 
grant, we beseech thee, that we thy family may, 
through his intercession, be enabled to overcome the 
old enemy, by suppressing within us every incitement 
toevil. Thro. . 

SECRET.—Mercifully look down, O Lord, on this 
saerifice of our redemption, and favourably receive 
it in behalf of this thy family. Thro’, 

TP.COMM. Sint.—May the offer of our service 
be acceptable to thee, O Almighty God: that the 
holy things we have received may, by the interceasion 
of B Edmund, the King and m. obtain for us the re- 
mards of eternal life. Thro’. 


23d NOVEMBER, 8 =§=~—is 607 


hence: and thy offerings shall be pleasing on my 
altar, Ps. cxi. Blessed is the man that feareth the 
Lord: in his commandments he taketh great delight. 
V.Gliory. . 

COLLECT, Deus, qui nos, as in p. 464. 

Of St. Fexicitas. Presta.—Grant, we beseech 
thee, O Almighty God, that by celebrating the feast 
of B. Felicitas, thy m. we may be protected by her 
merits and prayers. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. Phil. iii. as in p. 455. 

GRAD. Ps. cix.—The Lord hath sworn, and he 
will not repent: Thou arta priest for ever, accord- 
ing to the order of Melchisedech. V.'The-Lord said 
to my Lord: Sit thou at my right hand. Alleluia, 
Jileluia. V. 'This isthe priest, whom the Lord hath 
crowned. Alleluia. | 

GOSPEL. Matt. xxiv. Offert. and Comm. as in 


. 485. 
i SECRET.—Sanctify, O Lord, the offerings we 
bring to thee, and by the intercession of blessed 
Clement, thy martyr and bishop, cleanse us from the 
stains of our sins. Thro’. . 

Of St. Fericitas.—Mercifully look down, O 
Lord, on the vows of thy people: and grant we 
may enjoy her patronage, whose festival we cele- 
brate. Thro’. 

P. COMM.  Corporis.—Being nourished by the 
participation of thy sacred body and precious blood, 
we beseech thee, O Lord our God, that what we 
perform with pious devotion, may, by the interces- 
sion of blessed Clement, thy martyr and bishop, be 
to us a certain means of salvation. Thro’. 

Of St. FELICITAS. Supplices.—We humbly be- 
seech thee, O Almighty God, that by the intercession 
of thy saints, thou wouldst increase in us thy gifts. 
and regulate our lives. Thro’. 


3N 


@08 24th ann 2th NOVEMBER. 


XXIV. St. JOHN of the CROSS, c. 


All as in Mass XIII. p. 488, ercept 

COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who didst in- 
spire blessed John, thy confessor, with & ardent love 
of self-denial and of the cross: grant, we may so fol- 
low his example, as to obtain eternal glory. Thro. 

Of St. CunxsocoNus. Adesto.—Give ear, O God, 
to our prayers, that we, who iu all humility acknow- 
ledge the guilt of our offences, may, by the prayers 
of blessed Chrysogonus, thy martyr, be delivered 
from the burden of our sins. Thro’. 

SECRET. Of the same.—Be appeased, O Lord, 
we beseech thee, by the offerings we have made: 
and defend us from all dangers by the intercession 
of blessed Chrysogonus, thy martyr. Thro’. 

P. COMM. Tu, Domine.—Grant, O Lord, that 
by the participation of thy sacrament, we may be 
cleansed from our secret sins, and freed from the 
snares of our enemies. Thro’. 

Of St. Curysoconus. Tut, Domine.—May we 
O Lord, by the participation of this thy sacrament, 
be both cleansed from our sins, and delivered from 
all the snares of our enemies. Thro’. 





XXV. St. CATHARINE, v. m. 


All as in Mass XVI. p. 493, except 
COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who gavest the 
law to Moses on Mount Sinai, and didst wonderfully 
translate the body of bl:ssed Catharine, thy virgin 
and martyr thither, by the ministry of ‘holy angels: 
mercifully grant, by her merits aud prayers, that 


we may safely come to the mount which is Christ 
Who liveth. 


26h AND 27th NOVEMBER.  . 699 


XXVI. St. FELIX VALOIS, c. 
All as in Mass XIV. p. 489, except 


COLLECT. Deus, qui.—O God, who by thy 
heavenly inspiration didst call blessed Felix thy con- 
fessor out of the desert to exercise his charity in the 
redemption of captives: grant, that having obtained 
thy grace by his intercession, we may be freed from 
the captivity of sin, and brought safe to our heaven- 
ly country. Thro’. 


CoruzecT of St. PETER, Infirmitatem, .with its Se- 
cret and P. Comm. as in Mass I. p. 461. 


XXVII. St. GREGORY Thaumaturgus, bp. c. 


All as in Mass X.* p. 482, except 


GOSPEL. Mark xi. 22.—At that time: Jesus 
answering said to his disciples: Have the faith of 
God. Amen I say to you, that whosoever shall say 
to this mountain: Be thou removed, and be cast into 
the sea, and shall not stagger in his heart, but be- 
lieve, that whatsoever he saith shall be done, it shall 
be done unto him. Therefore I say to you, all things, 
whatsoever you ask when ye pray, believe that you 
shall receive: and they shall come unto you. 


———A 


VOTIVE MASS of the BLESSED TRINITY. 


All as on Trinity Sunday, p. 392, except 


EPISTLE. 2 Cor. xiii. 11.—Brethren: Rejdice, 
be perfect, take exhortation, he of one mind, have 
eace: and the God of peace and of love shall be 
with you. The grace 4 vo Lord Jesus Christ, and 


‘700 VOTIVE MASS OF THE HOLY GHOST. 


the charity of God, and the, communication of the 
Holy Ghost, be with you all Amen. 


After Septuag. instead of the Alleluia and V. p. 38 
1$ said 

TRACT. Te Deum patrem ingenitum, te Fiun 
unigenitum, te Spiritum Sanctum  Paraclitum, sanc- 
tam et individuam T'rinilatem, toto corde confüemur 
laudamus atque benedicimus. V. Quoniam magnus e$ 
tu, et faciens mirabilia, tu es Deus solus. V. Tin 
laus, tibi gratiarum actio, in secula. sempiterna, O 
beato, "Trinitas. 

I Paschal Time, instead of the Gradual, is said, 
Alleluia, Alleluia. V. Benedwtus es Domine Deus 
patrum nostrorum et laudabilis in secula. Alleluia, 

/'. Benedicamus Patrem et Filium cum Sancto Spirilu. 
Alleluia. 

GOSPEL. John xv. 26.—/4t that time: Jesus 
said to his disciples: When the Paraclete cometh 
whom I will send you from the Father, the Spirit of 
Truth who proceedeth from the Father, he shall give 
testimony of me: and you shall give testimony, be- 
cause you are with me from the beginning. (Chap. 
xvi.) These things have I spoken to you, that you 
may not be scandalized. They will put you out of 
the synagogues: yea, the hour cometh, that whoso- 
ever killeth you, will think that he doth a service to 
God. And these things they will do to you, because 
they have not known the Father, nor me. But these 
things I have told you, that when the hour shall 
come, you may remember that I told you. 





VOTIVE MASS of the HOLY GHOST. 


Omgliing the Prose and Preface, the rest is as on 
Whitsunday, p. 375, except 


LESSON. Acts viii. 14. 17. as in p. 380. 
GRA D.— Blessed is the nation, whose God is the 


VOTIVE MASS OF THE HOLY GHOST. 701 


Lord : the people whom the Lord hath chosen for his 
inheritance. By the word of the Lord the heavens 
were estublished ; and all the power of them by the 
spirit of his mouth. Alleluia, Alleluia. V. * Come, O 
Holy Ghost, fill the hearts of thy faithful, and kindle 
in them the fire of thy love. Alleluia, ' 


After Septuag. instead of the foregoung Alleluia and 
V. 45 said the 

TRACT. Ps. ciii—Send forth thy Spirit and 
they shall be created, and thou wilt renew the face 
of the earth. V.O Lord, how good and sweet is 
thy spirit in us. V. Come, O Holy Spirit, fill the 
hearts of thy faithful, and kindl@ in them the fire of 
thy love. 

N. B. In Paschal time, instead of the foregoing Gra- 
dual, &c. is said the V. Emitte spiritum, p. 376. 
( Either the Votive Mass of the Blessed trinity, or 
that of the Holy Ghost, is said on any occasion of 
thanksgiving, with the addition of the following 

Collect, Secret, and Postcommunion. 

COLLECT. Deus, cujus.—O God, whose niercies 
are without number, and the treasure of whose good- 
ness is infinite, we give thee thanks for the blessings 
thou hast bestowed on us: always beseeching thy 
divine Majesty, that as thou grantest what we ask, 
so thou wouldst continne thy favours to us in such a 
manner, that by them we may be prepared for re- 
ceiving the rewards of eternal happiness. Thro’, 

SECRET.—Receive, O Lord, this sacrifice of 
thanksgiving, and grant that those whom thou hast 
heard, and hitherto preserved, thou mayest hereafter 
defend from al] adversity, that they may serve and 
love thee more and more. Thro’. 

P. COMM. Deus qui neminem.—O God, who 
sufferest not those who hope in thee to be over 
much afflicted, but mercifully attendest to their pe- 


* Here kneel. 


3N3 


702 TE DEUM. 


titions: we give thee thanks for having heard our 

rayers, humbly beseeching thee, that by what we 
Rave received, we may be delivered froin all adver- 
sity. Thro’. 


The thanksgiving Hymn, TE DEUM, is said or sung 
after Mass. 


E Deum laudamus: Te Dominum confitemur. 
Te eternum Patrem omnis terra veneratur. 

Tibi omnes angeli, tibi cceli et univers:e potestates, 

Tibi cherubim et seraphim, incessabili voce procla- 
mant: 

Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Dominus Deus Saboath, 

Pleni sunt coeli et terra majestate glorise ture. 

Te gloriosus Apostolorum chorus ; 

Te prophetarum laudabilis numerus ; 

Te martyrum candidatus laudat exercitus. 

Te per orbem terrarum, sancta confitetur ecclesia, 

Patrem immense majestatis : 

Venerandum tuum verum, et unicum Filium; 

Sanctum quoque Paraclitum Spiritum. 

Tu Rex gloriz Christe: 

Tu patris Sempiternus es Filius. 

Tu ad liberandum suscepturus hominem, non hor- 
ruisti virginis uterum: 

Tu devicto mortis aculeo, aperuisti credentibus regna 
celorum. 

Tu ad dextram Dei sedes: in gloria Patris. 

Judex crederis esse venturus: 

Te ergo, quesumus, tuis famulis subveni, quos pre- 
tioso sanguine redemisti. 

Eterna fac cum sanctis tuis in gloria numerari. 

Salvum fac populum tuum, Domine: et benedic 
hereditati tuze. 

I:t rege eos, et extolle illos usque in seternum. 

Per singulos dies benedicimus te. 

Et laudamus nomen tuum in &eculum: et in sgcu- 
lum seeculi. 


TE DEUM. 708 


Dignare, Domine, die isto: sine peccato nos custo- 
dire. 
Miserere nostri, Domine : miserere nostri. 
Fiat misericordia tua, Domine, super nos: quemad- 
modum speravimus in te. 
In te Domine speravi : non confundar in eternum. 
V. Benedicamus Patrein et Filium, cum Sancto 
Spiritu. 
R. Laudemus et superexaltemus eum in seecula. 


The Prayer, COLLECT, Deus cujus, os in p. 702. 
Paraphrastical Translation of Te Deum. 


THEE, sov'reign God our grateful accents praise ; 

We own thee Lord, and bless thy wond’rous 
ways. 

To thee, eternal Father, earth’s whole frame, 

With loudest trumpets sounds immortal fame. 

Lord God of Hosts! to thee the heavenly powers, 

With sounding anthems fill thy vauNed tow’rs. 

The Cherubim thrice Holy, Holy, Holy, cry: 

Thrice Holy all the Seraphim reply, 

And thrice returning echoes, endless song supply. 

Both heaven and earth thy Majesty display ; 

They owe their beauty to thy glorious ray. 

Thy praises fill the loud apostles choir: 

The train of prophets in the song conspire. 

Legions of martyrs in the ‘chorus shine, 

And vocal blood, with vocal music join, 

By these thy Church, inspir’d with heav'nly art, 

Around the world maintains a second part; 

And tunes her sweetest notes, O God! to thee, 

The Father of unbounded Majesty ; 

The Son, ador'd co-partner of thy seat, 

And equal everlasting Paraclete. 

Thou king of glory, Cl.rist, of the Most High 

Thou co-cternal filial Deity : 

Thou who to save the world's impending doom, 

Vouchsaf'dst to dwell within a virgin’s womb: 


704 MASS FOR TME BRIDEGROOM. 


id tyrant Death disarm’d ; before thee flew 
The bolts of heav’n, and back the foldings drew 
To give access, and make the faithful way ; 
From God’s right-hand thy filial beams display. 
Thou art to judge the living and the dead. 

Then spare those souls for whom thy veins have bled 
O take us up amongst the blest above, 
To share with thein thy everlasting love. 
Preserve, O Lord, thy people, and enhance 
Thy blessing on thine own inheritance. 
Por ever raise their hearts, and rule their ways: 
Each day we bless thee, and proclaim thy praise: 
No age shall fail to celebrate thy name; 
Nor hour neglect thy everlasting fame. 
Preserve our souls, O Lord, this day from ill: 
Have mercy on us, Lord! have mercy still. 
As we have hop'd do thou reward our pain: 
We've hop’d in thee, let not our hope be vain. 
m Let us big#s the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
10st. 
R. Let us praise and extol him for ever. 


MASS for the BRIDEGROOM and BRIDE, at 
the BENEDICTION of the MARRIAGE. 


INTROIT. Tob. vii.—May the God of Israel 
join you together: and may he be with you, who 
was merciful to our two first parents, when alone. 
And now, O Lord, make them praise thee with a 
full and sincere heart. Alleluia, Alleluia. Ps. Blessed 
are all they that fear the Lord, that walk in his ways. 
V. Glory. 

COLLECT.  Ezraudi nos.—Hear us, O Almighty 
and merciful God, that what we according to our 
office perform, may be abunaantly sanctified by thy 
blessing. Thro’. : 

EPISTLE. Eph. v. 22. 33.— Brethren : Let wo- 
men be subject to their husbands, ag to the Lord. 


MASS FOR THE BRIDEGROOM. 705 


Because the hushand is the head of the wife : as Christ 
is the head of the Church: he is the Saviour of his 
body. ‘Therefore as the Church is subject to Christ, 
so also let the wives be to their husbands in all 
things. Husbands love your wives, as Christ also 
loved the Church, and delivered himself up for it: 
that he might sanctify it, cleansing it hy the laver of 
water in the word of life; that he might present it 
to himself a glorious Church not having spot or 
wrinkle, nor any such thing, but that it should be 
holy and without blemish. So also ought men to 
love their wivesas their own bodies. He that loveth 
his wife, loveth himself. For no man ever hated 
his own flesh: but nourisheth and cherisheth it, as 
also Christ doth the Church: for we are members of 
his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. “For this 
cause shall a man leave his father and mother: and 
shall stick to his wife, and they shall be two in one 
flesh." "This is a great sacrament: but I speak in 
Christ and in the Church. Nevertheless let every 
one of you in particular love his wife as himself: ana 
let the wife fear her husband. . 

GRAD. Ps. cxxvii.—Thy wife shall be as a fruit 
ful vine on the sides of thy house. V. Thy children 
as olive plants round about thy table. Allelua, 
Alleluia. V. Ps. xix.—May the Lord send thee 
help from the sanctuary, and defend thee out of Sica. 
Alleluia. 

After Septuag. instead of Alleluia and V. 1s said 

TRACT. Ps. cxxvii. Behold thus shall the man 
be blessed that feareth the Lord. V. May the Lord 
bless thee out of Sion, and mayest thou see the good 
things of Jerusalem all the days of thy life. V. And 
mayest thou see thy children’s children: peace upon 
Israel. . 

GOSPEL. Matt. xix. 3. 6.—At that time: The 
Pharisees came to Jesus, tempting him, and say- 
ing: Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife 


706 THE NUPTIAL BLESSING. 


for every cause? Who answering said to them: 
Have ye not read, that he who made man from the 
beginning, made them male and female? And he 
sail: “for this cause shall a inan leave father and 
mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and they two 
shall be in one flesh.” Therefore now they are not 
two, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined 
together, let not man put asunder. 

OFFERT. Ps. xxx.—lIn thee, O Lord, have I put 
my trust: I have said: thou art my God; my lifes 
in thy hands. 

SECRET.—Receive, we beseech thee, O Lord, 
the offerings we make for the sacred law of wedlock: 
and as thou wast the author of this work, be also the 
regulator thereof. Thro’. 


The NUPTIAL BLESSING. 


After the Pater noster, the Priest standing on the 
Epistle side, turns towards the Bridegroom aad 
Bride kneeling before him and says : 


Let us pray. Propitiare. 
ERCIFULEY give ear, O Lord, to our prayers, 
and let thy grace accompany this thy in- 
stitution, by which thou hast ordained the propaga- 
tion of mankind, that this tie, which is made by thy 
authority, nay be preserved by thy grace. Thro’. 
R. Amen. 
Let us pray. Deus, qui potestale. 
God, who, by the power of thy might, didst 
create all things out of nothing: who, at the 
first forming of the world, having made man to the 
likeness of God, didst, out of his flesh, make the 
woman, and give her to him for a helpniate: and 
by this didst inform us, that what in its beginning 
was ont, ought never to be separated. O God, 
who by so excellent a mystery, hast consecrated this 
union of the two sexes, and hast been pleased to 
make ita type ot the greet wacrament af Christ and 


THE NUPTIAL BLESSING, - 707 


his Church. O God, hy whom woman is joined to 
man, and that union, which was instituted in the 
beginning, is still accompanied with such a blessing, 
as alone, neither in punishment of original sin, nor 
by the sentence of the deluge, had been recalled; 
mercifully look down upon this thy handmaid, who, 
being now to be joined in wedlock, earnestly desires 
to be taken under thy protection: may love and peace 
constantly remain in her: may she marry in Christ 
faithful and chaste: may she ever imitate the holy 
women of former times: may she be pleasing to her 
husband, like Rachael : discreet, like Rebecca: may 
she, in her years and fidelity, be like Sarah: and 
may the first author of all evil, at no time, have any 
share in her actions. May she remain attached to 
the faith and the commandments, and, being joined 
to one man in wedlock, may she fly all unlawful 
addresses: may a regularity of life and conduct be 
her strength against the weakness of her sex: may 
she be modest and grave, bashful and venerable, aud 
well instructed in heavenly doctrine. May she be 
fruitful in her offspring, approved and innocent: and 
may it be at length her happy lot to arrive at the 
rest of the blessed in the kingdom of God : may they 
both see their children's children to the third and 
fourth generation, and live to their wished-for old 
age. Thro’. R. Amen. 

COMM. Ps. cxxvii.—Thus shall every man be 
blessed that feureth the Lord : mayest thou see thy 
children's children: peace be to Israel. 

P. COMM. Quesumus.—Mercifully accompany, 
O Lord, we beseech thee, what thy providence hath 
instituted ; and preserve in length of peace those, 
whom thou lawfully joinest together. Thro’. 
Before the Priest gives the Blessing to the People, he 

turns io the Bridegroom end Bride, and says 
M4 the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, 
and the, God of Jacob be with you: and 


708 VOTIVE MASS FOR THE SICK. 


may he fulfil his blessing in you: that you may see 

your children’s children to the third and fourth gene- 

ration: and afterwards enter into the possession of 
eternal life, through the assistance of our Lord Jesus 

Christ, who with the Father and the Holy Ghost, 

liveth, &c. KR. Amen. 

Then he exhorts them to observe an inviolable fidelity 
toward each other; to practise continence at the 
times of Prayer, (especially on Fast-days and great 
solemnities) and to persevere in the fear of God. 


A VOTIVE MASS for the SICK. 


INTROIT. Ps. liv.—Hear,O God, my prayer, 
and despise not my supplication: be attentive to me, 
and hear me. Ps. I am grieved in my exercise: and 
am troubled at the voice of the enemy, and at the 
tribulation of the sinner. V. Glory. 

COLLECT. Omnipotens.—O Almighty and ever- 
lasting God, the eternal salvation of them that be- 
lieve in thee; hear us in behalf of thy servants, who 
are sick, for whom we humbly crave the help of thy 
mercy, that their health, being restored to them, 
"they may render thanks to thee in thy Church. 
Thro’. . 

If the sick person be near the point of Death. 

COLLECT. Omnipotens.—O Almighty and mer- 
ciful God, who bast prepared for mankind the 
means of salvation, and the rewards of eternal life: 
look down, in thy mercy, on thy servant now la- 
bouring uuder the calamity of sickness, and be thou 
the comfort of his [or her] soul, which thou hast 
created: that, at the hour of death, it may be pre- 
sented to thee, by the hands of the angels, without 
spot. Thro’. 

EPISTLE. James v. 13. 16.—Brethren: Is any of 
you sad? Let him pray. Is he cheerful in mind? Let 
him sing psalms. Ys any man tick among you? Let 


A VOTIVE MASS FOR THE SICK. 700 


him bring in the priests of the church, and let them 
pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of 
the Lord: and the prayer of faith shall save the sick 
man; and the Lord shall raise him up: and if he be 
in sins, they shall be forgiven him. Confess there- 
fore your sins one to another: and pray one for ano- 
ther, that you may be saved. 

GRAD. Ps. vi.—Have mercy on me, O Lord, for 
I am weak: heal me, O Lord. V. All my bones are 
troubled, and my soul is troubled exceedingly. .4lle- 
luta, Alleluwa. V. Hear, O Lord, my prayer: and 
let my cry come to thee. Alleluia. 


After Septuagesima, instead of the Alleluias and V. 
fallowwg, is said the 


TRACT. Ps. xxx.—Have mercy on me, O Lord, 
for I am afflicted: my eye is troubled, with wrath, 
my soul, and my belly. 7. For my life is wasted 
with grief; and my years in sighs. V. My strength 
is weakened through poverty, and my bones are 
disturbed. 

GOSPEL. Matt. vii. 5. 13——At that time: 
When Jesus had entered into Capharnaum, there 
came to him a Centurion, beseeching him, and 
saying: Lord, my servant lieth at home sick of the 
palsy, and is grievously tormented. And Jesussaith 
to him: I will come and heal him. And the Cen- 
turion making answer saith : Lord, I am not worthy 
that thou shouldst enter under my roof: but only 
say the word, and my servant shall be healed. For 

also am a man subject to authority, having under 
me soldiers: and I say to this man, Go, and he 
goeth, and to another, Come, and he cometh, and to 
‘my servant, Do this, and he doeth it. And Jesus 
hearing this, marvelled: and said to them that fol- 
lowed him: Amen, I say to you, I have not found 
so great faith in Israel. And I say to you that man 
shall come from the Bast eM the West, and shall 


710 A VOTIVE MASS FOR THE SICK. 


down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the 
kingdoin of heaven: but the children of the kingdom 
shall be cast out into exterior darkness: there shall 
be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And Jesus said 
to the Centurion: Go, and as thou hast believed, 
80 be it done to thee. And the servant was healed 
at the same hour. 

OFFERT. Ps. liv.—Hear, O God, my prayer, 
and despise not my supplication: be attentive to me, 
and hear me. 

SECRET.—O God, by whose pleasure the mo- 
ments of our life are numbered, receive the prayers 
and sacrifices of thy servants, for whom, in their sick- 
ness, we implore thy mercy ; that we may rejoice in 
the health of those, whom we now apprehend to be 
in danger. Thro’. 

If the sick Person be near the point of Death. 

SECRET.—Receive, O Lord,the sacrifice we offer 
for thy servant, who is near the end of his [ or her] 
life: and grant, that by it, all his [ or her] sins may 
be cleansed away, that he [ or she] who is chastised 
by thy appointment in this life, may obtain eternal 
rest in that which is to come. Thro’. 

COMM. Ps. xxx.—Make thy face to shine upon 
thy servant, save me in thy mercy, save me: Lord, 
let me not be confounded O Lord, for I have called 
upon thee. 

P. COMM. Deus, infirmilatis.—O Lord, the sin- 
gular aid of human weakness, shew the power of 

y help to thy sick servant: that being assiste: by 
thy mercy, he may come jn health again to thy holy 
Church. Thro’. 

If the sick Person be near the point of Death. 

P. COMM. Quesumus.—We beseech thy mercy, 
O Almighty God, that thou wouldst please to 
strengthen with thy grace thy servant by the efficacy 
of these mysteries, that the enemy may not prevail 
against him [or her] at the hour of his [or her! death, 


MASS IN TIME.OF WAR. 711 


but that he [or she] may pass to eternal life with thy 
angels Thro’. 


MASS in time of WAR. 


The Ps. Miserere, p. 279, is previously said or sung, 
after, which follows the Prayer, O God, who by sin 
art offended, at the bottom of p. 363. 


INTROIT. Ps. xxiv.—Remember, O Lord, thy 
bowels of compassion, and thy mercies, that are irom 
the beginning of the world : lest at any time ovr ene- 
mies should prevail over us: deliver us, O God of 
Israel, from all our perplexities. Ps. ib. To thee, O 
Lord, have I lifted up iny soul: in thee, O my God, 
I put my trust; let me not be ashamed. |. Glory. 

COLLECT. Deus, qui conteris bella.—O God of 
battles, who grantest the victory to those that put 
their trust in thee: mercifully hear the prayers of us 
thy servants, that the evil designs of our enemies 
being defeated, we may praise thee with unceasing 
gratitude. Thro’. 

LESSON. Jer. xlii.—In those days : All the cap- 
tains of the warriors came, and said to Jeremiah the 
prophet: pray thou for us to the Lord thy God. And 
the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, and he called 
all the captains of the warriors, and all the people, 
from the least to the greatest. And he said tothem 
Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, to whom yuu 
sent me, to present your supplications before him: 
I& you will be quiet, and remain in this land, I will 
build you up, and not pull you down: I will plaut, 
and not pluck you up ; for now I am appeased for the 
evil that I have done to you. Fear not because of 
the King of Babylon, of whom you are greatly 
afraid: fear lim not, saith the Lord: for I am 
with you, to save you, and to deliver you from his 
hand. And JI will shew mercies to you, and will 

02 


719 MASS IN TIME OF WAR. 


take pity on you, and will cause you to dwell in 
your own land, saith the Lord, the Almighty. 

GRAD. Ps. lxxvi.—Thou art the God, that alone 
dost wonders: 'Thou hast made thy power known 
among the nations. V. Thou hast by thy power 
delivered thy people, the children of Israel and Jo- 
seph. Alleluia, Alleluia. Ps. lviii. Deliver me from 
my enemies, O my God: and defend me from them 
that rise up against me. lleluva. 

Aficr Septuagesima (but not in Paschal time) instead 
of the foregoing Alleluias and V. is said the 

TRACT, Deal not with us, as tn p. 117. 

GOSPEL. Matt. xxiv. 3. 8.—.2t that time: 
The disciples came to him privately, saying: Tell 
us when shall these things be? and what shall be 
the sign of thy coming, and of the consummation of 
the world? And Jesus answering, said to them: 
Take heed that no man seduce you: for many will 
come in my name, saying: I am Christ: and they will 
seduce many. And you shall hear of wars, and ru- 
mours of. wars. See that ye be not troubled. For 
these things must come to pass, but the end is not 
yet. For nation shall rise against nation, and king- 
dom against kingdom : and there shall be pestilences, 
and famines, and earthquakes in placcs: now all 
these are the beginnings of sorrows. 

OFFERT. Ps. xvii.—Thou wilt save the humble 
people, Lord: but wilt bring down the eyes of the 
proud: for who is God, but thee, O Lord ? 

SECRET.—Graciously receive, O Lord, the sacri- 
fice we offer unto thee ; that being delivered from the 
scourges of war, we may be placed under the wings 
of thy protection. Thro’. 

COMM. Ps. xxx.—Bow down thy ear to me, O 
Lord ; make haste to deliver me. 

P. COMM. Deus regnorum.—O God, the su- 
preme ruler of kings and kingdoms, who, by chas- 
tising, dost heal us, and by pardoning, dost preserve 


OCCASIONAL COLLECTS, &c. 713 


us: pour down upon us thy mercy, that resting in 
perfect security, under thy powerful protection, we 
may apply the blessings of peace as remedies towards 
the amendment of our lives. Thro’. 





Occasional Collects, Secrets, and P. Comms. to be 
said after the proper ones on days that are not dou- 
bles, a£ the choice of the Priest or Persons hearing 
Mass. 

For desiring the Prayers of the Saints. 

COLLECT.  Concede.—Grant, we beseech tbee, 
O Almighty God, that the intercession of holy Mary, 
the mother of God, and that of all the holy Apostles, 
Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and of all the elect, 
may every where bring joy to us: that while we 
celebrate their virtues, we may experience their pa- 
tronage. Thro’ the same. 

SECRET.—Be appeased, O Lord, with the offer- 
ings we have made; and by the intercession of 
blessed Mary, ever a Virgin, and of all thy saints, 
defend us from all dangers. Thro’. 

P. COMM. Sumpsimus.—We have received, O 
Lord, thy heavenly mysteries, celebrating the me- 
mory of blessed Mary, ever a Virgin, and of all thy 
saints: grant, we beseech thee, that what we per- 
form here in time, we may receive the joyful effects 
of in eternity. Thro’. 

For all States of the Church. 

COLLECT. Omnipotens.—O Almighty and ever- 
lasting God, by whose spirit the whole body of the 
church is sanctified and governed: hear our humble 
prayers for all degrees thereof, that, by the assist- 
ance of thy grace, they may faithfully serve thee. 
Thro’. 

SECRET.—Grant thy servants, O Lord, the par- 
don of their sins, comfort in life, and thy perpetual 

303 


714 OCCASIONAL COLLECTS, &c. 


protection: that, persevering in thy service, they 
may always obtain thy mercy. ‘Thro’. 

P. COMM. Libera.—Deliver, O Lord, we beseech 
thee, from all sin and from all enemies, thy servants, 
who offer their humble prayers to thee, that, leading 
holy lives, they may be attacked by no misfortunes 


Thro’. 
For a Congregation or Family. 

COLLECT.  Defende.—Preserve, O Lord, we 
beseech thee, this family from all misfortunes, through 
the intercession of blessed Mary, ever a Virgin; aud, 
as in all humility they prostrate themselves before 
thee, do thou mercifully defend them from all the 
snares of their enemies. Thro’. 

SECRET.—Receive, we beseech thee, O Al- 
mighty God, our devout oblation ; and, by virtue of 
this sacrament, defend thy servants from all adver- 
sity. Thro’. 

P. COMM. Sumptis.—Having received the offer- 
.ings of our redemption, grant, we beseech thee, O 
merciful God, that, by the celebration thereof, we may 
find thy protection against all adversity. Thro’. 

For Peace in a Congregation or Family. 

COLLECT.—O God, the author of peace and 
lover of charity, give to thy servants true agreement 
with thy holy will; that we may be freed from all 
the temptations that disturb us. Thro’, 

SECRET.—Being appeased by this sacrifice, grant, 
we beseech thee, O Lord, that we may not be bur- 
dened with the sins of others, who beg to be freed 
from our own. Thro’. 

P. COMM.—Pour forth upon us, O Lord, the 
spirit of charity: that thou mayest, by thy mercy, 
make those of one mind whom thou hast fed with 
one bread. ‘Thro’. 

/Ieainst Persecutors and Evil-Doers. 

COLLECT.  Hostiun.—Crush, O Lord, we be- 
seech thee, the pride of our enemies: aud, by the 


OCCASIONAL COLLECTS, Mc. 715 


power of thy right hand, frustrate all their malicious 
and obstinate designs. Thro’. 

SECRET.—May we, O Lord, by the virtue of 
this sacrament, be both cleansed from our hidden 
ans and delivered from the snares of our enemies. 

10’. 

P. COMM.  Protector.—Look down on us, O God 
our protector, and free us from the danger of our 
enemies, that we may serve thee without any dis- 
turbance. Thro’. 

In any Necessity. 

COLLECT. Deus refugium.—O God, our re- 
fuge and strength, fountain of all goodness, merci- 
fully give ear to the fervent prayers of thy church, 
and grant that what we ask with faith, we may ef- 
fectually obtain. Thro’. 

SECRET.—Grant, O merciful God, that this sa- 
crifice of our salvation may continually cleanse us 
from all our guilt, and defend us from all adversity. 

P. COMM. Sumpsimus.—We have received, O 
Lord, the sacred gifts of thy mystery, beseeching 
thee, that what thou commandest us to do in re- 
membrance of thee, may be a help to our weaknegs. 
Thro’. 

In any Tribulation. 

COLLECT.—Turn not away thine eyes, O most 
merciful God, from thy people crying out to thee in 
their affliction: but for the glory of thine own name, 
relieve us in our necessities. Thro’. 

SECRET.—Mercifully receive, O Lord, the of- 
ferings by which thou vouchsafest to be appeased ; 
and by thy great goodness restore us to safety. Thro’, 

P. COMM.—Look down mercifully, we beseech 
thee, O Lord, on our tribulation ; and turn away the 
wrath of thy indignation, which we justly deserve. 


Thro’. 
In a Famine or Pestilence. 
COLLECT.—Grant, us, O Lord, the effects of 


716 OCCASIONAL COLLECTS, &c. 


our humble and pious prayers : and by thy goodness 
deliver us from this famine or pestilence, that men 
may be sensible such scourges proceed from thy 
anger, and cease by thy rnercy. hro'. 

ECRET.—O God, who nourishest and renewest 
the two-fold substance of man by virtue of these sa- 
cramental gifts: mercifully grant that by their aid 
nothing may be wanting to our souls and bodies 
Thro' 


P. COMM.—Feed those, we beseech thee, O Lord, 
with corporal food, whom thou art pleased to nourish 
with thy eternal mysteries. Thro’. 

For Rain. 


COLLECT.—O God, in whom we live, move and 
have our being, send us, we beseech thee, seasonable 
rain; that enjoying a sufficiency of the necessaries 
of this life, we may aspire with more confidence after 
those blessings which are eternal. Thro’. 

SECRET.—Be appeased, O Lord, with the offer- 
ings we make thee; and send us the aid of season- 
able rain. Thro’. . 

P. COMM.—Grant us, we beseech thee, O Lord, 
wholesome rain ; and water from heaven the drought 
of the earth. Thro’. 


For Fair Weather. 


COLLECT.—Hear us, O Lord, crying out to thee, 
and grant our humble request of a dry season ; that 
we who are justly atficted for our sins may experi- 
ence thy clemency and mercy. ‘Thro’. 

SECRET.—May thy grace, O Lord, always go 
before and follow us ; and mercifully receive, as con- 
gecrated to thy name, the offerings we bring for the 
remission of our sins ; that by the intercession of thy 
saints, they may avail us to salvation. Thro’. 

P. COMM.—We beseech thy mercy, O Almighty 
God, that thou wouldst stop the overflowing of rain, 
and shew us thy pleasing countenance. Thro’. 


" 


OCCASIONAL COLLECTS, &c. 717 


Against Storms. 

COLLECT.—Defend, we beseech thee, O Lord, 
this house against the assaults of our spiritual ene- 
mies: and cause the present dreadful disorder of the 
air to cease. Thro’. 

SECRET.—We offer thee, O Lord, our praises 
and sacrifices in thanksgiving for the favours we have 
Already received: humbly beseeching thee to grant 
those we now stand in need of. Thro’. 

P. COMM.—O Almighty and eternal God, who 
both healest us by chastisement, and preservest us by 
the grant of thy pardon ; hear our humble prayers; 
that we may rejoice in the ceasing.of this storm, and 
always make a good use of the grant of thy favours. 
Thro’. 


For the Gift of Tears. 

COLLECT.—O Almighty and most merciful God, 
who, to quench the thirst of thy people, madest water 
spring out of a rock; draw from our stony hearts 
the tears of'compunction, that effectually bewailing 
our sins, we may, through thy mercy, obtain pardon 
for them. Thro’. 

SECRET.—Mercifully look down, O Lord, on the 
offerings we make to thy majesty ; and draw from 
our eyes such torrents of tears, as may extinguish the 
burning flames we deserve for our sins. Thro’. 

P. COMM.—Mercifully pour forth into our hearts, 
O Lord God, the grace of thy hély Spirit: which, 
by sighs and tears, may make us wash away the stains 
of our sins, and obtain for us the desired pardon. 
Thro’. 

Against Evil thoughts. 

COLLECT.—O Almighty and most merciful God, 
regard, in thy goodness, our prayers, and deliver our 
hearts from the disquietude of all perverse and evil 
thoughts: that we may become an abode for thy 
holy Spirit. Thro’. 

SECRET.—We offer thee, O Lord, this sacrifice 


718 PSALM EXAUDIAT. 

of salvation: that purging our hearts from unclean 
thoughts, thou wouldst preserve them undefiled, 
and enlighten thein by the grace of thy holy Spirit, 
Thro’. 

P. COMM.—O God, who enlightenest every man 
coming into this world ; illuminate, we beseech thee, 
our hearts with the light of thy grace, that always 
entertaining such thoughts as are worthy and well 

leasing to thy divine Majesty, we may sincerely 
ove thee. Thro’. 


 — 
fae 


Psalm xix. Eraudiat, 


X AUDIAT te Do- 

minus in die tribula- 
tionis:* protegat te no- 
men Dei Jacob. 

Mittat tibi auxilium de 
sancto :* et de Sion tuea- 
tur te. 

Memor sit omnis sacri- 
ficii tui :* et holocaustum 
tuum pingue fiat. 

Tribuat tibi secundum 
cor tuum :* et omne con- 
siliuin tuum confirmet. 

Leetabimur in salutare 
tuo:* et in nomine Dei 
nostri, magnificabimur. 

Impleat Dominus om- 
nes petitiones tuas :*nunc 
cognovi, quoniam salvum 


fecit Dominus Christum 
suum. 

Exaudiat illum,de celo 
sancto suo: *in potentati- 
bus, salus dextre ejus. 

Hi in curribus, et hi in 
equis:* Nos autem, in 
nomine Dei nostri, invo- 
cabimur. 

Ipsi obligati sunt, et 
ceciderunt:* Nos autem 
surrexinius, et erecti su- 
mus, 

Domine salvum fac re- 
gem :* et exaudi nos in 
die qua invocaverimus 
te. 7. Gloria. 

Oremus.—Queesumus, 
p. xlvi. 


ADESTE FIDELES, sung from Christmas-Day 
lo the Octave-day of the Epiphany. 


ANE fideles, lzeti triumphantes, 
WX ente, ventte in Bethlehem : 


ADESTE FIDELES. 


719 


Natum videte Regem Angelorum: 

Venite adoremus, venite adoreinus, 

Venite adoremus Dominum.* 
Deum de Deo: lumen de lumine 

Gestaut puelle viscera: 

Deum verum genitum non factum 

Venite adoremus, veuite, &c. to*. 
Cantet nune Io, chorus Angelorum 

Cantet nunc aula celestium : 

Gloria in excelsis Deo; 

Venite adoremus, venite, &c. to*, 
Ergo qui natus die hodierna, 


Jesu tibi sit gloria : 


Patris seterni, Verbum caro factum 
Venite adoremus, venite, &c. to*. 


The following Hymn is generally sung before solemn 
Mass on Whitsunday. 


VEN I Creator Spiri- 
tus, 

Mentes tuorum visita, 

Imple superna gratia, 

Que tu creasti pectora. 

Qui diceris Puraclitus, 
Altissimi donum Dei. 
Fons vivus, ignis, chari- 

tas: 
Et Spiritalis unctio. 

Tu septiformis munere, 
Digitus peeternee dexteree, 
Turite promissum Patris, 
Sermone ditans guttura. 

Accende lumen sensi- 

bus, 
Infunde amorem cordi- 
bus: 


Infirma nostri corporis, 
Virtute firmans perpeti, 
Hostem repellas lon- 
gius, 
Paceinque dones protinua 
Ductore sic te previo, 
Vitemus omne noxium. 
Per te sciamus da Pa- 
trem, 
Noscamus atque Filium : 
Teque utriusque Spiri- 
tum, 
Credamus omni tempore. 
Deo Patri, sit gloria. 
Et Filio qui a mortuis; 
Surrexit ac Paraclito. 
In seculorum secula.— 
Amen. 


L 720 | 


os 
FIVE POINTS or RESOLUTIONS 
Which may be formed with much spiritual profit, either 
before or after hearing .Mass. 


I. 

I destest and abhor, all and every one of the sins I 
have ever committed, or that have been committed 
by others from the beginning of the world to the pre- 
sent hour, or that may be hereafter committed tagzhe 
end thereof: and would, with the grace of God, do 
my utmost to prevent them, which I therefore hum- 
bly implore. 


II. 

I extol and approve of all the good works that have 
been done from the beginning of the world, or that 
may be done hereafter to the consummation thereof: 
and would, with the help of God, multiply them, 
whose grace [ most humbly implore. 


I1. 

1 purpose henceforth to direct all my thoughts, 
words and actions, to the greater glory of God, in 
union with all those good intentions which the saints 
have ever had—now have—or can possibly have 

ereafter. 


IV. 

I pardon and forgive, from the bottom of my heart, 
all my enemies—all who calumniate or detract me— 
all who would by any means injure me, or wish that 
evil would befall me. 


V. 

O ! that it were possible I could save all mankind 
by dying for each individual : this I would freely do by 
the help of the grace of God, which I therefore ear- 
nestly invoke, for without his grace, I can do nothing 

Er. Missale Romane. 


FINIS. 














