     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Passion of S. Perpetua, with an Appendix
                  Containing the Original Latin Text of the Scillitan
                  Martyrdom (this file's specific target text is the
                  Appendix: "The Acts of the Scillitan Martyrs," the
                  original Latin recension recovered from a
                  9th-century British Museum manuscript)
      Creator(s): Anonymous (the Acta itself, Carthage, 180 CE -- the
                  earliest surviving dated document of Latin
                  Christianity)
                  J. Armitage Robinson, B.D. (Editor, Fellow and
                  Assistant Tutor of Christ's College, Cambridge)
     Print Basis: Texts and Studies: Contributions to Biblical and
                  Patristic Literature, Vol. I No. 2. Cambridge:
                  University Press, 1891.
          Rights: Public Domain
    Rights basis: 1891 publication date places this volume long out
                  of US copyright; Google Books scan (via archive.org,
                  item MN5140ucmf_2) of a University of Chicago
                  library copy.
    Language: lat, grc
        Supplied: pulled directly from archive.org by a sibling
                  research session with working network access
                  (session_01WLxhNbVhjkf1R2SAh8dxxT), 2026-09-08, for
                  the Latin Pastoral-Congregational Christianity world
                  build (not yet begun as a formal construction
                  thread). The Passion of the Scillitan Martyrs is
                  already assigned in this world's own corpus map
                  (source_file anf09_gospel-of-peter-diatessaron-
                  origen-commentaries.xml) from the English ANF
                  translation only; no original-language witness
                  existed in the vendored corpus prior to this file.
    Content note: Verified this pass: the volume's main content is
                  Robinson's edition of the Passion of Perpetua
                  (Latin and Greek recensions, with introduction and
                  word-indices); the Scillitan Martyrdom is a
                  dedicated Appendix, confirmed present at this
                  file's own internal heading "THE ACTS OF THE
                  SCILLITAN MARTYRS," including Robinson's own
                  discussion of the manuscript's discovery and dating
                  (fixing the trial to 17 July 180, under the
                  proconsul Saturninus, per Robinson's own
                  redating from Usener's 1881 Greek MS. discovery)
                  and the Latin dialogue text itself ("Speratus
                  dixit...", confirmed present). This single file
                  therefore also vendors Perpetua's own Latin Passion
                  as a byproduct, not itself requested for this world
                  but potentially relevant to other worlds' own
                  builds (desert-monasticism, or a future
                  martyr-literature world) -- not assigned in any
                  corpus map this pass.

ie 
$y 


vs 
5 ares 


ae 








Book 
Library 


t No. 


ee 


, 


4 
Sy aoe! 
Pata, Vella 


bj 


icago 


Siw 


ae) 


gf 





N 
&q 
= 
NI 
S 
<) 


ty of Ch 
On page 


iversi 


one 
Uni 

Bes 
zt No. 


ee 


pera 


oe 
a 


ides the matin loptc this book also treats of 


Sd 
Fi 


a 


ay 


a 
Sore 
[fal 





Su 


ean ¥ 





ise 
Tee 


oh 
ca 


4 


rs 





THE PASSION OF ‘S. PERPETUA 


NEWLY EDITED FROM THE MSS. 


WITH AN INTRODUCTION AND NOTES 


TOGETHER WITH AN APPENDIX 
CONTAINING THE ORIGINAL LATIN TEXT OF 


THE SCILLITAN MARTYRDOM 


BY 


J. ARMITAGE ROBINSON B.D. 


FELLOW AND ASSISTANT TUTOR OF CHRIST’S COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE 


CAMBRIDGE 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 
1891 


[All Rights reserved] 


Cambringe : 
PRINTED BY C, J. CLAY, M.A. AND SONS, 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 


FRATRI - MEO 
QVI- APVD- ALIENIGENAS - AFRICAE - OCCIDENTALIS 
DVM - MARTYRVM - FIDEICOMMISSVM 
‘ PRO - VIRIBVS - EXEQVEBATVR 
NVPERRIME - IN - CHRISTO - OBDORMIVIT 
HOC - OPVS - QVANTVLVMGVMQVE 
DE - PRIMITIIS - ECCLESIAE - AFRICANAE 
DEDICO 


SVMMO - DESIDERIO 


PREFACE. 


HE yecent discovery of a Greek text has awakened a fresh 

interest in the most beautiful of all the records of Christian 
Martyrdom. The occurrence of Greek words in the familiar Latin 
document had previously led some scholars to suspect that it 
might be a translation from the Greek. This may help to account 
for the hasty welcome which has been accorded to the theory that 
the newly found Greek text is the veritable original. This view 
moreover found some support in the parallel theory of Aubé that 
Usener’s discovery of the still earlier Scillitan Martyrdom in a 
Greek dress gave us another Greek original for a record hitherto 
known to us only through somewhat amplified Latin recensions. 

In the poverty of our knowledge as to the beginnings of the . 
African. Church any new information must be eagerly welcomed. 
But it must first be tested by critical processes before it can be 
added to the-scanty materials of history. The present study is an 
attempt at such criticism. The result, unless I am mistaken, is 
that both theories alike break down. The beautiful Latin of 
S. Perpetua’s Martyrdom holds its own against its clumsy rival: 
and I have endeavoured by the aid of the MSS. to present it in a 
more satisfactory form. I have been fortunate in finding the 
original Latin of the Scillitan Martyrdom; and I edit accordingly 
for the first time what may perhaps claim to be the earliest 
consecutive piece of Christian Latin which has been preserved 
to us, 

The important problem of the language commonly used in the 
earliest Churches of the West receives, I believe, some new light 
from the observations which I have made in an additional note, in 
which I have adduced evidence to prove that the Churches of 
Vienne and Lyons were better acquainted with a Latin Version 
than with the original.Greek of the New Testament. The famous 





vill PREFACE. 


Letter which describes their sufferings was addressed to an Eastern 
Church and was therefore written in Greek: but the Scriptural 
quotations and allusions which it contains point to a process of 
extemporaneous retranslation from a Latin Version which betrays 
affinities with what is known as the African Old Latin. 

Several other matters of interest have come out in the course 
of the study of these problems. Two sources from which the 
Carthaginian Martyrs unconsciously drew the materials of their 
Visions appear to be the Shepherd of Hermas and the Apocalypse 
of Peter. These two books may accordingly be added provisionally 
to the early Latin Bible of the West. I have moreover been led 
to the belief that we owe the record of the Martyrs’ sufferings to 
no less powerful a writer than Tertullian himself. 

The present Study was accepted by the Professors of Divinity 
as a Dissertation for the Degree of B.D. I owe it to the courtesy 
of the Regius Professor that I have been allowed to make some 
small additions previous to its publication. 

To edit the Passion of S. Perpetua with the fulness which is 
called for by the many questions of history, of doctrine and of 
Latinity which it involves, would demand a large volume. I can 
only offer a short study, of the incompleteness of which I am pain- 
fully aware: but I hope that I have done something towards a 
purer text and a better understanding of a document which few 
students of Latin can fail to appreciate and no one can read without 
emotion. 


Curist’s CoLLeGe, 
S. Peter’s Day, 1891. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


PAGES 

INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . 1-58 
The Relation between the Latin and Greek Texts. . . 2 

The MSS. of the Passion . . . . . . 10 

The Origin and Use of the Short Latin Acts . . . . 15 
Were our Martyrs Thuburbitan? —. . . . . 22 

The Shepherd of Hermas and the Visions . . . . 26 

The Apocalypse of Peter and the Vision of Saturus . . . 37 

The Authorship of the Visions . . . . . 43 

The Authorship of the rest of the Martyrdom . . . . 47 
THE LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS OF THE PASSION . . 60-95 
ADDITIONAL NOTES . . . . . . . . - 96-103 
Additional Variants in the MSS... . . 96 

The Old Latin Version in the Churches of Vienne and Lyons . 97 

On the emendation of a passage in c. xvi. . . . . 100 

The Text of the Short Latin Acts. . . . . . 100 
APPENDIX . . . . . . . . . - 106-121 
Introduction to the Scillitan Mar tyrd dom . . . . . 106 

The Latin and Greek Texts . . . . . . 112 

Two later Latin Recensions . . . . . . . 118 
INDICES . . . . . . . . . . 123-131 
Index of words in the Latin Text of 8. 5. Perpetua . . . 123 
Index of words in the Greek Text of S. Perpetua. . . 128 


Index of subject matter. . . . . ; . . 130 


INTRODUCTION. 


THE Martyrdom of 8. Perpetua and her companions has come 
down to us without a title and without the name of its author; 
and moreover, if we except certain incidental allusions, with no 
indication either of its locality or of its date. These untoward 
circumstances have exercised, as we shall see, a strange influence 


upon its literary history; and in only one manuscript has it sur- 


vived even approximately intact in its original form. This copy 
was discovered by L. Holsten in the Benedictine Monastery of 
Monte Cassino. He transcribed it for the press, but did not live 
to edit it. His work was subsequently taken up by P. Poussin, 
who published it at Rome in 16638, adding to Holsten’s valuable 
notes others scarcely less important of his own. In the following 
year it was reprinted at Paris by H. de Valois, who prefixed a 
preface in which he discussed the locality and date of the martyr- 
dom and contended that the collector of the Visions was a Monta- 
nist. It was next reprinted by the Bollandists in 1668, with a few. 
additional annotations, but no fresh recension of the text. It was 
again edited at Oxford in 1680, in a duodecimo volume, at the 


_ end of Lactantius De Mortibus Persecutorum, with a few additional 


notes and some variants from a MS. called Codex Sarisburiensis. 
Ruinart in his Acta Sincera endeavoured to improve the text by 
the aid of two imperfect MSS. (Salisburgensis and Compen- 
diensis): but his emendations were for the most part infelicitous, 
and his list of variants was both incorrect and incomplete. 
So that up to the present time the editvo princeps has remained 
the best authority for the text. In the spring of the year 
1889 Prof. Rendel Harris discovered a complete Greek text of the 


R. 1 


2 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


Martyrdom in the library of the Convent of the Holy Sepulchre 
at Jerusalem. This was published by him, in conjunction with 
Prof. Seth K. Gifford of Haverford College, Pennsylvania, in 
1890 at the Cambridge University Press, with an introduction 
and short notes. At the same time he reprinted Ruinart’s Latin 
text with a few emendations suggested by the Greek. In the present 
edition I have given a fresh recension of the Latin text from the 
manuscripts: and I have discussed the relation of the Greek to 
the Latin text, and also to the shorter Latin Acts. I have also 
ventured upon the question of the authorship of the Visions 
themselves and of the framework in which they are preserved. 
Besides this, I believe that I have been able to point out some 
sources, hitherto unrecognised, from which what may be called the 
raw material of the Visions has been largely drawn; and I have 
added some notes and illustrations which I trust will throw 
light on several obscure passages in the text. My interest in the 
subject has been stirred by Mr Harris’s book, to which, as well 
as to his subsequent suggestions, I desire at the outset to acknow- 
ledge my indebtedness. 


The Relation between the Latin and Greek Texts. 


The MS. discovered by Mr Rendel Harris is thus described by 
him: “The Greek text is taken from a MS. in the library of the 
Convent of the Holy Sepulchre (Cod. 8. Sep. 1). The MS. con- 
tains Bios cal paptupias for the month of February. It is labelled — 
with the name of Symeon Metaphrastes, but inasmuch as the 
writing is of the tenth century at least the title must not be 
taken literally. Among the interesting matters in this Codex 
will be found on p. 136 the martyrdom of Polycarp (i.e. the letter — 
of the Smyrneans). On pp. 144—173 the life of Porphyry of 
Gaza. On p. 173 Hippolytus, De Christo et Antichristo. The 
martyrdom of Perpetua will be found on p. 41 of the MS.” 

The first question which calls for an answer is the relation of 
this Greek text to the Latin with which scholars have been fami- 
liar for the last two centuries. Are we to regard the Greek as a 


1 Acts of Perpetua and Felicitas, p. 36. 


THE LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS. 3 


translation of the Latin, or wice versé? The discoverer of the 
Greek form has endeavoured to prove that it is the original, and 
that the Latin is a translation made half a century later. Such a 
conclusion is very startling: for we naturally expect that the 
martyrdoms of a Latin Church will be chronicled in the Latin 
tongue’. . 
~The evidence in a question of this kind may conveniently be 
considered under three main heads. First, a translation, being 
obviously intended for foreign readers, will often introduce expla- 
natory phrases which would have been, superfluous to the persons 
for whom the original was intended; while, on the other hand, it 
will sometimes suppress details which are troublesome to trans- 
late or do not readily lend themselves to explanation. Secondly, 
the translation will generally be weaker and more diffuse than 
the original: and this will be specially the case if the original be 
Latin. Dependent clauses will often be coordinated, and words 
which cannot easily be paralleled will be represented by a double 
or an alternative rendering. Thirdly, when there is a play upon 
words in the original, this will as a rule be lost in the translation : 
and this last indication, if we are fortunate enough to meet with 
it, is perhaps the most conclusive of all. I shall endeavour to give 
illustrations in the present case under each of these heads, to 
support the view that the Latin is the original and the Greek a 
subsequent translation. If I dismiss the subject somewhat sum- 
marily, it will be in the conviction that almost every topic sub- 
sequently treated of in this Introduction will furnish new proofs 
to substantiate this view. For the convenience of the argument 
I shall from the outset speak of the Latin original, and of the 
Greek version. 


(1) In the introductory chapter we find a difference in person 
between the Latin and the Greek, which is explained at once if we 
suppose that the Latin was written for readers who lived on the 


1 T have now Mr Harris’s authority to say that he has seen reason to change 
his view of the matter, and to regard the Latin as the original. A similar contest 
is being waged over the Greek and Latin forms of the Scillitan Martyrdom; 
where Usener is undoubtedly right, in spite of Aubé’s efforts to refute him, in 
declaring the Greek to be a translation from an original Latin document. See 

- the Appendix at the end of this study. 


1—2 


4 THE PASSION OF S, PERPETUA. 


scene, and some of whom had been eye-witnesses of the events 


described. 


Et nos itaque quod audiuimus et 
contrectauimus annuntiamus et uo- 
bis}, fratres et filioli, ut et uos gui 
interfuistis rememoremint gloriae Do- 
mini, et gut nune cognoscitis per 
auditum communionem habeatis cum 


Kat 7peis & jeovoapey kat Ewpakapev 
kat eyndadyoapey evayyeArCoueda vpiv, 
adeAgol Kal réxva, iva Kal of ovpma- 
povres dvapynabaatv ddéns Geov, 
kat of viv Ot dkons yivooKovtes 
kowaviay €xnre peTa TOY Gyl@y papTv- 


sanctis martyribus, &c. Pov, K.T.r. 


This suggests that in the Greek a translator is drawing a line 
of distinction between persons who had been on the spot and only 
needed to be reminded, and others at a distance or ata later time, 
who through his writing would now for the first time have fellow- 
ship with the African martyrs. But the contrast in the Latin is 
between ‘fratres’ and ‘filioli, terms suggested by the ‘filioli’ of 
S. John’s Epistle ; that is to say, between the writer’s own gene- 
ration (‘qui interfuistis’) and a younger generation now growing 
up in the Church (‘qui nunc cognoscitis per auditum ’). 

Immediately after this quotation there follows in the Greek 
(c. ii.) a mention of the locality to which the martyrs belonged: é, 
monet Oovxpetavev (sic cod.) 7H prxpotépa. This is entirely absent 
from the Latin: and its absence may be accounted for on the 
ground that such a localising of the martyrdom was superfluous 
for the original readers. Indeed it is open to question whether 
the statement is not altogether false and based on a later misap- 
prehension’. 

In c. v. we read: 

Superuenit autem et de ciuitate 


pater meus, consumptus taedio: et 
ascendit ad me, ut me deiceret, 


Tlapeyévero S€é xat 6 warnp éx THs 
wOAATS Grodnpias papawopevos: Kai 
dvéBn mpos pe mpoTperdpevos pre KaTa- 


Bane. 


1 It is worth while to observe that the omission of the xal before tut is a late 
variant in §. John’s Epistle: and it is hard to believe that an original writer would 
give evayyehiféueGa instead of daayyéAdouer, though it might easily come in as a 
rendering of ‘annunciamus,’ Other indications of the later date of the Greek, 
derived from its rendering of quotations, are found in the change of ‘eorum’ into 
bpay in c. i. (see note ad loc.), and in Alretc@e cal AjuyerGe (c. xix.), which 
one can scarcely believe possible from an original writer. 

? See below, pp. 22 ff. 


THE LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS. 5 

The expression é« THs TOAATS aTodnulas) is a reminiscence of 
c. ill, TOTE OAtyas Nuépas amodnunocavTos avToU, K.T.r., Where Per- 
petua describes her relief at the temporary absence of her father. 
The Latin however does not suggest that he had gone on a journey, 
but merely that he had not come again to the prison: ‘tunc 
paucis diebus quod caruissem patrem Domino gratias egi, et 
refrigeraui absentia illius” The exaggeration of the Greek is 
apparently the result of an effort to avoid the ambiguity of ‘de 
ciuitate, which however was quite intelligible to those who 
thought of the martyrs as confined at this period in the prison of 
the Proconsular palace, which was on the Byrsa, 200 feet above 
the city. The Forum was down by the sea, and the local touch in 
‘ascendit’ may be illustrated from Appian’s statement that the 
Byrsa was the Acropolis of Carthage, and that in the time of 
Scipio’s siege there were three streets going up to it from the 
Forum’. 

In ce x. we read in the Latin ‘ad portam Sanauiuariam, 
(Saneuiuariam BC)’ the Greek has mpds wiAnv riv Neyomévny 
Cwtixnv. The explanatory phrase betrays the translator. 

Of omission and modifications which are apparently due to a 
desire to shirk a difficult phrase, we may notice the following: 


c. iii. uas hoc iacens, urceolum siue aliud ; crevos xeipevov 7 aAXO Te TeV 
TOLOUTOD. 

c. xiii, Aspasium presbyterum doctorem ; ’Acmactov tov mpeaBirepov. 

ibid. et de factionibus certantes ; cat wepi avtay pidoverxourtes. 

c. xv. ex ministris cataractariorum ; roy mapatnpovvrer Umnpetav. 

c. xviii. flagellis eos uexari pro ordine uenatorum postulauit ; paoriyo- 
Onvae avdrovs éBoncev. 


_ An indication that the Greek is later than the Latin is found in-~ 
the addition of epithets such as ‘holy’ and ‘blessed.’ These are 
not altogether unknown in the Latin, but the Greek is alone 
in introducing them in the following instances: c. xvill. of &yvor 


1 Von Gebhardt in the Deutsche Literaturzeitung for Jan, 24, 1891, ingeniously 
emends the Greek, by the aid of an expression in c. ix. (77 axydig papavbels), as 
follows: éx Tis woAews da’ dxnadlas (or dxydig) uapavopuevos. If this were the original 
form of the Greek, the explanation which I have given may serve to account for its 
corruption. 

2 Appian, De rebus Punicis, $1 4 Kapyydoviwy dxpérods: and § 128 rpav & otcav 
amo THs dyopas avodwy els adTAY, K.T.A 


6 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


nyadrAtacOnoav. Cc. XX. Tals wakaptass Sé vedviow. Cc. Xxi. did 
TOV AYLOV ToO"ATOV...Kal oF paKapLoe papTupES...eTl TO Waka- 
pio Oavatm avTadv...trdv paxapiov paptipev. It is incon- 
ceivable that, if these were in the original, a Latin translator 
should have rejected them. A parallel case is found in the later 
Latin recensions and the Greek version of the Scillitan Martyrdom: 
see the Appendix. 

We may next observe the evident desire of the Greek trans- 
lator to minimise the Montanistic allusions to the work of the 
Holy Spirit. Thus at the outset (c, i.) we have: 


Itaque et nos qui sicut prophetias 
ita etuisiones nouas pariter repromissas 
et agnoscimuset honoramus, ceterasque 
uirtutes Spiritus Sancti ad instru- 
mentum ecclesiae deputamus. 


‘Hpeis 5é oirwes mpodyreias Kat 
€ , 4 f 4 3 , 
opdcers Kaas Sexdueba cal emvywd- 
okopev Kal Tiysdpev Wacas Tas Suvd- 
poets TOU aylov mvevpaTos, Os XopNnyEt 
v7 ayia éxxAnaola. 


Here the translator omits ‘ pariter repromissas,’ and gives wacas 
instead of the Latin ‘ceteras,’ which implied that the prophecies 
and visions were themselves ‘powers of the Spirit intended for the 
equipment of the Church.’ 

In c. xvi. the beautiful phrase ‘permisit et permuttendo uolwit 
Spiritus Sanctus’ appears merely as ézérpewev 76 Gytov Tvedua. 

But the tendency is most conspicuous in the concluding sen- 
tences of the book, which have been miserably rewritten, so that 
the great moral of the whole, ‘ut nouae quoque uirtutes unum et 
eundem semper Spiritum Sanctum usque adhuc operari testi- 
ficentur,’ is exchanged for a frigid commonplace, 7 wavdperos 
TONMTELA TOV PAKapioV MapTUPwWY, K.T.r. 


(2) Ishall next quote a few passages in which the superior 
strength and terseness of the Latin seems to support the view that 
it is the original. 


c.ii. Perpetua, honeste nata, liber- 
aliter instituta, matronaliter nupta... 
haec ordinem totum martyrii sui iam 
hine ipsa narrauit, sicut conscriptum 
manu sua e¢ suo sensu reliquit. 


Ileprerova, 7ris qv yevynbcioa 
evyevas kal Tpadeioa moAuTedas 
yapnOciod te e£oxos...471s maoav 
THY Taéw Tov paprupiou évredbev Sunyy- 
gato, és kal T@ vot avrijs kat TH 
xetpt ovyypayraca Karéhurev obrws 
eimouca. 


THE LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS. 7 


No one will deny to the Latin in this place a true ring of 
genuineness: but I would call special attention to the phrase 
‘et suo sensu’. The Greek rendering, cal 76 vot avtis, is a 
caricature of the somewhat rhetorical phrase of the Latin. 


c. iv. Iam in magna dignatione 
es, tanta ut postules uisionem et 
ostendatur tibi, an passio sit an com- 
meatus. 


MH 3 ’ 3 , € Ul 

Hon ev peyad@ aéidpare vmapyes 

, > 
TogavTy ovoa ws ei aiTioweras émtacias 
> ? s x > s fod , 
omtagiav haBots ay eis To SetxORvai cor 
W 3 aA ~ Pa 
elarep advaBoAny exes 7 Tadeiv pédXets. 


Here ‘tanta’ is undoubtedly the ablative case: but the trans- 
lator takes it as a nominative, shewing a defective knowledge of 
the Latin language; such as also appears immediately below, where 
he renders ‘non nisi singuli’ as e¢ yu) povayov &va: and again, 
when ‘arserunt’ is translated by cpewacbévtas (c. xi.); and ‘fidei- 
commissum’ by KéAcvopa (c. Xvi.). 

It would be easy to increase this list almost indefinitely ; but 
I shall content myself with noting a few phrases which speak for 
themselves. 


c.v. Depone animos. 
Ibid. Haec dicebat pater pro sua 


, A 
’AmroOou Tovs Oupovs. 
~ ww € x A A ~ 
Tatra €keyey os TaTHp KaTa THY TOV 


pietate. yovéwy evvotav. 

c. vi. Tus gladii acceperat. ’Efouciay eiAne: payaipas. 

c. vii. Sordido uultu et colore "Eo Oqra éxovra pumapdy' @ypov TH 
pallido. xpea. 

ce. x. Efferens uirgam quasi la- ’EBacratev Sé xai paBddsv as Bpa- 


nista, et ramum uiridem in quo erant 
mala aurea. 


c. xviii. Agnouit iniustitia iusti- 
tiam. 

c.xx. Pudoris potius memor quam 
doloris. 


Beutis 7} mpoorarys povopaxyev edepey 
dé kal kdadovs xyAwpovs Exovtas pada 
Xpvaea. 

°Ereéyve 1 ddikia Thy Sixatoovyny. 


AiSovs pad)dov pynpovevoaca fj mover: 
aiSoupeyvn pndapas dpovticaca Tav 
addy dover. 


The instances quoted from c. x. and ¢ xx. are examples of an 
alternative rendering in the Greek. 


1 Cf. Tertull. De Fuga, 9, ‘Denique memor Apocalypsis suae, in qua timidorum 
exitum audierat, de suo sensu admonet et ipse timorem reiciendum: Timor, inquit, 


non est in dilectione.’ 


8 THE PASSION OF 8S. PERPETUA. 


(3) In the account of the death of Saturus in c. xxi. we have 
a remarkable instance of a play upon words in the Latin. 


Kt statim in fine spectaculi, leo- 
pardo eiecto, de uno morsu tanto 
perfusus est sanguine, ut populus 
reuertenti illi secundi baptismatis 
testimonium reclamauerit: Saluwmn 
lotum, saluum lotum. plane utique 
saluus erat, qui hoc modo lauerat. 
tunc Pudenti militi inquit: Vale, in- 
quit, et memor esto fidei meae. 


Kal ev0ds év réder tis Oewpias map- 
2a 2 , . 2 en , 

Oadis avt@ €BAnOn, Kat ev Evi Syypare 
Tov alwaros rot ayiou éverAnaOn’ To- 
covToy aiva éppun, os AoyicOAvar Sev- 
tépov Banricpov paptipiov’ KaOds Kal — 
emepover 6 Oxdos Boav Kat réyor" 
Kaddés éAovo, Kada@s éAotcw. Kal py 
< A a ¢ . , ¢ 
vVyLHS WV O ToLOUT@ TpdmM Aehovpevos. 
TOTE 


a ’ ’ yi . 
T@ oTpatidty Tovdevte ey 
¢ f A f 

Yytatve, kat pynpoveve micrews Kal 
epov. 


Here we may note, first of all, that the translator has got into 
confusion about ‘perfusus, which he seems to interpret of the 
leopard: and, secondly, that he comes dangerously near to the 
absurdity of making the spectators in their coarse jest consciously 
allude to the Second Baptism. ‘Saluum lotum’ is a phrase of 
the baths, to which cakes éXovcw properly corresponds. But the 
play upon words is lost when xada@s édXovew is followed by vyzrs, 
the literal translation of ‘saluus.’ The translator, indeed, seems 
to have been conscious of the loss, and to have endeavoured to 
make some reparation by his grotesque translation of ‘uale’ as 
vy late. 


The examples which I have given above are sufficient to create 
a strong presumption in favour of the originality of the Latin form 
of the document: and I hope that our subsequent investigation 
of the Latin text itself will set the matter beyond dispute. Mean- 
while I would call attention to a curious notice in the Vision 
of Saturus (c. xili.) which confirms this judgment. There it is 
expressly stated that Perpetua talked in Greek with the bishop 
and presbyter outside the heavenly gate. Such a notice is hard 
to explain if the original document was composed in the Greek 
language. But it is perfectly natural if it was written in Latin. 
Thus, conversely, in the Greek letter of the Churches of Vienne 
and Lyons it is thrice stated expressly that a speaker used the 
Latin tongue (Eus. H. £. v. 1, §§ 20, 44, 52). Indeed it is quite 


THE LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS. 9 


conceivable that Saturus meationed the fact because he did not 
understand Greek himself. 


But while we cannot admit the priority of the Greek docu- 
ment, we may gladly recognise its general excellence as a trans- 
lation, and look to it for great assistance in the emendation of 
- the Latin text. Two instances may here be given of its value 
for this purpose. 


(1) ci. quasi repensatione rerum A. 


Here Holsten edited ‘repensitatione, without recording the 
reading of his MS. ‘ Repensatio’ could scarcely mean anything 
but ‘repayment.’ The Greek has: #s wapovoia Tov TpayyaTtov 
xpo@ueOa, from which Mr Harris at once restored ‘repraesenta- 
tione,’ although he was unaware of the actual reading of A. The 
error is now seen to be a very simple one, when we remember 
that ‘prae’ would be written with the usual abbreviation. It is 
interesting to observe that this palmary emendation is confirmed 
by a passage in one of §. Augustine’s Sermons on these martyrs 
(Migne, P. L. 88 p. 1281): ‘ Hodiernus dies anniuersaria replica- 
tione nobis in memoriam reuocat, et quodammodo repraesentat 
diem, quo sanctae famulae Dei Perpetua et Felicitas,’ &c. 


(2) An important restoration is in c. xvill. where the replace- 
ment of the lost words ‘ad sanguinem’ after ‘a sanguine’ (azo 
aipatos eis aipa) redresses the balance of a sentence which proved 
troublesome to the earlier editors. It is somewhat strange that 
the words ‘ad sanguinem’ should have been lost in both the lines 
of the Latin text: but probably this is due to the fact that ‘ad’ 
was written ‘a,’ and then, as the final ‘m’ does not necessarily 
distinguish the accusative from the ablative (for it seems to have 
been sounded very lightly if at all in the vulgar Latin, and was 
often wrongly inserted or omitted), there would seem to be a 
dittography of ‘a sanguine,’ and so the loss would be certain. 
‘A’ for ‘ad’ occurs just before in the same sentence, ‘a bestias’ 
AB: so too in c. x. (p. 78, 1. 10) where for ‘ad bestias’ we have 
‘a bestiis’ A, and ‘a bestia’ B. We find the same spelling in 
Codex Bezae; ¢.g. Acts xvi. 38, ‘ quae dicta sunt a praetores.’ 


10 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


The MSS. of the Passion of S. Perpetua. 


The first edition, that of Holsten, was made solely from a MS. 
which he found in the Benedictine monastery of Monte Cassino. 
It will be convenient to describe this MS. first ; for, although it is 
not the oldest, it is the most complete. 


1. CoDEX CASINENSIS (A). In the Bibliotheca Casinensis 
(vol. iv. cod. 204) this MS. is described as coming at the end of an 
llth cent. MS. of Cyprian, and being itself written in a 12th 
cent. hand. But at the end of the description of our part of the 
MS., the same Catalogue speaks of it as ‘quod uidetur xi saeculo,’ — 
and this latter judgment coincides with the view of the present 
Archivist, Don Ambrogio Amelli. The opening lines of the 
Martyrdom are given in facsimile opposite p. 164 of the Cata- 
logue. The size of the leaf is 104 inches by 74. Black capitals 
are used at the beginning of sentences, but not for proper names. 
The hand is quite distinct from that of the works of Cyprian, but 
apparently of the same period. According to the present nume- 
ration of leaves the Martyrdom commences on f. 168 r., and ends 
on f. 173 v. There are 32 lines to the page. The Martyrdom 
has no title, but commences at once with the words: Si uetera 
fidei exempla: this is the only Latin authority for the important 
opening section. The edition of Holsten was a posthumous work, 
and his text is marred by many inaccuracies which a careful 
revision with the aid of the MS. would have removed. I have to 
thank the Benedictine Fathers for their kind hospitality shewn to 
me, when I visited the home of their great founder and collated 
this MS. in September 1890. 


2. CoDEX CoMPENDIENSIS (B). Readings from this MS. were 
used to some extent by Ruinart; but his witness is very incom- 
plete and often inaccurate. In his time the MS. belonged to the 
Abbey of Compiégne. It is now in the Bibliotheque Nationale at 
Paris (fonds latin, 17626). It is assigned to the 10th century. Our 
Passion commences on f. 64 with the words: INCIPIT PASSIO SCAE 
FELICITATIS ET PERPETVAE. Reuocatus et felicitas conserua eius. 
Thus the prefatory section is missing: and, generally speaking, the 


THE MSS. OF THE PASSION. 11 


condition of the text is far inferior to that of the Codex Casinensis. 
But it fills wp some serious blanks of that Codex. 


3. CoDEX SALISBURGENSIS, or SARISBURIENSIS (C). For this 
MS. I have searched in vain. Ruinart made use of readings 
from it, and speaks of it as ‘ Ecclesiae Salisburgensis, cuius codicis 
uarias lectiones sapientissimi uiri Antonii Faure Theologi Parisien- 
sis et Remensis Ecclesiae Praepositi beneficio accepimus.’ The 
MSS. of the Domkapitel at Salzburg have been dispersed; and 
most of them seem to have gone either to Vienna or to Munich. 
In neither place could I find any trace of this codex, nor was 
it to be found in the Peterstift at Salzburg. 

In the edition of the Martyrdom published at Oxford, without 
name’, in 1680 at the close of Lactantius De Mortibus Perse- 
cutorum, Holsten’s text is used, with corrections and various 
readings from a MS. spoken of as Codex Sarisburiensis. It is 
evident from a comparison of these readings with those given by 
Ruinart that Cod. Sarisburiensis bears the closest relation to Cod. 
Salisburgensis; indeed they are almost certainly one and the same. 
A confusion has arisen between Salisbury and Salzburg: but who 
has made the mistake we cannot say. The catalogue of the 
Cathedral MSS. at Salisbury, made by Mr Maunde Thompson, 
now Librarian of the British Museum, contains no mention of such 
a MS., and Mr H. J. White, who kindly made enquiry for me on 
the spot, can learn nothing of it. At present therefore we have 
to content ourselves with the testimony of the Oxford edition’, 
supplemented by the notices in Ruinart. But, fortunately, these 
suffice to give us a fair conception of the MS., and to shew its close 
relation to Codex Compendiensis. 


Substantial help for the criticism of the text is afforded by the 
Greek Version (g), the description of which by its discoverer, 
Mr Rendel Harris, is given above on p. 2. I am indebted to 
Mr Harris for having collated afresh on my behalf the Greek text 
printed in his edition with his original transcript of the MS. I 
have not however fully recorded its numerous blunders. 


1 There can be no doubt that it was edited by Thomas Spark of Christ Church, 
who reprinted the De Mortibus in his larger edition of Lactantius in 1684, 

2 ‘When the Oxford editor silently departs in his text from the text of Holsten, 
it is generally safe to assume that he is following Cod. Sarisburiensis. 


12 THE PASSION OF 8S, PERPETUA. 


The problem of the relation of the various authorities which 
have been enumerated is by no means a simple one. Cod. Casi- 
nensis is linked with the Greek Version by the prefatory section, 
which they alone have preserved: Codd. Compendiensis and 
Salisburgensis on the other hand are linked together by its 
omission. But in the body of the work the two last mentioned 
have many striking points of agreement with the Greek Version 
against Cod. Casinensis. At first sight therefore it might seem 
as though this triple combination (BCg) would be the securest 
foundation for the text: but the single fact, that in c. vii. all 
three omit the name of Geta, may teach us to be cautious in our 
judgment. 

I shall first endeavour to shew the relation of Cod. Salisbur- 
gensis (C), as far as we are able to judge of its readings, to Cod. 
Compendiensis (B): and then enquire into their common relation 
to Cod. Casinensis (A). After this I shall examine the relation of 
the Greek Version (g) to the two lines of Latin testimony which 
will thus have been marked out. 


1. B and C are together in certain obvious errors which are 
not found in A. I have already mentioned the omission of the 
prefatory section. This may have been due to a dislike to its 
Montanistic tendency, or to a desire to shorten the treatise for 
Church purposes; or, again, the MS. from which they were 
copied may have lost its first page. Inc. iv. (p. 66, 1. 21) they are 
together against A and g in the insertion of ‘Domini’ before ‘Jesu 
Christi’: this is probably an addition made, as so often, for 
liturgical purposes. They are probably wrong again in the same 
chapter (p. 68, ]. 1) in reading ‘ eleuauit,’ as against ‘ elecit’ A, and 
mpoonveyxev of the Greek. 

More certain errors are the following: 


. 76, 1. 14, afa] Ag ; aqua BC 

. 78, 1. 15, carne] Ag ; carcere BC 

86, 1. 14, iudicii BC; om. Ag 

86, 1. 15, omnes] Ag; multi BC 

90, 1. 3, apro] Ag ; aprum BC 

90, 1. 5, substrictus] Ag ; subreptus B ; subrectus C 

c. xx. p. 90, 1. 10, et reticulis indutae] A (displaced in g); om. BC. 


e 9 
bt bd 
ao 
Bi: 

SP Mr yy 


THE MSS. OF THE PASSION. 13 


On the other hand B and C are right when A is wrong in the 
following cases: 


c. ii, pp. 62, 1. 19, Saturninus] BCeg; om. A 
c. ili, p. 64,1 1, inquam] BCg; inquit A 
c.iv. p. 66, 1. 8, aeream] Ce (auream B); om. A 
9 p. 66, 1. 17, qui(a) ipse nos aedificauerat] BCg ; om. A 
” p. 68, 1. 4, canum] BCg ; sanum A 
c.ix. op. 74, 1. 20, mouerent] BCg; mouerentur A 
cx. op. 78, 1. 4, non calcans] BCg ; concaleans A 
c. xi. p. 82, 1]. 6, graece] BCg; om. A 
” p. 82, 1, 11, factionibus] BC; fatigationibus A ; om. g 
c. xvi. p. 86, 1. 4, humanius] BCg; manibus A. 


Hence we may conclude that B and C have acommon ancestor, 
which is independent of A. 


2. The instances already quoted enable us to see that the 
Greek Version cannot have been made either from A or from the 
immediate ancestor of B and C: for it sometimes has a right 
reading with A as against B and ©, and sometimes a right 
reading with B and © as against A. We may now proceed to 
enquire with which of these two lines of text it has the closest 
affinities. To do this we must examine the mistakes which it has 
in common with the one or the other. 

I am not aware of any instance in which it can be shewn with 
certainty that A and g have the same mistake, while B and C 
have retained the true reading’. On the other hand there are 
many cases in which BCg are wrong together, as against A. Thus 
in ¢. iii. p. 64, 1. 6, we must almost certainly retain ‘ profecto’ A, 
against ‘profectus’ BCg: and in c. iv. p. 66, L. 7, ‘fidenter’ A, against 
‘fidens’ BC and qiotews tAnpns ovca g. In this latter chapter 
(p. 66, 1. 18) ‘adtendens ascenderet’ of A is certainly right: Band C 
read ‘ascendens adtenderet,’ and the paraphrase in g seems to 
be due to the attempt to make some sense out of this. Further 
examples may be gathered from the apparatus at the foot of our 
printed text. 


1 An apparent exception to this statement is in c. xix. (p. 90, 1. 6), where B and 
C have a corrupt sentence, not found in A and g, about Pudens feeding the bear. 
Thave not taken this into the text, as my theory of the genealogy of the MSS. leads 
me to regard it as a gloss. But possibly it was corrupted at an early date and 
consequently omitted by A and also by the Greek translator. 


14 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


As a rule the readings of C are only preserved to us in cases 
where the editors have supposed them to be preferable to the text 
given by Holsten: so that its more obvious blunders have no 
doubt been passed over in silence. But if we may accept B 
as giving generally the text of the ancestor of B and C, we may 
find many more examples of coincidence in error between that 
ancestor and the Greek Version. Thus in c. vi. p. 70, 1.17, A reads 
‘et cum staret pater ad me deiciendam’; but B has the corrupt 
reading ‘et contemptaret (for ‘cum temptaret’) pater me deicien- 
dam’: g renders this by cal ws éorovdaley 6 ratip wou KaTa- 
Banrety amd ths époroyias. In c¢. vii. p. 72,1. 14, we have ‘cum 
moreretur’ A; ‘cum moraretur’ B; this latter being represented 
in g by wepiov ért. A striking instance is found in ¢. xii. p. 80,1. 12: 

angeli quattuor stabant, qui introeuntes uestierunt stolas 

candidas: et A 
erant angeli quattuor introeuntes et nos uestiti stolas can- 
didas B 

Here ‘introeuntes’ has passed in B from the accusative into 
the nominative case: and this is reproduced in the Greek Version, 
which however must have been made from a text less hopelessly 
corrupt than that now given in B: 
eicerOovtes of tTécoapes ayyedou évédvcay nuds AEvKAS oTONAS. 

In the same chapter (p. 80, 1. 22) we have ‘stemus et stetimus’ 
A; ‘stemus et stemus’ B. The reading in g, crafouev Kai mpoc- 
evéwpucOa, looks like an attempt at restoring sense by the aid of a 
liturgical formula. 

Thus we are led to postulate for BCg a common ancestor 
independent of A. This ancestor among other defects had lost 
the name of Geta, but it retained the preface, which is wanting in 
B and C. To it I am also inclined to attribute the commence- 
ment of the confusion as to the date and locality of our Martyrs, 
which is found in the Greek Version and in the Short Latin 
recension. As to date, the omission of Geta’s name opened the 
door to conjecture; for it is the only decisive note of time in 
the piece: and with regard to place, it is interesting to compare 
the phrase ‘in ciuitate Turbitana, in the title of C, with the words 
éy woAet Sovxpitavev (for QovpBitdvev) TH pixpotépa, which in 
the Greek Version immediately follows the prefatory section which 
C has omitted. 


THE SHORT LATIN ACTS. 15 


It will be seen from my text that of these two lines of testimony, 
A and BCg, I have almost always given the preference to the 
former. Again and again A gives a more difficult reading which 
commends itself on further investigation, but which is exchanged 
in BCg for something easier, though less idiomatic or less forcible. 


The Origin and Use of the Short Latin Acts. 


The longer form of the Martyrdom was obviously inconvenient 
for the annual commemoration, especially in localities which were 
not directly interested in the African Church, and at a time 
when other martyrs had to be commemorated on the same day’. 
Consequently the time arrived when the story of our martyrs had 
to be rewritten to bring it within a more manageable compass. 
At what period this was done it is perhaps not possible to de- 
termine: but it was probably after the confusion as to their locality 
and date had been already effected (see below, p. 25). But the 
manner in which it was done is plain to see. The old story was 
lacking in the one feature which characterises so many of the 
fictitious narratives of martyrdoms, and to which the appellation 
‘Acta’ more especially refers. There was no account of the pro- 
longed controversy between the martyrs and the cruel or the 
kind-hearted judge. This had to be supplied: and the new ma- 
terial carries with it its own condemnation. No one who appre- 
ciates the noble and dignified picture of Perpetua in the longer 
Martyrdom will for a moment believe that before the proconsul, 
and again in answer to her father’s appeal, she punned upon her 
name. Nor is it likely that Felicitas when asked whether she had 
a husband, replied, ‘Habeo quem nunc contemno. For the rest 
the compiler has made a very bad use of the longer form, which 
must have been fresh in his memory, if not actually before him. 
He has marred everything that he has touched. 

The verbal coincidences are too close to allow of the supposition 
that his narrative is independent of the longer form: as may be 


1 Hiven in the old Carthaginian Calendar Septimia comes on the same day with 
our martyrs. In the old Syrian Martyrology we read, ‘Perpetua, Saturnilus and 
ten other Confessors.’ In the Menology of Basil and in the Menaeum Trypho 
takes precedence of them. In the Roman Breviary they at last give way altogether 
before 8. Thomas Aquinas. , 


16 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


seen, to take a single instance, when he reproduces in his own 
manner the rhetorical contrast of ¢. xvill. ‘a sanguine ad san- 
guinem,’ &c. But on the other hand towards the end he most 
strangely deserts the authority which should have kept him right, 
and says that Saturus and Perpetua were devoured by lions. 
The brevity of the account of the scene in the amphitheatre may 
have been due to his having already exhausted the space allotted 
to him; but the error is hard to explain, for it does not seem 
that his copy of the original Martyrdom was defective at the close. 

It is not improbable that the Latin MS. which the abbreviator 
used was either that from which the Greek Version had been made, 
or some other descendant of the ancestor of BCg. For, if this 
were so, we can account for certain strange points of resemblance 
' between the Greek Version and the Short Latin, which deserve to 
be noticed somewhat in detail. 

The short Latin Acts commence with the words: “Facta per- 
secutione sub Valeriano et Gallieno, comprehensi sunt uenerabiles 
uiri iuuenes, Saturus et Saturninus, duo fratres, Reuocatus et 
Felicitas soror eius, et Perpetua, quae erat,” &c. The Greek 
text begins with two titles, the first of which is a mere heading, 
correcting the false date of the second and earlier title from 
vovats Pevpovapiats to TH pd Teccapwy vovev Pevpovapiwr, 
and adding evAdynoov, the ejaculation of the Reader. But the 
second is a complete sentence, as though it were intended to serve 
as the commencement of the Martyrdom: ’Eat Ovandepidvou Kat 
Tarsnvod Simypos éyévero, év © éuaptipnaar ot aytot Latupos, 
Laroupviros, ‘Peoveatos, Ueprerova, Onrtxntaty, vovats Devpov- 
apias. After this commences the translation of the Long Latin 
Martyrdom. 

Now the correspondence between this sentence and the com- 
mencement of the Short Latin is very striking. We have (1) the 
same mistake as to the emperors, (2) the phrase ‘persecution 
arose, (8) the first place given to Saturus in the list of martyrs, 
(4) the omission of Secundulus. 

It is hard to explain these coincidences except on the hypothesis 
that the Greek is a direct translation of Latin words prefixed to 
the Martyrdom in the copy used by the translator: and that 
the Latin abbreviator found the same words in his copy, and 


THE SHORT LATIN ACTS. 17 


modified them (1) by inserting ‘ comprehensi’ and ‘ iuuenes,’ from 
‘apprehensi’ and ‘adolescentes’ at the beginning of ¢. ii.; (2) by 
introducing ‘duo fratres’ and ‘soror eius,’ perhaps from his own 
imagination; (3) by placing Perpetua last, in order to run on 
with the fuller description of her which he has drawn from ce. 11. 

Moreover we can explain in this way how the Greek translator 
has come by his wrong date, the nones of February. ‘ Nonis 
Martiis’ still survives in the title of C, and it is found at the 
close of the Short Latin. This is the unvarying date of the Com- 
memoration in the west, and indeed it is retained in the old 
Syriac Martyrology (see below, p. 23). But the Greek date was 
the second of February, He seems therefore to have taken his 
day from the Latin heading; whilst he, or a subsequent copyist of 
his work, has altered the month from a recollection of his own 
calendar. 

I have already referred to the puzzling insertion in the Greek 
of the words év adder Povxpitdvey (sic)” TH ptxpotépa, and have 
noticed their correspondence with the words ‘in ciuitate Turbi- 
tana’ in the heading of C. They correspond still more closely 
with ‘in ciuitate Turbitanorum,’ which is the reading of many 
early MSS. of the Short Latin: and 77 prxporépa no doubt points 
to an original ‘ minore,’ which may have been afterwards neglected 
as unnecessary, or may have fallen out after ‘-norum’ (TURBITA- 
NORVMINORE). 


Tn c. 11, Perpetua’s age is given thus by our various authorities: 


Erat autem ipsa circiter annorum uiginti duo, A. 

Erat autem ipsa annorum circiter uiginti et duo, B, 
"Hy 8€ avry érév elxoot dvo. 

Annorum enim erat illa duorum et uiginti, Short Latin. 


1 The Commemoration of both Trypho and Perpetua is placed on Feb. 1 in the 
Menaeum; probably to keep Feb. 2 clear for the Feast of the Purification. But in 
the Basilian Menology (see below, p. 21) both of these saints are commemorated 
on Feb. 2. , 

2 In the Menaeum (see below, p. 21) we find Oov8pirdvwy, which in MSS. which 
used the u-shaped 8 would be almost undistinguishable from Oovxpirdvwv. In the 
account of the 7th Council of Carthage by Joh. Zonaras (Migne, Patr. Lat. 11. 1090) 
we read of OxjdaTos dri OovpBav. In the Latin (ibid. p. 1062) it is *‘Sedatus a 
Tuburbo.’ 


R. 2 


18 THE PASSION OF S, PERPETUA. 


It seems probable that the ancestor of the BCg group, with 
which our theory connects the Short Latin, had omitted ‘circiter ’ 
from the text, but had retained it in the margin. It reappears in 
a new place in B, but it is lost altogether in the Greek Version, 


and in the Short Latin. 
At the close of Perpetua’s first interview with her father we 


read: 


Long Latin. 


Tune pater motus hoc 
uerbo, mittit se in me ut 
oculos mihi erueret: sed 
uexauit tantum et profecto 
(profectus BC) est uictus 
cum argumentis diaboli. 


Short Latin. 

Tune pater eius audito 
hocuerbo irruit super eam, 
uolens oculos eius eruere ; 
et exclamans confusus e- 
gressus est foras. 


Greek Version. 

Tére 6 rarip mov Tapax- 
Oeis TwHSE TE Ab-ywH ewEeNOwv 
HOeEAno Ev Tos dPBarpovs 
fou é£opvéar’ erecta pbvov 
Kpdias €&NGev viKy- 
Gels pera Tav TOD diaBdrou 
LeyXav ov. 


Here we may note the correspondence of ‘uolens’ and 70éAncev, 


and more especially of ‘exclamans’ and xpafas. 
p p 


The latter may 


point to a misreading of ‘uexauit’ as ‘uocauit.’ B is in confusion 


here, reading ‘ uexauero’: the reading of C is not recorded. 


*Pro- 


fectus’ of B and C reappears as ¢£7\Oev and ‘egressus est foras 1 


In c. vii. we have noticed the loss of the name ‘ Getae’ from 
BCg. Corresponding to this we read in the Short Latin in one 
place ‘in Caesaris natale, and in another ‘die natali Caesaris’ ; 
but Geta’s name is absent. 


In c. xvill. we read as follows: 


Long Latin. 
Lotura post partum 
baptismo secundo. 


Short Latin. 
De lauatione post par- 
tum balnei sanguinis effu- 
sione meruit relauari. 


Greek Version. 


Méddouca Aodcac@at pe- 
Ta Tov ToKeTov BaTTICLe 
devrépp, Tovrégre Ty Ldly 
aluart. 


Here it would seem as though ‘baptismo secundo’ had evoked 
a marginal gloss, which was adopted as a correction by the abbre- 
viator, and incorporated as an addition by the Greek translator. 


1 In one of the preceding sentences, ‘Pater, inquam, uides uerbi gratia’ &c., the 


reading of: B is ‘uidens’ : 


and it can hardly be a mere coincidence that ‘uidens’ 


appears in the same sentence in some of the oldest MSS. of the Short Latin. 


THE SHORT LATIN ACTS, 19 


But by far the most remarkable modification which the Greek 
has in common with the Short Latin is found in Perpetua’s first 
Vision (c. iv.). Here the Greek translator tells us that the ladder 
was so narrow that no one could go up, save only one by himself 
alone’. He then leaves out the epithet ‘prior,’ which was applied 
to Saturus and which suggested that he was not the only one to 
climb: and presently he omits the words ‘et ascendi, and so 


leaves Perpetua to find her garden at the ladder’s foot. 


It cannot 


be a mere coincidence that in this he is in complete harmony 


with the Short Latin Acts. 


It will make the matter clearer, and 


at the same time serve to illustrate the loose way in which the 
abbreviator has dealt with his materials, if we transcribe the three 
documents at this point in full. 


Long Latin. 


Video scalam aeream 
mirae magnitudinis per- 
tingentem usque ad cae- 
lum, et angustam: per 
quam nonnisi singuli as- 
cendere possent: et in 
lateribus scalae omne 
genus ferramentorum in- 
fixum. Erant ibi gladii, 
lanceae, hami, macherae: 
ut si quis neglegenter aut 
non sursum adtendens 
ascenderet, laniaretur, et 
carnes eius inhaererent 
ferramentis. Et erat sub 
ipsa scala draco cubans 
mirae magnitudinis, qui 
ascendentibus  insidias 
praesiabat, et exterrebat 
ne ascenderent. Ascendit 
autem Saturus prior, qui 
postea se propter nos ultro 
tradiderat, quia ipse nos 
aedificauerat et tune cum 


Short Latin. 


Vidi in uisu hae nocte 
scalam aeream mirabili 
altitudine usque ad cae- 
lum, et ita erat angusta 
ut nonnisi wus per eam 
ascendere posset. Dextra 
uero laeuaque inerant fixi 
culivit et gladii ferrei, ut 
nullus cirea se nisi ad 
caelum respicere posset. 
Sub ea uero iacebat latens 
draco teterrimus ingenti 
forma, ut prae metu eius 
quiuis ascendere formi- 
daret. Vidi etiam ascen- 
dentem per eam Saturum 
usque ad sursum, et respi- 
cientem ad nos et dicen- 
tem: Ne uereamini hune 
draconem qui iacet; con- 
fortamini in gratia Christi, 
ascendite et nolite timere, 
ut mecum partem habere 
possitis. Vidietiam tuzta 


Greek Version. 

EtSov xAiwaxa yadxhp . 
Gavuacrod piKous’ Hs 7O 
LKos &xpts ovpavod” orevy 
dé Hv, ws pndéva Ov adris 
StvacGat ef ph povaxdy 
éva dvaBivare é& éxaré- 
pwy 6é€ Tay Tis KAluaKos 
epaay 
TWENTY LEVOV 


a = > 3 
may eldos nv épu- 
fipuv, 


Sopdrwr, dyklorpwv, paxat- 


éKet 


pav, dBedtoxwy: ta was 
6 dvaBalvay dued@s kat wh 
Lf 4 “ > f 

avaBrXémwv Tots aKovTioss 
Tas odpkas omapaxOeln’ jv 
bé bm’ avTy TH KAimaKe 
dpdxwy breppeyédys, bs 5H 
Tovs avaBaivovras év7dpev- 
ev, é€xOapB@v Orws by 
ToAR@OoLv dvaBaiver. ap- 
é€Bn 6é 6 
ee af pad e A tz 
Uorepov Oc’ jas éxwv mwapé- 


Zdrvpos' 6s 6} 


dwKey éaurdv* avTod yap 
kal otkodouy Yuey* GAN’ 
OTe cuveNiPOnuey dry. ws 


1 Apparently povaxds efs in this place means ‘one man at a time,’ and not ‘one 
monk’; but it must be admitted that the translator has been unfortunate in his 
choice of so ambiguous an expression. 


2—2 


20 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


adducti sumus praesens 
non fuerat. Et peruenit 
in caput scalae, et con- 


uertit se et dixit mihi: - 


Perpetua, sustineo te: 
sed uide ne te mordeat 
draco ille. Et dixi ego: 
Non me nocebit, in no- 
mine Iesu Christi. Et 
desub ipsa scala quasi 
timens me lente eiecit 
caput: et quasi primum 
gradum calcarem, calcaui 
ili caput. Ht ascendi, et 
uidi spatium immensum 


scalam horium ingentem, 
copiosissimum et amoe- 
num, etc. 

* 


oty mpos Th Expov Tis KXL- 
paxos qmapeyévero, éaTpa- 
on Kai elev’ Tleprerova, 
mepysévas oe’ aGdAAG BAEte 
bn oe 6 Spdxwy Sdxn, Kat 
Od wh me Brdyn 
év dvéuate "Inoot Xpiorod. 
kal broxdtw THs KAluakos 
awoel PoBovperds pe Tpéua 
Thy Kepahhy mpoojveyKer’ 
kal ws els Tov prov Baé- 
pov HOéEANGA éwtBFvat, 
Tip Kepadhy abrob érarnoa. 
Kai eidov éxel xijrov pé- 
yloTov, K.T.N. 


elroy * 


horti, ete. 


It seems then that the Greek translator considered that Per- 
petua’s triumph consisted in treading on the dragon’s head, and 
not im climbing the ladder: and that he was led to conceive of 
the garden, as the writer of the Short Acts has also apparently 
done}, as being at the foot of the ladder (é«e?, ‘iuxta scalam’) and 
not at its summit. 


The Sarum Breviary is a good instance of the use which was 
made of the work of the Latin abbreviator. There we find it 
distributed into three lections, as follows: (1) ‘Facta itaque per- 
secutione—egressus est foras’; (2) ‘Orantes uero—dignos esse 
effectos. (8) ‘Videns uero proconsul—in saecula saeculorum. 
Amen. So that nothing is omitted, except the miserable alter- 
cation between the Martyrs and their judge. It is of course open 
to us to suppose that this was itself a later interpolation ; but the 
style of it is too like the rest to favour this view. 

The old Roman Breviary (quoted by Holsten, p. 72) contains 
the same matter, though in a somewhat embellished form. But 
from the later Roman Breviaries our Martyrs have been ousted 
altogether by 8. Thomas Aquinas. 


1 In the Sarum Breviary we have the interesting variant ‘circa scalam,’ which 
may at any rate shew the interpretation that would naturally be put on the Short 
Latin in this place. 


t 


THE SHORT LATIN ACTS. 21 


It is interesting to trace the struggle between the competing 
commemorations in the local Breviaries. Thus in the copy in the 
Cambridge University Library of the very rare printed Breviary 
of Upsala (Stockholm, 1496) we find SS. Perpetua and Felicitas 
with a collect in the text, but S. Thomas is written in at the 
side as ‘eodem die,’ and his collect runs round the margin. In 
the Calendar of the Roman Breviary of 1728 S. Thomas is entered 
on July 15 (‘ canoniz. 1323’), but with a cross reference to March 7, 
where he is found in brackets after our Martyrs. 

In the Breviary of Quimper in Brittany (Paris, 1835) they 
still hold their own unchallenged; and the lection is a really 
admirable abbreviation of the Long Latin, without a single mis- 
take or unworthy alteration, and with the simple addition of the 
true date and locality: ‘sub Seuero Imperatore, Carthagine in 
Africa” This same lection in a slightly corrupted form is found 
also in the Breviary of Rennes (1822). 

The Greek day of the Commemoration is now (see p. 17 n.) 
the first of February, and under this date in the Menaeum we find 
a brief lection, which wrongly describes Perpetua as é« méXews 
OovBpitaverv ths Adpsxns, but rightly states that she and Feli- 
citas were tossed by a mad cow: so that it must be independent 
of the Short Acts. 

In the Menology of Basil we find a double entry, which is 
interesting in connection with the transference of the festival. 
Under March 14 we have after S. Euschemon of Lampsacus and 
before S. Alexander of Pydna: cat d@dnows TeV ayiwy papTipev 
Latvpov, Satoupvinrov, ‘Peveatov, Uepmerovas, cal Dirnxerarys 
év 7h “Popn paptupnoavtor. The writer was no doubt misled as 
to the locality by the absence of any definite statement in the 
Longer Latin which he had used in his previous entry. Under 
February 2 we have a most extraordinary mutilation of the story, 
which is worth reproducing in full, as it illustrates the controversy 
between Hast and West on the subject of Purgatory. 

"AOAnots THv ayiwv Ilepmerovas, Latupov, ‘Pevedtov, Latup- 
virov, Lexovvdov Kab Pnrwxvradrns. 

‘H tod xpiorod waptus Ieprrerova jv é« THs ydpas "Adpixgs’ 
mel O€ TOY YpLoTOY Wpodoyel, KpaTnOcioa Tapa Tav ‘EAAnVOY 
mTpoanxOn Te THS Yopas apyovTs peta TaV AOLTOV ayiwrv. Hv dé 


22, THE. PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


Th dyia Bpépos vrouatiov Kat adeAdds dvoywa Acwwoxparys. 
TyLwpobvTaL oY Tapa Tod apxovTos. ita éuBaddovTas eis 
guranjy. kat Oewpel 1} ayia Kat bvap cKdday yarkhjy pOdvov- 
cay dns yhs eis ovpavov, éxovoav eis ta Sto pépyn eumernypéva 
TdavTa Ta TOY KOAaaTHpioV eldy Kal SpaKkovta UTO THY oKaaD 
KoAVovTa TOs avaBaivovtas’ Kat Tov ayiov Latipov dvaBavta 
Kat otpadévta mpdos avtiy Kat réyovTa’ Mirép pov Llepzrerova, 
Tepipévn ce. Hv Sé Kal 6 adeAdds avis ev érépa hudaxn’ Kal opa 
Kal wept avtod, 6Tt waplotato Ackavy VdaTos’ Kal avedov erivev 
é& avis’ Kat eyva bre éreXevTyoe. Kai TO Tpwl aT pev peTa 
Onrcxitdtns vd Sapaddewv aypiov xepatiobeicar anéOavov' of 
dé Aoutrol eodaynear. 

The use of oxdXayv, and not xAiwaxa, as well as other differ- 
ences in the Greek words, points to the fact that this summary is 
independent of the Greek version. 


Were our Martyrs Thuburbitan ? 


In the original Latin Passion of 8. Perpetua, as contained in 
the Monte Cassino codex, no locality whatever is assigned to the 
Martyrs. This is natural enough in a contemporary document 
intended for the use of the African Church, especially if the 
Martyrs belonged to Carthage and suffered there. Indeed the 
omission in itself suggests that they were Carthaginians’. This 
view is confirmed by the statement of Victor Vitensis that their 
remains rested in a Basilica at Carthage which bore their names. 
After speaking of the desolation wrought by the Vandals among 
the public buildings of Carthage generally, he goes on to say: 
‘Et ut de necessariis loquar, basilicam maiorem ubi corpora 
sanctarum martyrum Perpetuae atque Felicitatis sepulta sunt, 
Celerinae uel Scilitanorum et alias quas non destruxerunt, suae 
religioni licentia tyrannica mancipauerunt’ (Vict. Vit. L 3 § 9). 
This of course does not preclude the possibility of their having 
been brought from another town to suffer at Carthage, as was the 
case with the Scillitan Martyrs. 


1 The silence of 8S. Augustine, who frequently refers to our Martyrs, is capable 
of the same interpretation: see below, p. 24. 


WERE OUR MARTYRS THUBURBITAN ? 93 


Moreover in the old Roman Calendar’ which goes back to 
the time of Liberius in the middle of the fourth century, 
we read simply: ‘Nonis Martii, Perpetuae et Felicitatis Africae.’ 
In Prosper’s Chronicon (Migne, Patr. Lat: 51, p. 566) under the 
head of the Fifth Persecution, in the time of Severus, we have: 
‘Qua tempestate Perpetua et Felicitas pro Christo passae sunt, 
nonis Martiis, apud Carthaginem Africae in castris bestiis de- 
putatae Antonino II. et Geta.’ This notice reappears almost 
word for word in Bede, De sew aetat. (Ed. Basil. 1563, 11. 
185). And other authorities might be cited in the same sense”. 

The old Carthaginian Calendar, discovered by Mabillon in the 
binding of a book and published by him with annotations in his 
Vetera Analecta®, unfortunately fails us at this pomt. It begins 
with ‘xiii Kal. Maias’ and ends with ‘xiii Kal. Mart.,’ so that the 
nones of March are not contained in it. Mabillon says that this is 
because during Lent no such festivals were celebrated in the 
African Church: Ruinart thinks that we have not the whole of 
the Calendar. 

Thus far then we have no indication that the Martyrs were 
Thuburbitan. But in a short Roman Martyrology (Holst. p. 60) 
we read: ‘Nonis Martii, In Mauritania ciuitate Tuburbitanorum 
SS. Martyrum Perpetuae et Felicitatis. This notice is found 
elsewhere; and in the Martyrology included in Bede’s works (Ed. 
Basil. 1563, 111. 897) it is combined with further statements and 


1 Commonly called the Bucherian after its discoverer, Bouchier: printed by 
Buin. p. 617. 

2 See Acta Bolland. under Mar. 7, and Analecta Bolland. u. 16, where in the 
Martyrol. Trevirense we find: ‘{Non.] Mar. Africa passio Perpetuae . Felicitatis . 
Saturi.” For the Basilian Menology see above, p. 21. The Syriac Martyrology 
published by Dr Wright from the old Nitrian MS. in the British Museum (Journ. of 
Sacr. Lit. vol, vit. N.S. pp. 45—56, 423-432) gives the following entry, which is 
especially interesting as being almost the only mention of a Western Martyrdom 
which finds a place here : 


ral aia camio oo eaiadts dintis chsarsa 
CFA, TAT wa waluyalwa 
Translated by Dr Wright: ‘Adar (March) 7. In Africa, of the number of the 
ancients, Perpetua, Saturninus (MS. Saturnilus), and ten other Confessors.’ 


3 im. 398. The Calendar without the notes is given by Ruin. pp. 618 f., and 
with additional notes by Miinter, Prim. Eccl. Afr. pp. 251 ff. 


2 4 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


among them the date ‘sub Seuero principe’; and the whole entry 
is reproduced in Ado under March 7*. 

It is to be observed that in all these notices the date, if given 
at all, is given correctly. But now a new confusion awaits us. In 
the Roman Martyrology published by Galesinius (Holst. p. 74) we 
have as the locality ‘Thuburbae in Mauritania, and as the date 
‘Valeriano et Galieno imperatvuribus. On this Galesinius remarks 
that though the statement is to be found elsewhere, yet ‘ ueteres 
emendatioresque rei Ecclesiasticae annales aliter ostendunt; quorum 
auctoritatem secuti reponimus, Septimio Seuero imp. anno scilicet 
Christi ccirx, Antonino It et Geta Consulibus®’ 

This is just the confusion which meets us in the Short Latin 
Acts and in the Greek version of the Long Latin. How are we to 
account for it ? 

In the old Carthaginian Calendar we have the following entry: 
‘im Kal. Ag. Sanctarum Tuburbitanarum et Septimiae.” And in 
Ado’s Roman Martyrology (and, with variations, elsewhere) under 
the same date: ‘Apud Africam, ciuitate Tuburbo Lucernariae, 
natale sanctarum uirginum Maximae, Donatillae et Secundae: quae 
persecutione Gallieni sub Anolino indice passae sunt, &c, &c. 
Thus the Thuburbitan Martyrs are Maxima, Donatilla and Secunda, 
and they suffer under Anulinus in the persecution of Gallienus. 

Together with this we may set the fact that S. Augustine, 
who does not mention these famous Martyrs by their names, 
speaks of the festival of the Thuburbitan Martyrs*® in a sermon 
De Contemptu Mundi (Kid. Ben. v. 1338, note b) first published 
by Sirmondi. Now althongh S. Augustine never connects S. 
Perpetua and her companions with Thuburbo, yet Sirmondi at 
once identified the Thuburbitan Martyrs with them. Perhaps the 
mistake was made by others long before, and may even have been 
the source of the whole confusion. 


1 Compare the confused entries in Martyrol. Fuldense (dnal. Boll. 1. 9), and in 
the Hieronymian Martyrol. ex cod. Bernensi (Brux. 1881), where some of the same 
names are repeated three times in the entry, and we have: ‘In Mauritania ciuitate 
Turpitanorum passio SS. Perpetuae et Felicitatis.’ 

2 But Antoninus II. and Geta =—205, whereas Antoninus III. and Geta II. 
= 208. 


3 To add to our perplexity there is a variant here; Suburbitanarum. 


WERE OUR MARTYRS THUBURBITAN ? 25 


When we examine the story of the Thuburbitan Martyrs as 
given by Ado (July 30), we find great reason to doubt its genuine- 
ness. For, in the first place, they cannot have suffered in the 
reign of Gallienus at all. For in the Acta Crispimae (Ruin. p. 450) 
the proconsul Anulinus mentions their names to Crispina, as being 
her ‘consortes, and threatens that she shall suffer as they have 
already suffered. But these Acts mention Diocletian and Maximian 
as the reigning emperors; and this must be the right date for 
Anulinus’. . 

Moreover their whole story bears a suspicious resemblance to 
that of S. Perpetua and her companions. Thus, they are exposed 
to the beasts, they kiss each other in the arena ‘to complete the 
martyrdom with the peace’,’ and because the bear refuses to 
injure them they are put to the sword. 

I would venture therefore to suggest that there has been 
complete confusion between our Martyrs and the Thuburbitans of 
July 30, whose names only seem to have survived and whose 
story had to be written down from imagination. The Thuburbitans 
gave their locality and their own false date (Gallienus) to our 
Martyrs*, and received in turn some of the details of our Passion. 


1 Tuseus and Anulinus were consuls in 295. Optatus Milevitanus refers to 
Anulinus as a persecutor under Diocletian (c, Donat. 111. p. 76, ed. Paris, 1676: ‘in 
prouincia proconsulari...Annulinus, in Numidia Florus’). 

There were the ‘dies turificationis,’ C. I. L. Afr. 6700. The earlier Anulinus, 
the general of Severus, was consul in 199, and also proconsul of Africa, ibid. 1170. 
We find Anulinus as a persecutor very frequently: e.g. in the Passion of Felix, 
Ruin. p. 356; of Saturninus and Dativus, Ruin. p. 383 ; of Mammarius, Mabillon, 
Vet. Anal. tv. 93; of the Alatinensian Martyrs, ibid. rv. 104, and even in Italy 
and in the time of Nero in the obviously fictitious Greek acts of Nazarius and 
Gervasius, Migne, Symeon Metaphr. m1. 895. 

2 *Quae cum inducerentur, in media arena osculatae sunt se inuicem, ut mar- 
tyrium pace complerent.’ Compare Perp. c. xxi., ‘ante iam osculati inuicem, ut 
martyrium per solemnia pacis consummarent.’ 

3 This was the more easily done because the original Latin Passion seems to 
have given no locality and no date for the Martyrdom, if we except the incidental 
notice, ‘natale tunc Getae Caesaris.’ The name of Geta moreover survives only 
in Holsten’s MS. It is quite conceivable that it was erased in some copies almost 
at once in consequence of the well-known action of Caracalla. Compare Dio 77. 12 
(quoted by Clinton): e¢ tis éypawe 7d bvoua 7d Tod Téra pdvov, 7 elre pdvov, etOds 
amadero* S0ev ob’ ev tals kwumdlats of ronal é7: abt éxpGvrTo, Viven if persecution 
had ceased, it would still be dangerous to recite the name of Geta in commemorating 
the Martyrs. 


26 THE PASSION OF 8. PERPETUA. 


Another consideration which may shake our belief in the 
assignment of our Martyrs to Thuburbo is the frequently repeated 
phrase ‘Mauritania in ciuitate Tuburbitanarum. For although 
there are two towns in proconsular Africa within a radius of forty 
miles from Carthage called respectively Thuburbo Maius and 
Thuburbo Minus, we have no evidence of any town of that name 
in the Mauritanian district. So that we may regard the whole 
statement as probably the fiction of a later time. 

If the account of the matter which I have here suggested is a 
reasonable one, it will be at least hazardous henceforward to speak 
of 8. Perpetua and her companions as Thuburbitan Martyrs’. 


The influence of the Shepherd of Hermas upon the Visions 
of the Martyrs. 


It is a familiar experience with us all that our dreams can 
frequently be traced back to thoughts which have been present to 
our waking moments; and that their materials, in whatever 
strange combinations they may present themselves, are derived 
largely, if not exclusively, from our recollections. If therefore 
it should appear on examination that many of the details in the 
Visions of the African Martyrs may have been suggested by the 
Shepherd of Hermas, we shall not for that reason be tempted 
to question their genuineness, unless it can at the same time be 
further shewn that the phraseology in which they are narrated 
bears a suspiciously close relation to that of Hermas. 

Before entering on this enquiry it may be well to note to what 
extent the Visions are indebted to narratives contained in the 
Canonical Scriptures. We can scarcely doubt that the Ladder in 
Perpetua’s first Vision was suggested by the story of Jacob’s 
Dream. Compare the words of Perpetua, ‘Video scalam aeream 
mirae magnitudinis pertingentem usque ad caelum,’ with Gen. 


1 The epithet was challenged by Valois in his preface to the Passion of S. 
Perpetua, and has also been rejected by Miinter (Prim. Eccl. Afr. p. 208) and 
recently by Pillet, who quotes with satisfaction from the Letters Apostolic of 
Leo XIII., who, in restoring the ‘Apostolic Chair’ of Carthage in 1884, refers to the 
Martyrs as Carthaginians (Histoire de Sainte Perpétue, p. 66). 


THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS AND THE VISIONS. 27 


xxviil. 12, Vulg." ‘Viditque in somnio scalam stantem super terram, 
et cacumen illius tangens caelum. It is interesting in this 
connection to recall a passage in the Acts of Montanus and 
Lucius, which are a base imitation of our Martyrdom, where the 
message of the Lord in the Vision of Victor is: ‘Dic illis signum 
Jacobi’ (Ruin. p. 232). 

Again, in the Vision in which she first sees Dinocrates, we read : 
‘Et mter me et lum grande erat diastema, ita ut uterque ad 
inuicem accedere non possemus.’ With this we naturally compare 
S. Lue. xvi. 26, Vulg. ‘Inter nos et uos chaos magnum firmatum 
est: ut hi qui uolunt hinc transire ad uos non possint, neque inde 
huc transmeare.’ 

Again in the Vision of her conflict with the Egyptian we have 
obvious reminiscences of Gen. ili. The Egyptian, whom afterwards 
she knows to be the devil, rolls himself in the dust, and presently 
endeavours to catch her by the feet; but she tramples upon his 
head. Here we have the conflict between the Woman and the 
Serpent, and perhaps even a testimony to the antiquity of the 
rendering : ‘ipsa conteret caput tuum, et tu insidiaberis calcaneo 
eius. Nor is it unreasonable to combine with this the appearance 
of the devil in the first Vision as a dragon ‘qui ascendentibus 
insidias praestabat.’ 

In the Vision of Saturus we have the snow-white hair of the 
Lord (cf. Apoc. i. 14) and the elders, ‘seniores,’ standing round 
Him; and ‘stolae candidae’ and ‘stetimus ante thronum, 
answering to ‘stantes ante thronum amicti stolis albis’ in Apoc. vii. 
9. It is possible even that the strange phrase ‘et de manu sua 
traiecit nobis in faciem’ may have been suggested by -the last 
words of the same chapter; ‘et absterget Deus omnem lacrimam 
ab oculis eorum.’ 

But there still remain a multitude of details, which must have 
been suggested by something which the Martyrs had either heard 
or read, and for the origin of many of which I believe that we 
must look to the Shepherd of Hermas. 


1 The question of the Latin Version used in Africa at this time has no clear 
light thrown upon it by the words of our Martyrs themselves, although something 
perhaps may be learned from the quotations of the redactor. I have given the 
Vulgate renderings for obvious reasons of convenience. 


28 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


Thus in her first Vision Perpetua sees beneath the Ladder a 
dragon of wondrous size, who endeavours to terrify those who 
would climb. Saturus, having climbed, turns and says to her: 
‘Perpetua, I wait for thee: but see that that dragon bite thee not.’ 
She replies: ‘He shall not hurt me, in the name of Jesus Christ.’ 
‘And from underneath the ladder as if in fear of me he gently put 
out his head; and as though I were treading on the first step, I 
trod on his head.’ When she reaches the top she is greeted with 
the words: ‘Thou hast well come, my child’ (Bene uenisti). 

Hermas sees in his fourth Vision ‘a very great beast, a hundred 
feet in length’ and with a strange head (@nplov péyotov wcel 
KATOS TL..TO pHnKEL Woe ToOdMY p'' THY b& KEhadry eixev ws 
kepapov.. Vis. iv. 1. 6). ‘And I began to weep and to ask the 
Lord that He would deliver me from him. And I remembered 
the word which I had heard (it had been spoken to him 
mysteriously just before), Hermas be not of doubtful mind...and I 
boldly presented myself to the beast...I come nigh to him; and 
that huge monster stretches himself out on the ground, and does 
nothing but put out histongue.’ Immediately after this the Church 
meets him in the guise of a Virgin, and he relates to her his escape 
from the beast. ‘Thou hast well escaped’ (xaras éFédevyes), she 
says, ‘because thou didst cast thy care on God and open thy heart 
to the Lord, believing that by none other canst thou be saved, but 
only through the great and glorious Name.’ He is then charged 
with a message to the Lord’s elect to ‘tell them that this beast 
is a type of the great tribulation which is about to come,’ 
but which through repentance and faith they may be able to 
escape. 

In the Garden near the top of the ladder Perpetua finds a tall 
Man with white hair, in a shepherd’s dress (‘in habitu pastoris’), 
milking sheep. This no doubt is intended for the Lord, and, when 
we remember how often the figure of the Shepherd occurs in 
Christian literature and art, we shall not be willing to press too 
closely the parallel of Hermas’s Shepherd. But it is worth 
noticing that it is in the very next Vision to the one we have 
mentioned that Hermas for the first time is introduced to his 


1 Tf we could accept Hilgenfeld’s ingenious emendation kepiorov, ‘a horned 
serpent,’ the parallel would be still closer. 


THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS AND THE VISIONS, 29 


Shepherd, whom he describes as dvjp tis évdokos TH dyper, cxNMaTE 
motpevixe@ (Vis. v. 1). 

In Perpetua’s second Vision she sees her brother Dinocrates, 
who had died of a gangrene in the face at the age of seven years, 
in a dark place, dirty and pale and with the wound still in his 
face. He is moreover hot and thirsty, and is vainly trying to get 
at the water of a font (‘ piscina,’ coAuu87nApa) whose rim is above 
his head. The boy no doubt had died unbaptised', and this was 
the cause of his appearing to be in a place of torment. ‘ Piscina’ 
in its ecclesiastical use at once suggests a baptismal font, and 
although the boy is represented as anxious to quench his thirst 
this does not prevent us from interpreting his real need as that 
of baptism. 

In a later Vision she sees him, in answer to her prayers, cleansed, 
well clothed and refreshed: only the scar of the old wound is to 
be seen: the rim of the font is lowered to the boy’s waist; and he 
drinks water out of a golden goblet that never fails. His need 
was supplied and he departed from the water ‘to play in the 
manner of children with great delight. Then I understood that 
he was released from punishment’ (‘Tunc intellexi translatum eum 
esse de poena’). 

Now in the third Vision of Hermas we have the first account 
of the Building of the Tower; and, among the stones which are 
rejected, we hear of ‘some falling into fire and being burned ; 
and others falling near to water, and not able to roll into the water, 
although they wish to roll and come into the water’ (Vis. ii. 2. 9). 
It is explained later (i. 7. 3) that ‘these are they that have 
heard the word and wish to be baptised into the name of the 
Lord, but their baptism is prevented by their own unstedfast- 


1 It is fair to state that this view is directly challenged and contradicted by S. 
Augustine (De Anima ad Renatum 1.10). But he could only argue from the proba- 
bilities of the case, and moreover he was blinded by the desire to dispose of a 
disagreeable objection. It is most improbable that in a pagan household a boy of 
seven years old should have been baptised even if his sister were a Christian at the 
time of his death; and of this we have no evidence whatever: indeed she was 
probably a recent convert, and was only a Catechumen at the time of her arrest. 
8. Augustine’s suggestion that the child was old enough to tell lies, and so though 
baptised to need a period of torture after death, is a mournful illustration of the 
straits to which a good man may be driven by the exigencies of controversy. 


30 | THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


ness. There is still a hope for the rejected ones; but only ‘when 
they have been tormented...and then (if they repent) it shall 
happen to them to be released from their torments’ (werareOjvat 
éx TOV Bacadvev avTar). 

In the ninth Similitude we have great stress laid on the ne- - 
cessity of the water, or the seal (7) ofpayis odv To Udwp éeotiv): 
and we are distinctly told of some who have received it after 
death. (Sim. ix. 15. 5 of dadoronXo kai of didaoKarot,...coopn- 
Gévres...ennpuvEav Kat toils mpoxexoiunpévors, kal avtol eéwxay 
avtots Thy odpayisa tod Knpvyuatos. KxatéByoapv ody per avTav 
eis TO UOwp, K.T.A.) 

Passing on to Perpetua’s last Vision (c. x.) we find Pomponius 
the deacon coming to her in a white robe and with ‘ manifold 
shoes’ (‘multiplices galliculas’). He conducts her to the amphi- 
theatre and departs with the words: “Fear not; I am here with 
thee, and suffer along with thee.” After this comes a hideous 
Egyptian with his attendants to fight with her. Then ‘there come 
to me beautiful young men, as my attendants and supporters. And 
I am stripped and turned into a man: and my supporters begin to 
rub me down with oil, as they do for the games: and I see that 
Egyptian on the other hand rolling in the dust. And there came 
forth a man of wondrous size, so as even to reach above the top of 
the amphitheatre...having also manifold shoes, made of gold and 
silver (‘galliculas multiformes ex auro et argento factas’), and 
bearing a rod like a trainer (‘quasi lanista’), and a green bough, 
on which were golden apples.’ She wrestles and fights with the 
Egyptian, and at last throws him and treads upon his face. 
Then she comes and receives the bough, and begins ‘to go with 
glory to the porta Sanautuaria (a sort of Gate of Life, mentioned 
later on in the actual history of her martyrdom). And I awoke, 
and understood that it was not with beasts but against the devil 
that I was to fight. But I knew that victory was mine.’ 

The appearance of Pomponius in a glorified form, with the 
promise to be with her in her struggle against the devil, may be 
compared with the promise of the Angel of Repentance to Hermas, 
“Fear ye not the devil, for there is no power in him against you: for 
I will be with you...The devil can wrestle against you, but wrestle 
you down he cannot.” (Mand. xii. 4. 6, 7 and 5. 2, wij) foB7Onre 


THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS AND THE VISIONS. ol 


Tov Std Borov...dvvatat 6 ddBoros avtitaNaicat, kataTradaicar é 
ov Svvarat). 

Sprinkling with sand or dust after being anointed was a common 
practice in the games; but in Perpetua’s mind it is no doubt con- 
nected with the language of Genesis iii.’: and the influence of this 
passage, as we have seen, is further to be traced when the Egyptian 
tries to take her by the feet, and she at last tramples on his 
head. 

The beautiful young men who come to support her, together 
with the extraordinary stature of the man who appears as the 
trainer, may be paralleled from Herm. Sim. ix. 6. 1 where we 
have a man of lofty stature, overtopping the Tower, surrounded 
by others who are ‘glorious.’ He also has a rod in his hand, with 
which he tests all the stones of the building (avnp Tis vndos TH 
peyéer, Bote TOV TUpPYOV Um EpeXesy). 

The beautiful shoes, observed in two instances in Perpetua’s 
Vision, have a curious counterpart in the ‘white shoes’ of the 
Church when she appears to Hermas after he has escaped the 
Beast (Vis. iv. 2.1). Once more, in the eighth Similitude various 
people are given rods ‘ by a glorious angel of the Lord, exceeding 
tall” These he presently examines. Then he commands crowns 
to be brought forth, ‘and he crowned the men who shewed up 
their rods with buds upon them and some fruit as well, and 
dismissed them to the Tower.’ Presently Hermas asks the 
Shepherd, “ Who are they that are crowned and go to the Tower?” 
and is told, “As many as wrestled against the devil and wrestled 
him down are crowned: these are they who suffered on behalf 
of the Name.” Similarly in the ninth Similitude those stones 
which come from the eleventh mountain, ‘where are trees full of 
fruits, adorned one tree with this fruit and another with that...are 
they who suffered for the name of the Son of God...they are all 
glorious with God...but they who suffered willingly, these are 
more exceeding glorious with the Lord: for their fruit it is that 
excelleth.’ Of such a company would Perpetua be with her golden 
apples going with glory to the Gate of Life. 

When we come on to the Vision of Saturus the same phenomena 


1 So in Herm. Vis. iv. 1. 5 the Beast comes with ‘a great dust, on which much 
stress is laid. — 


32 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


meet us’. After death he finds himself together with Perpetua 
‘being borne away by four Angels to the East: and their hand 
touched us not.’ Now at the close of Hermas’s first vision the 
Woman who represents the Church is carried away, as her chair had 
already been carried away, to the East. She is taken by the arms by 
two men who are afterwards described as Angels (Vis. i. 4. 3 jpav 
avtyy Tov ayxdvev Kal amndOav...1tpds tiv avatorjv). The 
emphasis on the method of carriage may perhaps be compared 
with the statement of Saturus, ‘But we went not on our backs 
heads downward (‘ibamus autem non supini sursum uersi’), but as 
though we were climbing a gentle slope.’ But perhaps this was 
suggested by the contrast with their position as they lay in the 
stocks (cf. c. viil.). 

When Saturus and Perpetua reach the Garden above they are 
met by four more glorious Angels, and are bidden to ‘go in and 
salute the Lord” They come then to a place, ‘ whose walls were 
such, as though they were built of light: and before the door of 
that place stood four Angels, who clothed those who entered in 
with white robes.’ 

Now in the ninth Similitude of Hermas there stand around 
the gate of the Tower twelve Maidens: ‘but the four that stood 
at the corners seemed to me to be more glorious. It was the 
part of the Maidens to carry the stones through the Gate for the 
building of the Tower. Those and those only that were so brought 
in by the Maidens became white. Others retained their various 
colours, and had to be rejected (Sim. ix. 4). This is elaborated 
later on into wearing the vesture of the Maidens (Sim. ix. 13), 
‘In no other way can a man be found in the kingdom of God, 
except they clothe him with their clothing’ So, returning to the 
first metaphor, we read (Sim. ix. 17. 4), ‘The building of the 
Tower became of one colour, bright as the Sun.’ 

The Martyrs found sitting within ‘a Man with white hair and 
a youthful countenance, whose feet we did not see’ (‘niueos 
habentem capillos et uultu iuuenili, cuius pedes non uidimus’’). 


1 Some of the following details from the Vision of Saturus admit of explanation 
in connection with another source from which the main portion of his Vision seems 


to come: see below, pp. 38 ff. 
2 We may perhaps compare Herm. Vis. iii. 10.1 rodrwy 7d rpdcwmrov ovx eldov, 


dre dtreaTpapmevor Hoay. 


THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS AND THE VISIONS. 33 


To return once more to the fourth Vision of Hermas, the 
Church is there described as having white hair, as well as white 
robes and white shoes (Vis. iv. 2.1). And reference is made to 
the three preceding visions in which he had seen her in three 
successive forms (Vis. ii. 10): first, as very aged; secondly, with 
her countenance young, but her flesh and hair old (tHv pév dyuy 
vewtépay eiyev, x.T.r.); thirdly, as wholly young and beautiful, and 
only her hair old (An vewrépa Kai KadXrEL exrpeTectaTn, wovas Oé 
Tas Tpixas mpeaButépas eiyer). 

In the vision of Saturus it would be easy to refer the white 
hair of the Lord to Apoc.i. 14; but this would not account for the 
strange addition ‘et uultu iuuenili, which however is accounted 
for at once if we may suppose a reminiscence of the Shepherd, 
where great stress is laid on the combination of newness and old- 
ness : see again Sim. ix. 12. 1 of the Rock and the Gate. 

The ‘four Elders on His right and on His left,’ and the ‘many 
other elders behind them, in the vision of Saturus, may be com- 
pared with ‘the six men who presided over the Building, and 
walked with Him on the right and on the left,’ while there were 
‘many other glorious ones round about Him’ (Herm. Sim. ix. 6. 2). 

After they had kissed the Lord, the Elders bade them, “Go 
and play” (‘Ite et ludite’). Adding to this curious command the 
subsequent statement, ‘we were nourished with an unspeakable 
odour which satisfied us’ (‘ odore inenarrabili alebamur, qui nos 
satiabat’), we turn again to the Shepherd. 

Hermas is left by the Shepherd under the care of the Maidens 
(Sim. ix. 10 f.. They treat him as their brother: ‘and she 
who seemed to be the first of them began to kiss me; and the 
others seeing her kissing me began to kiss me also, and to go 
round about the Tower and to play with me (aaifew per éuod). 
And I became as it were a young man and began myself to play 
' with them.’ When the Shepherd returned the next morning he 
asked him had he supped. He replied “I supped on the words of 
the Lord all the night long” (é8eizrvnoa...ra pypata tod Kupiov 
OANY THY VUKTA). 

Lastly, when they came out from the Presence they found 
‘before the door Optatus the bishop on the right, and Aspasius 
the presbyter-teacher on the left, separated and sad. And they 


R. 3 


3o4 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


threw themselves at our feet and said to us, “ Make peace between 
us, for ye have gone forth and left us thus.”’ The angels presently 
interfere and say, “Let these refresh themselves: and if ye have 
any quarrels among yourselves, forgive one another”: and they say 
to Optatus, “Correct thy people (‘corrige plebem tuam’): for so 
do they come to thee, as if returning from the Circus and contend- 
ing about its factions.” The Greek version here omits the words 
‘on the right, and so sets the bishop and the presbyter on the 
left hand outside the door. Mr Harris thinks that the Greek is 
justified by the statement in Herm. Vis. iii. 1. 9 that ‘the right 
hand is the place of others, those, to wit, who have already pleased 
God and have suffered for the Name.’ But the words ‘separated 
and sad’ seem to require the Latin form in its fulness. Nor is it 
probable that the right hand place of honour would have been 
‘outside the door.’ 

But to the rebuke to the rulers of the Church for quarrelling 
there is more than one parallel in the Shepherd. Thus they are 
warned ‘lest their quarrellings rob them of their life. How will 
they chasten the Lord’s elect,’ if they be not at peace among 
themselves? (Vis. iii. 9. 7 viv ody tpiv rAéyw Tots Tponyoupévots 
THs éxxAnolas Kat Tots mpwroxadedpitats’...17Os vets madeverv 
OéreTe Tovs exrEKTOVS Kupiov, K.T.r.). Compare too the praise of 
those leaders of the Church, ‘who were always at harmony with 
themselves, and had peace among themselves, and hearkened to 
one another.’ 


T think that the instances which I have adduced are sufficient 
to establish a strong probability that the Martyrs were familiar 
with the Visions of Hermas. Evidence of this kind is cumulative ; 
and even if individual instances of comparison may seem fanciful 
and overstrained, yet when we recall at once Perpetua’s escape 
from the monstrous dragon by the help of the Name; her vision 
of the Man in a shepherd’s dress; the effort of Dinocrates to get 
at the water, and his subsequent release from punishment; the. 
promise of Pomponius and the beautiful shoes; the green bough 
with the golden apples, and the going with glory to the Gate of 
Life: and then the passage of Saturus and herself, borne by four 
angels to the East; the four more glorious angels who clothe them 


w 


THE SHEPHERD OF HERMAS AND THE VISIONS. 35 


and take them in; the Man with the white hair and the youthful 
countenance; the kiss, and the command to go and play, and the 
unspeakable odour which took the place of food; the bishop and 
presbyter rebuked for their quarrellings—it is difficult to believe 
that all these details, some of which seem to cry for an explanation 
of some kind, are wholly independent of the striking parallels 
which are offered to us in the Shepherd of Hermas. 

Hitherto our comparison has been made with the Greek 
original of the Shepherd of Hermas. It is worth while to bring 
together a few passages in the earlier Latin Version, which Har- 
nack assigns to the second century, where the language has points 
of correspondence with that of Perpetua and Saturus. The corre- 
spondence is often slight in itself, but it gains in importance when 


considered in its context. 


c. iv. Iam in magna dignatione es, 
tanta ut postules uisionem et ostend- 
atur tibi an... 

Bene uenisti. 

Tn habitu pastoris. 

c. viii. Tune intellexi translatum 
eum esse de poena. 

ce. x. Et facta sum masculus. 


Efferens,..ramum uiridem in quo 
erant mala aurea. 

c. xi, Coepimus ferri a quattuor 
angelis in Orientem, quorum manus 
nos non tangebat. 


c. xii. Niueos habentem capillos et . 


uultu iuuenili, cuius pedes non ui- 
dimus. 


Osculati sumus illum...et dixerunt 


nobis seniores: Ite et ludite. 


c. xiii. Si quas habetis inter uos 
dissensiones, dimittite uobis inuicem. 


Herm. Vis. iv. 1 Quia me dignum 
aestimauit ut ostenderet mihi mira- 
bilia sua. 

Vis. iv. 2 Bene effugisti. 

Mand. proem. Habitu pastorali. 

Vis. iii. 7 Tune illis continget 
transferri de poenis. 

Sim. ix. 11 Et uidebar mihi iunior 
factus esse. 

Sim. viii. 2. 1 Alii afferebant uirgas 
suas uirides, 

Vis. i. 4 Venerunt quatuor iuuenes 
et tulerunt cathedram ad Orientem... 
duo quidam uiri...sustulerunt illam 
humeris et abierunt, ubi et cathedra 
erat, ad Orientem. 

Vis. tii. 10 Faciem quidem iu- 
uenilem habebat...capillos aniles. 

Tbhid. (supra) Horum faciem non 
uidi. 

Sim. ix. 11 Osculari me coepit... 
et ipsae coeperunt me ut fratrem 
osculari, et ducere circa turrim, et 
ludere mecum. 

Vis. iii, 9 Pacem habete alius 
cum alio...et suscipite uos inuicem... 
ne forte hae dissensiones uestrae 
fraudent uitam uestram...Commonete 
ergo uos inuicem. 


3—2 


36 THE PASSION OF 8. PERPETUA. 


These slight indications are perhaps scarcely sufficient to 
justify us in assuming, what is probable enough in itself, that 
the Martyrs used this early Latin version of the Shepherd; and it 
is quite possible that Perpetua may have known the book in the 
original Greek. The fact that the correspondence consists so much 
more in matters of detail than in points of language is just what 
we should expect if the visions are visions at all, and not literary 
creations of a later time. The reminiscences would primarily be 
those of incidents and situations; and the verbal coincidences 
would only come in by the way when the Visions were being 
related or written down. We may regard it then as fairly certain 
that the Shepherd of Hermas was in the hands of the African 
martyrs; and we may further regard it as quite conceivable that 
they read it in the early Latin version. 

We know from Tertullian that arguments were drawn from 
the Shepherd in his day in matters both of Church practice and 
Church doctrine. He himself had a low opinion of the book*; 
but it was evidently appealed to by the Anti-Montanistic section 
of the African Church. And the present investigation shews that 
others, who to say the least display what are called Montanistic 
tendencies and sympathies, were no less attracted by its fascinating 
allegories, whatever they might have thought as to its teachings 
on certain controverted topics. So that here we have an addi- 
tional reason for believing that in the African Bible of the close of 
the second century, as in the Sinaitic Codex at a later period, the 
Shepherd of Hermas found a place at the close of the Canonical 
Books of the New Testament’. 


1 T cannot see any sufficient ground for supposing, with Gebhardt and Harnack, 
Hermae Pastor, prolegg. pp. xlvii. ff., that Tertullian materially changed his view in 
regard to the Shepherd. In the passage De Orat. 16 he passes no judgment what- 
soever on the book, but merely meets by a common-sense reply an argument drawn 
from it as to the right posture in prayer. If he speaks of it as Scripture, this is 
only in a highly ironical sentence (‘Immo contra scripturam fecerit, si quis in 
cathedra aut subsellio sederit’), from which it is manifestly unfair to conclude 
that he himself regarded it at this time with as much reverence as his opponents 
evidently did. 

2 For a full discussion of this point see the notes of Gebhardt and Harnack in 
‘the place referred to in the preceding note. 


THE APOCALYPSE OF PETER AND THE VISIONS. 37 


The Influence of the Apocalypse of Peter on the Vision of Saturus. 


In the History of Barlaam and Josaphat (Boissonade, pp. 280 ff, 
360 ff.) we find two remarkable Visions, which present so many 
points of contact with the Vision of Saturus, that it will be 
desirable to quote them here somewhat fully. On the first occa- 
sion Josaphat, having been fiercely assailed by fleshly temptations, 
offers a prayer for protection: he then falls asleep and has the 
following Vision. “Opa éavroy vo tiwdv hoBepdv apraryévra, 
kat TéTous os ovdéTroTE EwpaKer OiedOovTa, Kal év Tivt yevopevov 

f t ¢€ 7 v \ / 77 , ” 
peyiotyn Tedtads Wpaios avOect Kat Niav evddeot Kopwon, év0a 
ura péev éwpa wavTodara Kai TotKina, Kaptrois Eevois Ticl Kal 
Gavpactois BpiOovtra, ideivy Te ndictos Kal arpacAat ToOewwois. 
Ta Te PUANa TeV Sévdpav ALYyUpOY UInyer atpa Til NeTTOTAT 

Pp yup 1X. Pe HE 
” , ? ] , , 

Kab AKOpETTOV Kal YapleoTAaTHY ExTEWTOVTA EVMOlaY KLVOULEVA.... 
\ \ \ , x , t e . 9 a 
Thy Sé Oavpacrny TavTnv Kal peydrny medsadda ot hoBepol éxeivor 
U 3 XN 3 , > i 3 f XN la 
Stayayovtes avTov eis Wow Elonyayov appyT@ TLL AaTPOTHTE 
3 I bd / \ “ \ 4 f Xx & 
atroatiiBovaay, éx ypvaolov pev Stavyods Ta Teiyn, NiOwy Sé av 
ovdels mwmoTe éwpaxe Tas éradrbes eyovcay aveynyepévas.... 
pas dvalev muKva Tals axtiot SsatTov Tacas avTAS Tas WNaTELAS 
émArpou' Kal vmdmTEpol TivES TTpPATLAL, AUTH ExaoTY Pos avoat, 
, > cA f v 3 a ’ , > t 
TavTy erednmouv, wédXos dOoveas Ako Bpoteia wndétoTe axova Ev. 
Kal hovns nrovae Neyovuans Av’TH 7 avatravats TOV Oixaiwor alty 

n evhpocuvn TOY EevaperTHaavTMY TS Kupiy. 

After this he is carried off reluctantly to see the torments of 
hell, and then he awakes. Long afterwards, on the death of 
Barlaam, he has another Vision, which is in fact a continuation of 
the first. Kai dpa tovs doBepovs avdpas éxeivovs, ods xal mpo- 
Tepov éwpaxet, éMOovTas mpos avTov, Kal arrayayovtas autor éis 
Ty peyioTnv Kab Oavpactny éxelvny medidda, Kal pos THY Se- 
Sofacpévny Kal UmepX\autTpov eioayayovTes TONY. cigEepyoméeve@ 

‘ ’ an \ i v4 ¢ f n oe / XN 

dé avTo THY TUANHY ErEepoL UINVTOVY TOAD KaTHYAaiopévor Port, 
otepavous éyovtes ev yepoly appyt@ Stadaptovras Kade Kal 
oe 3 \ gas f 3 , 3 r \ rn 
otovs ofOarpol ovddérote Bpdtecor éOeacavto. épomévou dé Tod 
*Iwdcad’ Tivos of ctédavoe tis S6Ens of virepXNaptpo. ois Opa; 
Dos per 6 eis, ébyoar, KT. ele TadTa, Kal TOV Bapraap evOds 
eddnes BNETrELY, K.T.X. 


38 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


The points which specially concern us are the angelic bearers 
who carry him to Paradise: the very great plain covered with 
flowers: the city shining with unspeakable brightness and with 
walls of transparent gold, which he finds when he has crossed the 
plain: the singing of the hosts of heaven. And, in the second 
part, the more glorious ones who meet him at the gate as he 
enters; and the recognition of his preceptor Barlaam. These 
coincidences are so striking that we feel at once that they must 
have some common source; and, as the Shepherd of Hermas offers 
us nothing to correspond to them, we naturally enquire whether 
any other early series of Visions with a somewhat similar sanction 
can with probability be supposed to have been current in the 
African Church. 

Before entering upon this enquiry, we may notice a most 
remarkable coincidence which may be added to those already 
mentioned by the change of a single letter in the Latin text. 
Saturus sees ‘arbores rosae,’ and adds: ‘altitudo autem arborum 
erat in modum cypressi, quarum folia cadebant sine cessatione.’ 
These enormous rose-trees correspond well enough with the 
fragrant trees of Josaphat’s Vision. But why do their leaves ‘fall 
without ceasing’? No explanation of any kind has been offered 
of this extraordinary statement. In the Apocalypse of 8. John 
‘the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations,’ but, in 
the passage of Ezekiel (xlvili. 12) from which this description is 
taken, it is expressly stated that their ‘leaf shall not fade’ In 
the Apocalypse of Moses (Tisch. 1866, p. 11) the leaves of all the 
trees in Paradise, except the fig-tree, fall off when Eve eats the 
forbidden fruit (catéppeov ra gvddra). This alone would be 
sufficient to condemn the reading ‘cadebant’ in the Vision of 
Saturus, 

In Cod. C we find instead of it ‘ardebant’; but the united 
testimony of Codd. A and B and the Greek Version (caredépero) 
renders this reading impossible on textual grounds, even if it 
were in itself an improvement. Now in Josaphat’s Vision we 
read: Ta te @vAAa TaV Sévdpwv ALyupov vIrnyet, ‘the leaves of 
the trees made a tuneful sound. If we read ‘canebant,’ all is 
clear. The trees in heaven were always singing. 

What support can we find elsewhere for such a statement ? 


THE APOCALYPSE OF PETER AND THE VISIONS. 39 


First, we may observe that to the Eastern mind there would be 
nothing strange in the conception. A few passages from the Old 
Testament may remind us of its frequency as a metaphor. ‘Then 
shall the trees of the wood sing out at the presence of the Lord’ 
(1 Chron. xvi. 33; cf Ps. xcvi. 12): ‘Break forth into singing, 
ye mountains, O forest, and every tree therein’ (Isa. xliv. 23; 
ef. lv. 12): ‘The desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose: it 
shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing’ 
(Isa. xxxv. 1, 2). 

Again, in the longer recension of the Testament of Abraham’, 
not far from the beginning, as the Archangel Michael is going 
with Abraham to his house, a remarkable incident occurs: xara 
THS 000d éxelvys tatato Sévdpov Kumdpiccos’ Kal kata mpdotakw 
Tod Oeod éBoncev TO dSévOpov avOpwrivy wry, Kat eirev' “Arytos, 
aytos, dytos, KUpLOS 6 Oeds, 6 MpoTKaNovpevos avTOV ToOls ayaTracL 
avrov. It is at the least a strange coincidence that the singing 
trees of Saturus’s Vision grew ‘in modum cypressi’: and also that 
later on he hears ‘uocem unitain dicentem: Agios, agios, agios: 
sine cessatione.’ Moreover it may be noted that ‘sine cessatione’ 
is the phrase which he also has used of the trees”. In the latter 
part of his Vision he is clearly influenced partly by the Apocalypse 
of S. John and partly by liturgical formulae: and hence it is 
quite possible that in the original source the Ter Sanctus was 
actually the song of the trees of Paradise, though he has reserved 
it for the angelic hosts. If this be the case, possibly we may find 
here some clue to the extraordinary phrase in Jeremiah’s prayer 
in ‘the Rest of the Words of Baruch’®, c. ix.: ntvfaro evyny, Néyov" 
“Aros, dytos, dytos’ TO Ouplapa Tov SévSpav trav Cdvrov. 

There is another passage in the Vision of Saturus where the 
text is clearly corrupt, and where the emendation which I would 
venture to propose derives a measure of support from Josaphat’s 
description. The words are, as commonly edited, ‘quattuor ili 
Angeli, qui gestabant nos, deposuerunt nos: et pedibus nostris 
transiuimus stadium wia lata. Here Codd. B and C(?) read ‘uia 


1 To be published in the second volume of the present Series, by M. R. James, 
M.A., Fellow of King’s College. 


2 See note ad loc. p. 81. 
3 Edited by Prof. Rendel Harris (Cambridge, 1889), to whom I owe this reference. 


40 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


lata’; and the Greek has cat 6é6v AaBovtes, which points to a 
similar reading, as far as ‘uia’ is concerned. But this gives no 
tolerable sense: and Cod. A has ‘uiolata.’ I would read ‘uiola- 
tum, and conceive the plain to have been ‘covered with violets.’ 
The word ‘uiolatus’ in a similar sense is found in Palladius, in Feb. 
32: ‘conditum uel absinthiatum uel rosatum uel uiolatum!” This 
use however is so rare, that the word was extremely likely to 
suffer corruption at the hands of later scribes. But its restoration 
gives us an admirable sense, and harmonises well with the Vision 
itself and with the statement of Josaphat, weyiorn medvads wpaious 
avect Kai Nav evddect Komaan. 

We must now proceed to our enquiry as to the common source 
of the details found in both Visions. The later Apocalypses, such 
as the Apocalypse of Esdras and the Vision of Paul, again and 
again present us with descriptions of Heaven and of Hell which 
are evidently derived from some earlier apocalyptic work which is 
now lost’. A comparison of their common materials leads us back 
with almost indisputable certainty to the lost Apocalypse of Peter. 
To establish this conclusion would be beyond our present scope : 
and I must content myself with bringing together here some points 
of contact between several of these works and the Visions of 
Saturus and Josaphat. 

Apocalypse of Esdras (Tisch. 1866, p. 80) kal amnyayov pe 
of ayyedo Kata dvatoAas Kal Sov To dutoy THs Cons. Kat tov 
éxel Tor "Kvoy xat “Hriav cat Movon, «rr. Cf. Perpet. xi. 
coepimus ferri a quattuor Angelis in Orientem...ubi inuenimus 
Tocundum et Saturninum et Artaxium,’ &c. 

p. 81 6 atépaves cot nroipactas. Cf. Barl. et Jos. (Boissonade, 
p. 360) Tivos of crépavor tijs SdEns of UTepNauTpoL, ods 69H; Dds 
pev O eis, Ebnoar, K.T.A. 

Apocalypsis Pauli, p. 43 of &€ dyaOolt dyyedou of mapada- 
Bovres thv vpuyny tod Sixalov nomdcavto avTny &>s yveptpmov 
ovoav. Kai érropevOn ody avrois, cal €&7rOe TO mvedua cis amray- 
Thaw avTdv rAéyov' Aciipo, yuyy, eloedOe eis TOv TOTO, K.T.A. 

1 For the word ‘ uiolatio’ cf. note ad loc. p. 81. 
2 This subject has been investigated by Mr M. R. James, to whom I owe the 
suggestion that the Apocalypse of Peter is the ultimate source of all such descrip- 


tions. I hope that he will publish the results of his investigations in a future 
number of this Series. 


THE APOCALYPSE OF PETER AND THE VISIONS. 41 


Cf. Perpet. xi. ‘alii quattuor Angeli clariores ceteris, qui, ubi 
uiderunt nos, honorem nobis dederunt, et dixerunt ceteris Angelis: 
Eece sunt, ecce sunt: cum admiratione. 

p. 51 Kat iWov exe? Sévdpa Trappeyédn, x.7.r. p. 53 Kal cuv- — 
éxumrov avtois ta dévdpa. These last are fruitless trees, but are to 
be noted as displaying sympathy with certain souls. Cf. p. 64 cai 
idov éxet Sévdpov rrappeyéOn opatov, év 6 eraverraveto TO TrEdpa 
To dytov. We may also notice the following phrases: p. 63 xal 
iSov tovs KS mpecButépous...xal mavta wapexadouv tiv dd€av 
Tov Oeod’ p. 59 epdpuevov vd Teccapwv ayyéAwv orovoaias : 
and p. 65 é£e ety éx Tob xoopov, a phrase of frequent recurrence. 

Apocalypse of Moses, p. 20 cat 7AOov eis Tov Tapddecoy, Kat 
exuwnOncav wavtTa Ta puta Tov Twapadbeicov, bs TavTas amd Tov 
"Addu yeyevynpévovs aio Tis evwdias vuatakat, ywpis Tod =O, 
x.7r Cf. Barl. and Jos. p. 280 cal dxopeotov Kai yaptecrarny 
éxrréTrovTa evwdiayv Kivovpeva. 

Besides these Apocalypses there are other writings of a similar 
character such as the Vision of 8. Furseus (see the Bollandist Acts, 
January 16), from which might be adduced further coincidences 
with the details of our Visions. It is quite certain that the com- 
mon element in all of these—and it is to be traced in the descrip- 
tions of hell even more plainly than in those of Paradise—is 
derived from some early apocalyptic work which is no longer 
extant. It has been suggested above that this original source was 
the Apocalypse of Peter. Is there any ground for supposing that 
this work would be current in Africa and known to our Martyrs ? 

The Apocalypse of Peter seems to be mentioned in the Mura- 
torian Fragment', where it immediately precedes the Shepherd of 
Hermas. The notice of it adds: ‘quam quidam ex nostris legi in 
ecclesia nolunt’: but this very statement implies that in some 
Churches it was read. 

It is quoted by Clement of Alexandria, who, according to 
Eusebius, H. H. vi. 14. 1, commented in his Hypotyposes on all the 
Books of the New Testament, ‘not even omitting...the Epistle of 
Barnabas and the so-called Apocalypse of Peter.’ 

Eusebius himself (H. #. 111. 25. 4) classes it with the Shepherd 
of Hermas and other books which he rejects from the Canon: éy 


1 See however Zahn Gesch. des N. LT. Kanons 1. pp. 105 fi. 


42 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


Tois vobois KatateTayOw Kalb tév IlavaAov rpakeav 7 ypadn, o TE 
Aevyopevos Tlosunv, cat 4 ’Amroxaduyis Tlétpov, cat mpos TovToss 
% pepowevn BapvaBa émictody, kal Tév aTooTOA@Y ai Neyopevat 
dibayat. 

The stichometry of the Codex Claromontanus of the Pauline 
Epistles closes with the Shepherd, the Acts of Paul and the 
Apocalypse of Peter. It is also included in the stichometry of 
Nicephorus. It is clear therefore that at one time it was bound 
up with copies of the New Testament, and was read in the public 
worship of some Churches. We have seen that this was probably 
the case with the Shepherd of Hermas in the early African 
Church. It is not unreasonable then to add to the African Bible 
of the second century the Apocalypse of Peter: in which case we 
should have in the Vision of Saturus a fresh illustration of a 
passage in Tertullian (De Anima 9, quoted below, p. 52) in which 
he speaks of the public reading of the Scriptures in the Church as 
affording materials for visions to a certain inspired sister. 

Before we leave this subject I would call attention to some 
curious points of resemblance to the story of our Martyrs in the 
Symposium of 8S. Methodius. As the Apocalypse of Peter is 
directly quoted in another part of the same work (ii 6f.), these 
coincidences, if they are of any value, will be a fresh confirmation 
of the view taken above. 

In viii. 2 we have the following description of the rewards of 
Virgins: ai O€ edarepor kai Kova eis Tov UTEpKdcpLoV TOTOV 
drepxvacat Tod Biov Kal iSovcat moppwbev & yun Erepos avOpoTrav 
ecacato, TOVS NELLBVAS avTovs THS adOapcias, Gunyava KadAH 
kat avOn hépovtas Kai meTANp@évous, K.T.A. GAA Kab El TES 
avtév Onpiots  mupt BovrovTo Ta cbwata Tapadiddévat...daTe 
Soxely avtas év Koa pm Ovaas M7 Etvat €v KOTMO, K.T.A. Bev 
Kal TpaTat TOV GAwY META THY avaKdnoLW Kal THY évTEDOEV Exdn- 
piav ai 6p0as Kal mictas TapOevercacat TH YpLOT@ TA VEKT- 
THpLa pépovtat TOV AOAwD, Tois THS abOapcias avOect oTed- 
Ocicat mpos avTod’ ama yap TO Katareiwat Tov Kdcpmov 
Tas Wuxyds AOyos Tais TapOévots VTaVTa@VTAas ayyéXOUS 
peTa TOAAHS eUdnpias cis TOs TMpoepnpévous TapaTréuTE NeEt- 
Mevas avtds, KT.A. évTadOa 6) éXMovoas Savpacta Twa Oed- 
cacbat Kai éexddutpa...civa, yap Sévdpov cmppocivyns avis, 


AUTHORSHIP OF THE VISIONS. 43 


elvat ayamns, civat TvVETEwWS...at OE YoPEVoUTELY eupEeras yepai- 
povoat Tov Oeov, x.7.X. And lower down (viii. 4) we have: év to 
ovpave an Seidiaonte AoxavTa Kal EpedpevovTa Tov guy. 

The references to the beasts and to the state of trance, and the 
last reference to the serpent that lies in wait, may perhaps be 
dismissed at once as merely coincidental. For we have no 
reason to suppose that 8. Methodius was acquainted with our 
Martyrdom itself But those introduced by the word Adryos 
evidently are derived from some apocalyptic source, and, though 
S. Methodius has worked his material up into Platonic form, we 
may well conjecture that the tradition to which he refers was 
derived from the Apocalypse of Peter’. 


The Authorship of the Visions. 


The Compiler of the Martyrdom distinctly states more than 
once that Perpetua and Saturus themselves wrote down their own 
Visions, whereas he in compliance with Perpetua’s wish added the 
narrative of their final sufferings. It is a fair question therefore 
to ask whether there are any traces of difference in style and 
composition between the portions said to have been written by 
Perpetua, Saturus and the redactor respectively. In so brief a 
document it would be hard to charge the redactor with falsifica- 
tion if no such traces were to be seen: but on the other hand 
their existence would confirm us in the belief that we had the 
actual words of the Martyrs themselves. 

If we consider the distribution of adopted Greek words in the 
piece, we shall find that the most striking of them occur in the 
writing of Perpetua, who, as Saturus tells us, could speak Greek. 
Thus it is she who uses: machaera, draco, tegnon, catasta, horoma, 
diastema, phiala, agon, afa, psallere. Saturus uses stola and 
thronus (cf. Apoc. vil.), and hears the song of praise in heaven as 
Agios, agios, agios. He also hears Perpetua address the bishop 
Optatus as Papa. The redactor uses: catechumenus, psallere (as 
a, direct reminiscence of Perpetua’s use of it), agape, ecstasis, and 
scandalizemint (in quoting words of Perpetua). Now in the case 


1 For parallels between the Acts of Thomas and Perpetua’s Vision of Dinoerates, 
see the notes on this Vision. 


44 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


of Saturus and the redactor we find only words that were no 
doubt familiar Bible or Church phrases: but Perpetua’s words do 
not, for the most part, admit of the same explanation: and accord- 
ingly we are justified in reckoning them as evidence of indi- 
viduality of style in her portion of the narrative. 

Moreover a close examination of the vocabulary and manner 
of what purports to be her writing leads us to the same result. 
Thus Perpetua uses ‘deicere’ three times In the sense of ‘to over- 
throw a person’s stedfastness’; but in the only place where the 
redactor employs it (c. xviii.) it has quite a different sense. Again 
‘refrigero, in the intransitive sense of to refresh oneself, comes 
four times in Perpetua, once in Saturus, and twice in the 
redactor; but in the first of these cases he is quoting Perpetua’s 
word, and the second case immediately follows the quotation 
(c. xvi.). ‘Beneficio’ with a genitive occurs three times in Per- 
petua; ‘subito’ three times; ‘ostendi, of a vision, three times; 
‘mirae magnitudinis’ three times; ‘coepi’ eleven times in Per- 
petua, three times in Saturus, and only once in the redactor. 

The narrative of Perpetua, and the same is true of that of 
Saturus, is marked by extreme simplicity : it is eloquent indeed, 
but with no touch of conscious art or rhetoric. The narrative of 
the redactor is equally beautiful, but in a very different way: 
it is full of epigram and chastened rhetorical contrast. 

The simplicity of Perpetua’s style is due to two principal 
causes : first the constant use of the simplest of conjunctions; and 
secondly the incessant repetition of the same words and phrases. | 
The first of these may be illustrated by an analysis which I 
have made of the use of the word ‘et’ throughout the whole 
piece. Perpetua employs it 152 times in 172 lines; Saturus 57 
times in 52 lines; the redactor only 90 times in 170 lines’. That 
is, roughly speaking, Perpetua uses it nearly once in a line; Saturus 
still more frequently ; and the redactor only about once in two lines. 
Again, there are passages in Perpetua where, with her constant 
habit of repeating a word she has just used, she employs ‘tunc’ 
as her connecting particle again and again. The most conspicuous 
instance of this is in c. iii, where for 13 lines ‘et’ is almost 
banished, and we have ‘tunc’ four times, and three sentences 


1 JT have eliminated from the calculation quotations from the New Testament. 


AUTHORSHIP OF THE VISIONS. 45 


are without any introductory conjunction. In Saturus we have 
‘tunc’ only once, and that in a strong sense at the end of his 
Vision: and in the redactor ‘tunc’ occurs only once as a connect- 
ing particle. 

The use of ‘ut’ absolutely is also worth noting in Perpetua; 
eg. ‘et factus est mihi carcer subito praetorium, ut ibi mallem 
essem quam alicubi’: and in three similar instances (c. 111, ut... 
laniaretur; c. x., ut excederet, ut...mitterem). Compare with this 
her use of ‘ita ut,’ c. vil. (bis). 

These may seem trifling points; but we must remember that 
it is in the use of particles that we find the surest evidence of the 
sameness or difference of styles, where there is any room for the 
suspicion that a forger has been at work. 

The second peculiarity which we have noted in Perpetua’s 
style is the repeated employment of the same words and phrases 
where a careful writer would have been at pains to vary his 
language. 

Thus in ¢. ili., within the space of 9 lines we find ‘ paucis diebus, 
‘in ipso spatio paucorum dierum, ‘post paucos dies’ and ‘ paucis 
horis’: in 10 lines we find ‘sollicitudine infantis’ (twice), ‘sollicita 
pro eo’ and ‘tales sollicitudines’; and the expression ‘sollicitudine 
infantis’ comes again inc. vi. In 13 lines we have ‘carcer’ five 
times; and in 10 lines ‘infans’ four times. We may note too 
the sentence, ‘Tabescebam ideo quod illos tabescere uideram 
mei beneficio. In c. iv., in 5 lines we have ‘scala’ five times; 
and in 6 lines ‘ascendere’ five times. We have moreover ‘ferra- 
mentorum...ferramentis’; and the characteristic sentence: 
‘lente eiecit caput; et quasi primum gradum calcarem, calcaui 
uli caput. 

In c. v. we read: ‘post paucos dies rumor cucurrit ut audi- 
remur’: with which we may compare c. vi.: ‘subito rapti sumus 
ut audiremur...rumor statim per uicinas fori partes cucurrit. We 
have also: ‘pater meus consumptus taedio,’ which recurs word 
for word in c.ix. In c.vi. we have a good example of repetition in 
the following sentences: ‘ Ht ego respondi: Non facio. Hilarianus, 
Christiana es? inquit. Ht ego respondi: Christiana sum. Et 
cum staret pater ad me deiciendam, iussus est ab Hilariano deicr, 
et uirga percussit. Et doluit mihi casus patris mei, quasi ego 
frissem percussa: sic dolut pro senecta eius misera.’ With the 


46 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


last words compare c. v., ‘Et ego dolebam causam patris mei’; 
c. vii. ‘et dolui commemorata casus eius’; and c. ix., ‘Ego dole- 
bam pro infelici senecta eius.’ 

Inc. vii. we have: ‘ Erat deinde...ubi Dinocrates erat piscina 
plena aqua, alttorem marginem habens quam erat statura pueri; 
et extendebat se Dinocrates quasi bibiturus. Ego dolebam quod et 
piscina illa aguam habebat, et tamen propter altitudinem marginis 
bibttwrus non esset. Et experrecta sum, et cognoui fratrem meum 
laborare: sed fidebam me profuturam labori eius: et orabam pro 
eo omnibus diebus quousque transiuimus in carcerem castrensem. 
Munere enim castrensi eramus pugnaturi.’ 

In c. viii. we have ‘quem retro uideram, and ‘quam retro 
uideram.’ 

In c. x. we have ‘fautores mei’ three times: and im the last 
words of Perpetua’s writing: ‘Hoc usque in pridie muneris egt: 
ipsius autem muneris actum si quis uoluerit scribat.’ 


T think that after this detailed examination we are justified 
in saying that Perpetua has a distinct style of her own, which 
marks off her writing from that of the compiler of the Martyrdom. 
The absence of glaring instances of ‘ Africanism’ in what she has 
written is only what we should expect, when we remember that 
it is edited for us by a writer of unusual literary ability and of 
cultured style. We may well believe that the rougher phrases 
have been smoothed away. 

When we turn to the Vision of Saturus we have much less 
material for comparison; but even here a fair case may be made 
out for individuality of authorship. We have already noticed the 
extraordinary frequency with which he couples his sentences by 
the simple conjunction ‘et.’ We may further observe that he 
has phrases more than once which are not found elsewhere in the 
piece. Thus he gives us ‘tale fuit quasi’ twice (c. xi.), and 
‘tales erant quasi’ (c. xil.): ‘sic quasi’ twice: ‘cum admiratione’ 
twice: ‘sine cessatione’ twice (but this occurs also once in 
Perpetua): ‘exire’ in the sense of ‘mori’ three times. Moreover 
he uses ‘dixi, dixit, dixerunt’ eleven times, never varying the 
word, whereas Perpetua has also ‘inquit’ and ‘respondi.’ So too 
he uses ‘uiridarium’ three times for a garden, while Perpetua uses 
‘hortus, Considering then that we have only 52 lines of his 


AUTHORSHIP OF THE REST OF THE MARTYRDOM. AT 


writing, the evidence is much fuller than we had a right to 
expect. 

When we now return to the Greek form of the Martyrdom, 
we find that these peculiarities of style are entirely obliterated; 
and thus we are supplied with a fresh and most powerful argument 
on behalf of the originality of the Latin document as a whole. 


The Authorship of the rest of the Martyrdom. 


If the evidence which I have adduced is sufficient to establish 
a real difference of style between the writers of the Visions and 
the redactor who edits them and supplements them with an 
account of the actual Martyrdom, no one, I suppose, will hesitate 
for a moment to leave the authorship of the Visions with the 
Martyrs themselves. 

Ts it possible also to identify the redactor? I believe that it is. 
It has been several times suggested that the whole character of 
the composition points to Tertullian as its author. Holsten, the 
first editor of the Martyrdom, although he does not anywhere 
suggest that Tertullian was its author, yet takes pains to collect 
from his writings many illustrations both of matter and of vocabu- 
lary. 

It must always be difficult and hazardous to attempt to assign 
a work to a particular author, when there is no tradition con- 
necting it with his name. But I can scarcely conceive that any 
instance could be found in which identification can be made with 
a greater probability than is attainable in the present case. 

I shall begin by examining the Scriptural quotations in the 
piece, and then pass on to parallels of thought and diction be- 
tween our author and Tertullian, and finally bring together some 
of the more important coincidences in vocabulary. 

First, let us examine the way in which the redactor quotes the 
New Testament. The first citation is in the Preface, and comes 
from Acts ii. 17. ‘In nouissimis enim diebus, dicit Dominus, 
effundam de Spiritu meo super omnem carnem, et prophetabunt 
filii filiaeque eorum; et super seruos et ancillas meas de meo 

Spiritu effundam ; et iuuenes uisiones uidebunt et senes somnia 


48 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


somniabunt.’ The reading ‘eorum’ suggests a comparison of the 
rendering of this passage in the Latin of Codex Bezae. I have 
also given the Vulgate version, italicising its divergences. 


Copex BrEzar. 


Erit in nouissimis diebus, dicit 
Dominus, effundam Spiritum meum 
super omnem carnem, et prophetabunt 
fili eorum et filias eorum ; et iuuenes 
uisiones uidebunt et seniores somnia 
somniabunt; et ego super seruos meos 


VULGATE, 


Et erit in nouissimis diebus, dicit 
Dominus, effundam de Spzritwu meo 
super omnem carnem, et prophetabunt 
filii westr? et filiae westrae; et iuuenes 
uestv? uisiones uidebunt et seniores 
uestrt somnia somniabunt ; et quidem 


et super ancillas meas effundam Spiri- 
tum meum. 


super seruos meos et super ancillas 
meas 27 diebus tllis effundam de Spiritu 
meo, et prophetabunt. 


It will be seen that most of the peculiarities in our quotation 
are explained by supposing the currency in Africa in the second 
century of a text closely related to that of Codex Bezae. But there 
still remains the curious disarrangement of the sentences, which 
seems to be an idiosyncrasy of the writer himself. Now it is 
remarkable that Tertullian (Adv. Marc. v. 8) quotes the passage 
thus: ‘In nouissimis diebus effundam de meo Spiritu in omnem 
carnem, et prophetabunt filii filiaeque eorum; et super seruos et 
ancillas meas de meo Spiritu effundam.’ Here we have the same 
displacement, as far as the quotation extends, and the same 
variants in the text’. 

A little later in the Preface we find these words: ‘Et nos 
itaque quod audiuimus” et contrectauimus annuntiamus et uobis, 
fratres et filioli, ut et uos qui interfuistis rememoremini gloriae 
Domini, et qui nunc cognoscitis per auditum communionem 
habeatis cum sanctis martyribus,’ &c. 

In this passage we have the language of two verses worked up 
somewhat confusedly. They stand in the Vulgate thus: 


1 Cf. Tert. De Resurr. 63, ‘ Hffundens in nouissimis diebus de suo Spiritu in 
omnem carnem, in seruos suos et ancillas.’ 

2 Possibly ‘et uidimus’ has fallen out after ‘ audiuimus’; for the Greek version 
of the Martyrdom has & jKovcaper Kal Ewpdxapev kal évyradjoauev. With the order 
which we should thus get Cod. Sinaiticus corresponds, reading, apparently against 
all other Greek MSS., ¢ dxyxéapev kal ewpdxapyev. It is also to be noted that the 
Latin of the Martyrdom, though not the Greek, has the true reading ‘et uobis.’ 


AUTHORSHIP OF THE REST OF THE MARTYRDOM. 49 


1 Jno. i. 1. ‘Quod fuit ab initio, quod audiuimus, quod uidimus 
oculis nostris, quod perspeximus, et manus nostrae contrectauerunt 
de uerbo uitae.’ 

1 Jno. i. 3. ‘Quod uidimus et audiuimus, annunciamus uobis, 
ut et wos societatem habeatis nobiscum.’ 

The most curious result of this combination is ‘ contrectauimus’ 
(1 pers. plur.), which cannot be explained from any MSS. or Versions. 
But we find it in Tertullian (Adv. Prax. 15): ‘Vidimus et audiuimus 
et contrectauimus de sermone uitae,’ which is a loose citation of 
1 Jno. i. 1, which he has quoted somewhat more accurately a little 
before. Here then we seem to have another example of the way 
in which an individual writer may have a habit of his own in 
quoting a special text. 

The next quotation is inc. xix. ‘Sed qui dixerat, Petite et acci- 
pietis, petentibus dederat eum exitum quem quisque desiderauerat.’ 
The actual phrase is found in Jno. xvi. 24 ‘ Petite et accipietis, ut 
gaudium uestrum sit plenum. But the more natural text to 
have quoted would have been ‘ Petite et dabitur uobis’ (Mt. vii. 7, 
Le. xi. 9), and that passage was probably in the writer’s mind 
when he added ‘petentibus dedit,’ which 1s parallel to ‘ pulsanti 
aperietur’ in 8. Matthew and 8. Luke. 

Now this same confusion is to be traced in more than one 
passage of Tertullian. Thus we read (De Orat. 10) ‘Dominus, 
prospector humanarum necessitatum, seorsum post traditam orandi 
disciplinam: Petite, inquit, et accipietis’; where he certainly 
ought to have written ‘et dabitur uobis. Again (De Bapt. 20): 
‘Petite et accipietis, inquit. Quaesistis enim et inuenistis; pul- 
sastis et apertum est uobis. Again after combating the Mar- 
cionist use of ‘Quaerite et inuenietis’ (De Praescr. 8) he goes on 
to quote, ‘Pulsate et aperietur uobis, and later on in the same 
chapter, ‘ Petite et accipietis’: and in c. 11 he loosely quotes the 
next sentences thus: ‘Petenti enim dabitur, inquit, et pulsanti 
aperietur, et quaerenti inuenietur.’ 

The same confusion is to be found several times in 8S. Augustine’s 
writings (see Sabatier, ad loca): so that we are not justified in 
laying stress on it as an idiosyncrasy of Tertullian. The confusion 
is an easy one: but it is apparently not to be accounted for 
by any known Version, and the fact that it is made both by our 


R. 4 


50 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


author and by Tertullian is certainly an interesting coincidence, 
and one which acquires importance when added to those already 
mentioned. 

The next instance I shall give is from the Epilogue. It does 
not, strictly speaking, contain a quotation though it involves a 
reference to Mt. xxi. 14 and perhaps also to Rev. xvii. 14; but 
it may serve as a point of passage from the consideration of 
Scriptural citations to other instances in which we find parallels 
between our author and Tertullian. We read at the close of the 
narration of their sufferings: ‘O fortissimi ac beatissimi Martyres! 
O uere uocati et electi in gloriam Domini nostri Iesu Christi; 
quam qui magnificat et honorificat et adorat, utique et haec non 
minora ueteribus exempla in aedificationem Kcclesiae legere debet.’ 

The first point to notice is that ‘the glory of the Lord’ is 
regarded as the great end of Martyrdoms, and is set forward by 
their public recital in the Church. The same thought is twice 
expressed in the Preface: ‘necessario et digerimus et ad gloriam 
Dei lectione celebramus’; and, in a passage cited above, ‘annun- 
tiamus et uobis...ut et uos qui interfuistis rememoremini gloriae 
Domini.’ 

Now when Tertullian discusses Flight in Persecution, he takes 
the high ground that Persecution is a dispensation of God for 
judging the Church and shewing who are truly His. And the 
great end of Persecution is found to be ‘the glory of God’: De 
Fug. 1: ‘Totum quod agitur in persecutione gloria Dei est, 
probantis et reprobantis, imponentis et deponentis. In c. 9 he 
says: ‘nolite in lectulis...optare exire, sed in martyriis, uti 
glorificetur qui est passus pro nobis. Again (c. 12) he asks, if 
Christians may escape by the payment of a bribe, ‘quomodo 
et martyria fierl possent in gloriam Domini?’ 

At the close of the book (c. 14) after admitting the hardness 
of its sayings and yet insisting on fearlessness as the true sign of 
love, he says: ‘Et ideo multi uocati, pauci electi.” The whole line 
of thought is closely parallel to the words of our author about the 
Martyrs, who were not only called but chosen to the glory of our 
Lord. 

An interesting parallel in thought rather than in words is to 
be found in the Preface. After speaking of the Divine grace 


AUTHORSHIP OF THE REST OF THE MARTYRDOM. 51 


displayed in his own day in Martyrs and in Revelations, he adds: 
‘Cum semper Deus operetur quae repromisit, non credentibus in 
testimonium, credentibus in beneficium.’ Tertullian (De Anima 
51) tells of a Christian girl, ‘uernacula ecclesiae, who had died 
and-was laid out for burial, but who, when the priest began to say 
a prayer over her, raised her hands from her side and folded them 
in the form of a cross on her breast, and afterwards, ‘condita pace’ 
(i.e. when the kiss of peace had been given to conclude the prayer), 
returned them to their former position. This he vouches for of 
his own knowledge: similar facts he has heard related. Then he 
adds, ‘Si et apud ethnicos tale quid traditur, ubique Deus 
potestatis suae signa proponit, suis in solatium, extraneis in 
testimonium.’ The thought is precisely the same, and the two 
sentences though so differently worded are almost interchangeable. 

On the other hand in c. xx. we have a parallel in words rather 
than in sense. When Perpetua has been tossed by the mad cow, 
her only care is to rearrange her torn robe, ‘pudoris potius memor 
quam doloris.’ In Tertullian (De Paenit. 10) we read of some who 
put off the open confession of their sins—‘ pudoris magis memores 
quam salutis.’ 

The distinctly Montanistic tone of the Martyrdom may be 
illustrated by two facts in the history of its transmission. The 
first of these has already been noticed (p. 6): the Greek trans- 
lator has carefully modified passages which he regarded as un- 
satisfactory on this ground; and especially the closing section 
of the piece. A similar fate has awaited the document in the 
West: for both Cod. Salisburg. and Cod. Compend. have omitted 
the whole of the Preface, and the Short Latin recension has 
nothing to correspond to it at all. Accordingly it has only been 
preserved in the Monte Cassino MS., and in a modified form in 
the Greek Version. 

Now this Montanistic tone, using the expression in its best 
sense, as connoting the emphasis laid on the present work of the 
Holy Spirit in the Church and especially in Martyrdoms, is just 
what we should look for in a work of Tertullian. It is needless 
+o multiply quotations on this point: but I cannot forbear quoting 
two passages out of many. The first is at the outset of his exhor- 
tation to the Martyrs in prison: ‘ Imprimis ergo, benedicti, nolite 

4—2 


52 THE PASSION OF 8S. PERPETUA. 


contristare Spiritum Sanctum, qui uobiscum introiit carcerem. Si 
enim non uobiscum nunc introisset, nec uos illic hodie fuissetis’ 
(Ad Mart. 1). We may note in passing that our redactor also 
applies the epithet ‘benedictus’ to a martyr (c. xi. ‘Saturus 
benedictus’). The other passage is from the De Corona: ‘Plane 
superest, ut etiam martyria recusare meditentur, qui prophetias 
eiusdem Spiritus Sancti respuerunt’ (De Cor. 1). 

We have the technical phraseology of Montanism in c. xx., 
where ‘adeo in Spiritu et in ecstasi fuerat’ may be compared with, 
the striking passage in De Anima 9, which gives an interesting 
illustration of the materials out of which visions were formed and 
so far bears out our view of the use made by our Martyrs of the 
Shepherd of Hermas, which no doubt they had heard read in the 
Church. ‘Est hodie soror apud nos reuelationum charismata 
sortita, quas in ecclesia inter dominica sollemnia per ecstasin in 
Spiritu patitur; conuersatur cum angelis, aliquando etiam cum 
Domino, et uidet et audit sacramenta, et quorundam corda dinoscit, 
et medicinas desiderantibus submittit. Iam uero prout scripturae 
leguntur aut psalmi canuntur aut allocutiones proferuntur aut 
petitiones delegantur, ita inde matertae uisionibus subminis- 
trantur.’ 

Again, it is interesting to observe the number of expressions 
which suggest that the writer is familiarly conversant with the 
phraseology of Roman law, and so form a fresh link with the style 
of Tertullian. To pass over such commoner words as ‘exempla’ 
(bis), ‘documentum’ (bis), ‘testificari’ (bis), ‘testimonium’ (bis), 
‘haereditas, we find the rarer word ‘fideicommissum, which is 
seldom met with outside the law books, in the striking metaphor 
of c xvi. ‘quasi mandatum sanctissimae Perpetuae, immo _fider- 
commissum elus exequimur, unum adicientes documentum de 
ipsius constantia et animi sublimitate. The word implies a 
sacred trust of moral rather than of legal obligation. ‘ Midei- 
commissum est quod non ciuilibus uerbis sed precatione relinquitur; 
nec ex rigore luris ciuilis proficiscitur, sed ex uoluntate datur 
relinquentis’ (Ulpian. Frag. 25, 1). Again, if Tertullian be the 
author it is curious to see how he can turn the edge of his own 
favourite argument from ‘prescription’ when used against himself, 
and that too in words every one of which can easily be paralleled 


AUTHORSHIP OF THE REST OF THE MARTYRDOM. 53 


from his writings. Compare c.1i.‘ Vel quia et haec uetera fntura 
quandoque sunt et necessaria posteris, si in praesenti suo tempore 
minori deputantur auctoritati, propter praesumptam uenerationem 
antiquitatis’; with Apol. 19, ‘auctoritatem summa antiquitas 
uindicat’; and De Virg. Vel. 2, ‘sed nolo interim hunc morem 
ueritati deputare. Lastly, we may note the word ‘instrumentum’ 
in one of the various senses in which Tertullian loves to use it; 
c. i. ‘ad instrumentum Kcclesiae deputamus’: compare especially 
De Cor. 8, ‘per communia ista instrumenta exhibitionis humanae’; 
and for other examples both of this word and of ‘deputari’ see 
Holsten’s note on Perpet. c. 1. 

Two phrases which, although they occur in earlier Latin writers, 
are conspicuously characteristic of Tertullian are also to be found 
in our author. The first of these is ‘uiderit,’ ‘let him see to it, 
in dismissing somewhat contemptuously an opponent with whom 
it is not worth while to argue. Thus in c. i. we have: ‘Sed 
uiderint qui unam uirtutem...’; of those who deny the variety of 
the Spirit's manifestations in all ages of the Church. Compare 
Ad Scap. 4, ‘ Viderint qui sectam mentiuntur, and see Oehler’s note 
on De Cor. 13, where many examples are collected. The second is 
the absolute use of ‘si forte,’ in the sense of ‘if at all’; compare 
c. xviii. ‘si forte, gaudio pauentes, non timore, with Ad Mart. i. 
ad fin., and see Oehler’s note on De Cor. 5. 

Our enquiry is rendered more difficult by the want of any 
piece of sustained historical narration in Tertullian’s recognised 
works, which might have given us an opportunity of observing his 
method of telling a plain straightforward story. Wherever we 
open him we feel that we meet with the rhetorician, passionately 
in earnest but always pleading a cause. On the other hand, even 
in our short and simple narrative we have touches of rhetoric which 
form a strong contrast to the quiet naturalness of Perpetua’s own 
style. These come out from time to time in the narrator’s com- 
ments on the incidents which he relates. Thus, at the very outset 
of his own narration, in speaking of the death of Secundulus in 
prison he makes the remark: ‘non sine gratia, ut bestias lucraretur. 
gladium tamen etsi non anima, certe caro elus agnouit*.’ With 
this special use of ‘lucrari’ we may compare De Res. 42: ‘Quis 

1 See the notes on this passage, pp. 82 f. 


54 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


enim non desiderabit dum in carne est, superinduere immortali- 
tatem et continuare uitam lucrifacta morte per uicariam demuta- 
tionem ?’ With the second clause compare Ad Mart. 4: ‘'Timebit 
forsitan caro gladium,’ &c.; and later on in the same chapter: ‘Orna- 
mentum enim et gloria deputabitur maiore quidem titulo, si 
anima potius cesserit plagis, quam corpus.’ 

The same characteristic is observable as the narrative proceeds, 
and it is specially to be noticed in the rhetorical contrasts employed 
in speaking of Felicitas, in c. xvill.: ‘Saluam se peperisse gaudens 
ut ad bestias pugnaret, a sanguine in sanguinem, ab obstetrice 
ad retiarium, lotura post partum baptismo secundo.’ The Second 
Baptism, to which our author again rhetorically alludes in c. xxi, 
is so frequently spoken of by Tertullian that it would be super- 
fluous to collect illustrations of 1t?. 

IT cannot help quoting in this connection the epigrammatic 
comment, ‘Agnouit iniustitia iustitiam, which is rendered the 
more striking by the use of the rare word ‘iniustitia.’ The com- 
ment on the eagerness of Saturninus to be exposed to all the 
beasts, ‘ut scilicet gloriosiorem gestaret coronam,’ may be com- 
pared with Ad Scap. 4: ‘sed maiora certamina, maiora praemia.’ 
That on the provision of a mad cow contrary to custom in the 
arena, ‘diabolus praeparauit, sexui earum etiam de bestia aemu- 
latus, is curiously parallel to the opening sentence of the treatise 
Adv. Praxean: ‘ Varie diabolus aemulatus est ueritatem.’ 

The play upon words in c. xxi, to which we have already 
alluded (p. 8), where the author puts a new and unexpected 
meaning into the taunting shout of the multitude in the amphi- 
theatre, is very like Tertullian’s irony in Ad Scap. 3: ‘Cum 
de areis sepulturarum nostrarum adclamassent: Areae non sint! 
areae ipsorum non fuerunt.’ 

At last the orator breaks out in the noble peroration: ‘O 
fortissimi ac beatissimi Martyres! O uere uocati et electi in 
gloriam Domini nostri Jesu Christi!’ The second of these clauses 
has been already illustrated from Tertullian (p. 50), and we may 
add to the passages there quoted De Bapt. 16, where we have the 
same words applied to Martyrs in speaking of the Second Baptism: 
‘ proinde nos facere aqua uocatos, sanguine electos.’ It is interest- 

1 Cf, Oehler on Apol. 50. 


AUTHORSHIP OF THE REST OF THE MARTYRDOM. 55 


ing also to note that ‘fortissima Martyr’ is the very epithet 
applied to Perpetua in De Anima 55°. 

I must now close this investigation with a few parallels of 
words and phrases, given in the briefest possible form. JI do not 
of course pretend that they are peculiar to our author and 
Tertullian, or that they would prove anything by themselves; but 
they are useful as supplementary evidence of the harmony of lan- 
guage and thought which we have already found to exist between 
them. I need scarcely acknowledge my indebtedness to Oehler’s 
valuable Index, and to Rénsch’s [tala und Vulgata. 

ci, St uetera fider exempla, &e. (cf. c. xxi. haec non minora 
ueteribus exenrplis). 

De Fuga 2. Exempla in seripturis signata demonstrant (e.g. 
Saul, Phygellus and Hermogenes). Ibid. 3. Cum ergo et haec 
exempla magis in persecutionibus eueniant. 

In literis sunt digesta...digerantur...necessario et digerumus. 

Ad Natt, ii. 1. Ex omnibus retro digestis (and Oehler’s note : 
‘digerere et digestum Tertulliano usitatissima sunt uocabula’). 
De Bapt. 1. Non erit otiosum digestum istud, instruens tam eos, 
&c. (In the Classical use of these words the idea of. orderly 
arrangement generally prevails.) 

Quasi repraesentatione rerum. 

De Jejun. 13. Ipsa repraesentatio totius nominis Christiani 
(of a Universal Council). De Praescr. 36. Ipsae authenticae 
litterae eorum (sc. apostolorum) recitantur, sonantes uocem et 
repraesentantes faclem uniuscuiusque (where the general sense is 
the same as here). Cf. also De Res. 17. 

Pro aetatibus temporum...in ultima saecult spatia. 

Adv. Jud. 1. Noster uero minor aetate temporum intellegatur, 
utpote in ultimo saeculi spatio, &e. 

Nowissimiora. Cf. Tertullian’s forms, ‘extremior, ‘extremis- 


1 ¢ Quomodo Perpetua fortissima Martyr sub die passionis in reuelatione para- 
disi solos illic commartyres suos uidit,’ &c. Tertullian has been accused of a 
mistake in this passage, which he could scarcely have made had he been himself 
the editor of the Visions: namely, that of confounding the Vision of Saturus with 
that of Perpetua. But, in truth, he is strictly correct: for Saturus saw others 
beside Martyrs in Paradise: whereas Perpetua speaks only of the ‘ candidati milia 
multa’ in the Garden at the top of the Ladder: and these obviously were ‘ only 
fellow-martyrs.’ 


56 THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


simus,’ ‘postremissimus’; and Ronsch, [. und V., 278, 280, where 
instances are given from other writers of these provincial 
formations. 

Omma donatiua administrans in omnibus. 

Adv. Marc. 8. Donatiua, quae charismata dicimus. 

De Res. 47. ‘Donatiuum autem Dei uita aeterna., 

Siue in martyrum siue in reuelationum dignatione. 

Adv. Iud. 1. Per gratiam primae dignationis in lege...gratiam 
diuinae dignationis consequitur. 

De Patient. 11. Gratulari et gaudere nos docet dignatione 
diuinae castigationis (cf. c. xviii. ad fin., of our Martyrdom), 

c. xvi. Ad supplementum tantae gloriae describendae. 

Adv. Marc. iv. 16. Plane haec Christus adiecerit ut supple- 
menta consentanea disciplinae Creatoris. Cf. De Anima, 35. 

ce. xvi. Pridie quoque cum tllam cenam ultumam, quam liberam 
uocant, quantum in ipsis erat non cenam liberam, sed agapen cena- 
rent. 

Apol. 42. Non in publico Liberalibus discumbo, quod bestiariis 
supremam cenantibus mos est. 

Tbid. 39 (in reference to the ‘agape’). Vt qui non tam cenam 
cenauerint quam disciplinam. 

c. xx. Ad uelamentum femoris reduait. 

De Fuga, 6. Ad uelamentum timiditatis suae utuntur. 

Apol. 36. Ad uelamentum sui potest fungi. 

Adv. Val. 16. Velamentum sibi obduxit. (The word is not a 
common one, and its use in classical writers is quite different.) 

ce. xxi. Ad sumumam. 

Adv. Mare. v.17. Ad summam subiungens. 

Ante tam osculati inuicem, ut martyrium per solemma pacis 
consummarent, 

De Orat. 18. Quae oratio cum diuortio sancti osculi integra?... 
Quale sacrificium est a quo sine pace receditur ? 


This investigation might doubtless be carried further by one 
who had a more intimate acquaintance with the writings of 
Tertullian than my cursory reading allows me to claim: but 
I cherish the hope that I have done enough to render it in the 
highest degree probable that we have in this beautiful Martyr- 


AUTHORSHIP OF THE REST OF THE MARTYRDOM. 57 


dom a genuine addition to the hitherto recognised works of 
the great master. It is hard indeed to force oneself to imagine 
another such writer, living at the same time and in the same 
Church, filled with the same Montanistic fervour, delighting in the 
same legal phraseology, able to wield the same passionate rhetoric 
to the same good purposes, even making the same confusions 
in his Scriptural quotations; who yet must be distinguished from 
Tertullian himself; and that, forsooth, only because tradition has 
assigned to him no name. 

An argument of this kind will appeal with different degrees of 
force to different minds. I would beg any one who desires to 
estimate it fairly to read over again Tertullian’s De Patientia, and 
to ask himself whether it does not gain a new meaning and beauty 
if we suppose that its author had already written the story of 
Perpetua. I would especially call attention to the following 
passages : 

ce 7. Nihil enim nostrum, quoniam Dei omnia, culus ipsi 
quoque nos. 

Quis enim ab alio secari omnino non sustinens ipse ferrum in 
corpore suo ducit ? 

ce. 9. Christum laedimus cum euocatos quosque ab illo quasi 
miserandos non aequanimiter accipimus. 

c. 10. Nos utres (v. . putres), uasa fictilia. 

c. 11. Quin insuper gratulari et gaudere nos docet dignatione 
diuinae castigationis. 

c. 13. Carnis patientia in persecutionibus denique proeliatur... 
si et carcer praeueniat, caro in uinculis, caro in ligno, caro in 
solo et in illa paupertate lucis, et in illa patientia (v. J. penuria) 
mundi, cum uero producitur ad experimentum felicitatis, ad 
occasionem secundae intinctionis, ad ipsum diuinae sedis ascensum, 
nulla plus illic quam patientia corporis. 

Almost every phrase here quoted has its parallel, in thought if 
not in word, in our Martyrdom: and many smaller coincidences 
might be collected. But the whole feeling of the piece is of more 
importance than its phraseology. Patience, he tells us at the close 
(c. 15), ‘temptationes inculcat, scandala pellit, martyria consum- 
mat.’ And then he draws her portrait; and did he not draw it 
from the life? Was he not thinking of her whose one prayer at 


58 THE PASSION OF 8. PERPETUA. 


her baptism had been at the Spirit’s bidding for this very Patience? 
Had he not in view the scene in the amphitheatre where the 
Martyrs shake their heads at the judge whom God will judge: and 
the noble picture of Perpetua herself, ‘the bride of Christ, the 
darling of God,’ with her bright step and flashing eye, soon to 
find herself enjoying in the Spirit the beatific vision before the 
time, and only recalled to earth to taste of pain and to point the 
clumsy sword to her own throat? 

‘Age iam si et effigiem habitumque eius comprehendamus. 
Vultus illi tranquillus et placidus, frons pura, nulla maeroris aut 
irae rugositate contracta ; remissa aeque in laetum modum super- 
cilia, eculis humilitate non infelicitate deiectis; os tacurnitatis 
honore signatum ; color qualis securis et Innoxiis; motus frequens 
capitis in diabolum et minax risus; ceterum amictus circum pectora 
candidus, et corpori impressus, ut qui nec inflatur nec inquietatur: 
sedet enim in throno Spiritus eius mitissimi et mansuetissimi, qui 
non turbine glomeratur, non nubilo liuet, sed est tenerae sereni- 
tatis, apertus et simplex, quem tertio uidit Helias. Nam ubi 
Deus, ibi et alumna eius, patientia scilicet. Cum ergo Spiritus 
Dei descendit, indiuidua patientia comitatur eum.’ 


THE LATIN AND GREEK TEXTS 


OF THE 


PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 


I. Si uetera fidei exempla, et Dei gratiam testificantia et 
aedificationem hominis operantia, propterea in litteris sunt 
digesta, ut lectione eorum quasi repraesentatione rerum et Deus 
honoretur et homo confortetur; cur non et noua documenta 


saeque utrique causae conuenientia et digerantur ? 


uel quia 


proinde et haec uetera futura quandoque sunt et necessaria pos- 
teris, si in praesenti suo tempore minori deputantur auctoritati, 


propter praesumptam uenerationem antiquitatis. 


sed uiderint 


qui unam uirtutem Spiritus unius Sancti pro aetatibus iudicent 
1o temporum: cum maiora reputanda sunt nouitiora quaeque ut 
nouissimiora, secundum exuperationem gratiae in ultima saeculi 


spatia decretam. In nowissimis enim diebus, dictt Dominus, Act. ii. 
efundam de Spiritu meo super omnem carnem, et prophetabun 


fil filiaeque eorum: et super seruos et ancillas meas de meo 


Deest titulus in A. 


INCIPIT PASSIO SCAE FELICITATIS ET PERPETVAE B; 


PASSIO 


SS. FAELICITATIS ET PERPETVAE, QVOD EST NONIS MARTIIS IN CIVITATE TURBITANA © 


1 Deest cap. I. in BC 
repensatione A 


1 Dei gratiam testificantia] Cf. Act. 
xx. 24 testificari euangelium gratiae Dei. 
3 repraesentatione] See above p. 9. 

4 et homo confortetur] The Greek has 
lost this clause: but probably it origin- 
ally had it; and, if so, we should read 
below éxarépay épyagéueva wpédrerav. 

8 sed uiderint] See above p. 53. Those 
are blamed who limit the manifestations 
of the Spirit’s working: with ‘unam’ 
contrast ‘ceteras,’ p. 62, 1. 3. 

10 cum...sunt] The use of ‘cum’ with 


2 aedificatione A 
12 decretam] decreta A 


3 repraesentatione] coni. Harris;. 


indic. in a causal sense is found in early 
Latin writers, and is very common in 
African Latin: see Oehler on Tert. Apol. 
1 (note n). There is no need to read 
‘sint’ with Holsten. , 

11 nouissimiora] See above p. 55; 
and add ‘postremissimas’ (C. Gracchus, 
in Wordsworth’s Fragments and Speci- 
mens of early Latin p. 354). See also 
Rénsch [tala und Vulgata pp. 277 ff. 

12 decretam] The Greek suggests either 
this or perhaps ‘decretae,’ instead of the 


i 17. 


MAPTYPION TIEPTIETOYAC. 


Mapruptov tijs ayias Ileprerovas kal rav ov airy teAcwbévtwv év 
a nA \ , nx ‘4 2 i4 

Adpixy’ TH mp0 Tecoapwv vovav Pevpovapiwy. EvAoynuor. 

3 \ 3 t \ “ XN > £ > @ 3 

Emi Ovarepsavou cai Tadinvod dimypos éyévero, év @ éwap- 

f eg , A € U , 

TUpnoav of dyLor YaTupos, VaToupviros, ‘Peouvxdros, Lepzrerova, 
Pyrxnrarn, vovats Pevpovapiass. 

I. Ei td radata ths miatews Soypata, kal Sd€av Geod 


tm 


a \ b] \ 3 / > n X\ fal , 
gavepovvta Kal oixodouny avOpwrois atotedodvTa, Oia TovTO 
a > n ¢ “ nn 
éorTiv yeypappéva, iva TH avayvocel avTav ws Tapovoia Tov 
; , \ ¢ \ a s \ XN N \ 
mTpaypatov ypeouela Kai 6 Oeds So£ac07, Siati pn Kal Ta Kava 
7 a \ € U > , > I ¢ , 
mapadeiypata, ate 61 éxatepa épyalopeva wdérevay, Waa’TaS 10 
a 3 N \ na 4 >? \ ? 
-ypabn mapadobein; 7) yap Ta viv mpaxyéevta ov THY avTHY 
~ 5 ‘ 3 nn / 
mappynoiav éyet, éret Soxet mws eivat Ta apyata cemvorepa; 
n 4 , € f “ 
TAY Kab TadTa VoTEpoy ToTE yevoueva TrahaLa, Woa’Tws Tots 
bd ¢€ fal / \ > n \ ‘4 3 > Wv 
pe? nds yevyoetat Kal avayKaia Kat Tita. adr owrrat 
e , , \ 
olriwves play Svvapiv évds aylov wvevpaTos Kata Tas nALKias 
n , f \ , Bd n 
Kpivovat TOV yYpoverv’ OTe Sy dSuvaTwrepa EdeL voeicOar Ta 


_ 
en 


Kasvotepa, os éyovra avEavopévns THs YapiTos THS eis TA TEXAN 
TaY Kalpov émnyyedpévns. “En écydtaic yap rimépaic, Aérer 6 
Kypioc, ékye@® amd TOY TNeYMaTéc MOY ET TIACAN CApKa, Kal 
TIPOPHTEYCOYCIN O1 YIOl YMON Kal al OyraTeépec YMON" Kal Ol 20 


3 yakwod 6 ef ra] efra Séypuara] forsan rapadelypara 7 avepodyrat 
11- rapadobeis 16 6%] dé 17 éxovra] oxara coni. Gebh... 18 émnyyed- 


pevns 


reading of A, ‘decreta.’ Final ‘m’ is from Act. ii. 17 f. see above pp. 47 f. 

very frequently omitted in this MS., e.g. See also pp. 49 ff. for various parallels 

‘aedificatione’ 1. 2. between the whole of this prefatory sec- 
12 in nouissimis] On the quotation tion and Tertullian’s works, 


62 PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 


Spiritu effundam: et twuenes wisiones uidebunt, et senes somnia 
somniabunt. itaque et nos qui sicut prophetias ita et uisiones 
nouas pariter repromissas et agnoscimus et honoramus, ceteras- 
que uirtutes Spiritus Sancti ad instrumentum Ecclesiae deputa- 
zs mus, cui et missus est idem omnia donatiua administrans in 
omnibus prout unicuique distribuit Dominus, necessario et 
digerimus et ad gloriam Dei lectione celebramus; ut ne qua 
aut imbecillitas aut desperatio fidel apud ueteres tantum 
aestimet gratiam diuinitatis conuersatam, siue in martyrum sive 
1oin reuelationum dignatione: cum semper Deus operetur quae 
repromisit, non credentibus in testimonium, credentibus im 
beneficium. et nos itaque quod audiwmus et contrectawimus 1Jn.i. 
annuntiamus et wobis, fratres et filioli: wt et wos qui interfuistis ’“’ 
rememoremini gloriae Domini, et qui nunc cognoscitis per 
rg auditum communionem habeatts cum sanctis martyribus, et per 
illos cum Domino Iesu Christo, cui est claritas et honor in 
saecula saeculorum. amen. | . 
II. Apprehensi sunt adolescentes catechumini, Reuocatus 
et Felicitas conserua eius, Saturninus et Secundulus. inter 
20hos et Vibia Perpetua, honeste nata, liberaliter instituta, 
matronaliter nupta, habens patrem et matrem et fratres duos, 
alterum aeque catechuminum, et filium infantem ad ubera: 
erat autem ipsa circiter annorum uiginti duo. haec ordinem 
totum martyrii sui iam hinc ipsa narrauit, sicut conscriptum 
25 Manu sua et suo sensu reliquit. 
III. Cum adhuc, inquit, cum prosecutoribus essem, et 
me pater uerbis euertere cupiret et deicere pro sua affectione 
2 et nos] nos et A 5 administratur A 6 prout] pro A 7 lecti- 
onemA 9 diuinatisA om.inA 13 ut] + hii A 18 Reuocatus] ex hoc 
uerbo inc. B 19 om. Saturninus A 20 hos] quos B ubia A; uiuia C 
honeste nata] honesta A 23 erat autem] et erat B_ annorum circiter B 


duo] et duo B; et duorum C 25 suam manu B 26 essem] essemus B 
27 om. uerbis A euertere cupiret] auertere B 


2 prophetias...nouas}] Cf. Tert. adv. 
Prax. 30 Spiritum Sanctum..,oixovouias 
interpretatorem, si quis sermones nouae 
prophetiae eius admiserit. 

5 idem omnia...distribuit Dominus] 
Cf. Rom. xii, 3, 1 Cor. vii. 17, xii. 6. For 
‘donatiua’ see above p. 56, 


7 ad gloriam Dei] See above p. 49. 

9 diuinitatis] Dr Hort has suggested to 
me ‘diuinitus’ as a possible emendation. 

10 cum semper Deus] Cf. Tert. de 


Anim. 51, quoted above p, 51. 


12 contrectauimus] See above p. 49. 
13 interfuistis] This gives us an ap- 


PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 63 


NEANICKOL YM@N OPACEIC OYONTAl, Kal O| TIPECBYTal YM@N E€NY- 
TINIOIC ENYTINIACOHCONTAL. Lets O€ ofTeves TpodyTeias Kal dpdaets 
kawas SexoucOa Kai ériywookopey Kai Tiu@yev Tacas Tas 
Suvdpets ToD dyiov mvevpatos, ws yopnyel TH ayia éxxrnoig 
mpos nv Kal éméuhOn tavta Ta yapicuata év macw s:LoLKody, 
éxaoTo os euépioev 0 Oeos, avayKaiws Kai avapipynoKoper Kal 
Wpos oiKodouny eiadyouev, meTA GyaTNnS TadTa ToodyTEs Els 
dogav Oeod, cat va pn Tas 4 aBéBasds Tis Kal OALYOTLOTOS, 7 
Kal Tots TaNalois wovoy THY yapw Kal Thy Sivapw didocba 


on 


a a An , 
vouion, ete ev Tols THY papTUpwy elite ev TOS TOY aTrOKANU- 10 
weov afismacw: mavrote épyalouévouv Tov Ocov & émrnyyel- 
> , x a 3 ‘4 3 3 f X\ a 
NATO els papTUPLOY fey TOV aTrigT@V Eis avTiAnyrLy -6€ TOV 
TLSTOV. Kab Hels & HKOYCAMEN Kal EWPAKAMEN Kal EPHAADHCAMEN 
’ , ¢on > YN Us ° 1, oe , 
evayyertCoueba YMIN, AdeAGol Kai Téxva’ INA Kal Ob GUTApOYTES 
avauynobdcow S0&ns Oeod, Kat ot viv 8’ axons ywwodoxKovtes 15 
ral \ 3 
KOINWNIAN EYHTE META TOV ayiov papTUpeY, Kal dv avT@v peta 
Tod Kupiou yay “Incod Xpratod, @ 7 Seka eis Tors aidvas TOV 
apn. 
> fa . tS aA / i 
II. °Ev ore. QovpBiravev tH pixpotéepg avvehnpOnoav 
‘a tA ¢ , XN f , 
veaviokot KaTnxovpevol, ‘Peoveatos kat Pnrxntatn avvdovroz, 


ALOVODV. 


vy 
ce) 


Kat Latoupviros cat Lexodvdos: per avrav dé nat OvsBia 
Ileprerova, nTis Hv yevvnbeioa evyevas Kai Tpageioa TodvTEAas 
yapnbciod te eEoywas. 
) \ @ ¢ iy ¢€ / ; 3 \ \ 
adergovs, Ov 6 Erepos Hv Waa’TwS KaTHYOUMEVOS: etyev 5é Kal 


ed es a XN , \ U 
auTn eixyey TaTépa Kal pnTtépa Kal dvo 


téxvov, 5 Tpos Tots wacOois Ere EOnralev- Hv O€ abty érov elxoce 25 
duo: ATs Tacav Thy Ta&wy Tod paptupiov évTedOev Sinyyoato, 
os Kab TO vol avTAS Kal TH yeipl cvyyparaca KatéNurrev OVTwS 
elTrovaa. . 

III. "Er, dyciv, yuev waparnpovpévev éreyxeipes 6 waTHp 
Mot rOyots TeiVew pe KATA THY EavTOD EevoTrAAYYViaV TIS 30 


eis dvrtets 


7 pera aydans| legebat didilectione. 
avrinnpw 
27 Karéhevrey 


19 @ovkpiraver 21 
30 edordaxviay 


proximate date for the compilation of 
the Martyrdom. It is addressed to some 
who were eye-witnesses. For the change 
of person in the Greek, see above p. 4. 
18 Reuocatus, &c.] For the occurrence 
of the names in African Inscriptions see 


louNa kal weprerova 


8 4 aBeBadorns 12 


23 airy 25 airy 


_Mr Harris’s note ad loe. 


21 matronaliter nupta] These words 
occur im an African Inscription; C. I. L. 
Afr. 870. 

27 deicere] Cf. Tert. ad Scap. 4 modice 
uexatam hominem et statim deiectum. 


64 PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 


perseueraret: Pater, inquam, uides, uerbi gratia, uas hoc iacens, 


urceolum siue aliud ? 


et dixit: Video. 
quid alio nomine uocari potest, quam quod est ? 


et ego dixi ei: Num- 
et ait: Non. 


Sic et ego aliud me dicere non possum, nisi quod sum, Christiana. 
stunc pater motus hoc uerbo mittit se in me, ut oculos mihi 


erueret: 
mentis diaboli. 


sed uexauit tantum, et profecto est uictus cum argu- 
tunc paucis diebus quod caruissem patrem, 
Domino gratias egi, et refrigeraui absentia illius. 
spatio paucorum dierum baptizati sumus: 


in ipso 
et mihi Spiritus 


ro dictauit non aliud petendum ab aqua, nisi sufferentiam carnis. 
post paucos dies recipimur in carcerem: et expaul, quia num- 


quam experta eram tales tenebras. 
ualidus turbarum beneficio, concussurae militum. 
macerabar sollicitudine infantis ibi. 


o diem asperum! aestus 
nouissime 
tunc Tertius et Pomponius, 


15 benedicti diaconi qui nobis ministrabant, constituerunt praemio 
ut. paucis horis emissi in meliorem locum carceris refrigeraremus. 
tunc exeuntes de carcere uniuersi sibi uacabant: ego infantem 


lactabam: iam inedia defectum. 
matrem et confortabam fratrem, commendabam filium. 
20 cebam ideo quod illos tabescere uideram mei beneficio. 


sollicita pro eo adloquebar 
tabes- 
tales 


sollicitudines multis diebus passa sum: et usurpaui ut mecum 
infans in carcere maneret; et statim conualui et releuata sum a 


1 inquit A uidens B 3 quam quod est] C; quam quid est B; om. A 
ait] dixit B 5 motus]+in B misit B 6 euerteret B uexauero B 
profecto] profectus BC 8 deoB refrigeraui] conieci ; refrigerauit A; 


refrigerata sum BC 
in B sufferentia B 
ualidos B 


1, 13) missi B 
B; fratri C . 


refrigeremur B 
20 om. ideo B 


6 cum argumentis diaboli] Holsten 
quotes ‘ Antonius in vit. Simeonis styl. 6 
cum signum crucis fecisset, continuo 
diabolus nusquam comparuit, cum argu- 
mento suo euanuit: Anastas. Biblioth. 
[Lib. Pontif.] in Benedicto III. carmen 
uicit ac mundi principem et omnia eius 
argumenta nequissima.’ 

7 caruissem patrem] The acc. after 
‘carere’ is found in Plautus and in late 


9 et mihi] mihi autem B 
12 tales experta eram B 
13 concussure A; concussura B 
stituerunt praemium C; continuerunt premium B 
18 pro] deB 
illos] illo A 


10 non] nihil B ab] 
estus ualidus A; estos 
nouissimo B 15 con- 
16 ut]+ hii A (cf. p. 62, 
19 fratrem] matrem 

meo benefitio cum seqq. B 


writers: cf. Rénsch I. und V. pp. 414 f. 

8 refrigeraui] I have restored this 
from a comparison of 1. 16 ‘refrige- 
raremus’; p. 74, 1. 16, p. 82, 1. 8. One 
corruption gave ‘refrigerauit’ (A), mak- 
ing ‘absentia’ the nominative; another 
changed ‘refrigeraui’ into ‘refrigerata 
sum’ (BC). Comp. the change to the 
passive in B in 1, 16. 

10 ab aqua] For the first prayer after 


PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 6: 


f ¢€ “ > fal 3 XN \ > , . Tl , 
TpoKeLpwevns oforoylas eKreceiv* Kayo TmpoS avToV aTeEp, 
4 ea / / fel 4 * bh iad 
Env, opas NOoyou yapty oKedos Kelsevov 7 GAO TL TOV 

a i 3 ld 
ToLOUT@Y ; Kakeivos amrexpiOn: ‘Oped. Kayo: “Ado ovopafew 
7 Oy \ L IO) , > , oa 2 7 , 
avTo pn Oépis; ovdée Svvapat, et py 0 eipt, TovTéoTL xXpL- 
oTlavy, TOTE 6 TaTnp pov TapayOels TOede TO NO erredOaly 5 
f 
nOérncev Tovs dbOarpor's pov éEopvEas: erevta povov Kxpaktas, 
a a rn A 4 
éEnrOev vienbeis peta Tav tod StaBorXov pnyaver. TOTE 
bY fa 9 4 a / 
OAtyas Huépas aTroonuncavTos avTov, nVYapioTnoa T@ Kupig, 
3 a ad ¢€ , ba 
kat hoOnv arovtos avrTovd' Kat év avtats tais nuéepais éBa- 
4 . ‘> AV ¢ , ‘ a \¢ Sé AX 
aTioOnpev’ Kai éué darnyopevoev TO TvEedpa TO ayLoy pndev Ado 10 
n 3 \ ‘\ 
aitnoacOat ato tov datos Tod BamrTiopatos et py capKos 
¢€ 3 ‘ . 
viropovny. peta dé drlyas nyuépas EBANOnwev els hvrdaKny, Kal 
a , e \ 
éEevicOnv: ov yap TwTOTE TOLODTOY EwpaKely TKOTOS* ws SeLVnY 
eof ano? , N \ ? r A 3 > oA 
nuépav Kadwa Te ohodpov: Kai yap avOpadrwv wAHO0s Hv Eexet 
af- A A / / . x oN \ 
G\NOS TE Kal OTPAaTLOTa@Y oUKOpaYTiats TAEioTais’ peD & by 15 
\ 
Tore Téptios Kai 
€ nw f 
Topetrovios, evroynpévoe Stakovoe of Senxovovv july, Tiwas Sores 


f ‘ A 
TavTa KaTeTrovotpny Sa TO vyTrLOV TéKVOD. 


érroinaav nuas eis juep@repov ToTov TAS PuraKns peTayOnvat. 
TOTe avarvons érvyouev, Kal 8) Exacro. mpocaydévtes eayo- 
rNalov éavtois’ Kat To Bpédos jvéxOn apes pe, Kal émedidovy 20 
avT@ yada, Hon avyy@ papavlév: TH untpl MpocerdXovp, Tov 
adergov mpoetpeTouny, TO vATLOv TrapeTLOéunv’ éeTnKOUNV Oé OTE 
€Oedpovr avtouvs bu’ éwé AvToumevOUS’ OVTAS TEPLAVTTOS TAELOTAIS 
nuépas ovca, WTnoa Kal TO Bpédos év TH huvraKyn pet Epod 


/ tal ? \ > N 
Hévey’ Kaxelvo avédaBev Kal eyo éxoupiacOnv amo avias Kai 25 


6 pdvny 12 éxAnOnpev 
Baptism, cf. Tert. de Bapt.20. Mr M.R. 
James gives me the following quotation 
from the unpublished Acts of Xanthippe 
and Polyxena: ép@pov ot tax) dvacraca 
AaBE 76 dyov Bawriopa Kal airnoa év re 
Barriopart pucOjvat ce Tv Tot Spaxovros 
mayliwr. 

13 concussurae militum] The Greek 
translation takes this in the technical 
sense of unjust accusation for the sake 
of extortion: ef. Tert. ad Scap. 4 con- 
cussione eius intellecta; and de Fuga 12 
miles concutit (cf. 13 ad init.). But the 
context seems here to require the sense 


R. 


13 ws] @ coni, Gedbh. 


17 raprévios 24 HOyca 
of ‘rough treatment,’ though perhaps 
with a view to extortion; cf. ‘constitu- 
erunt praemio’ below. 

14 ibi. tune] I have retained the 
punctuation of Cod. A. 

22 conualui] ‘conualuit’ has been 
suggested to correspond with the Greek. 
But in this case weshould have to suppose 
that the ‘t’? was lost independently in 
both lines of the Latin text. Moreover 
we should introduce a harsh change of 
the subject, such as the Greek translation 
has endeavoured to modify by the addi- 
tion of éxetvo. 


66 PASSIO S, PERPETVAE, 


labore et sollicitudine infantis: et factus est mihi carcer subito © 
praetorium, ut ibi mallem essem quam alicubi. 

IV. Tune dixit mihi frater meus: Domina soror, iam in 
magna dignatione es, tanta ut postules uisionem et ostendatur 


stibi an passio sit an commeatus. 


et ego quae me sciebam 


fabulari cum Domino, cuius beneficio tanta experta eram, 
fidenter repromisi ei, dicens: Crastina die tibi renuntiabo. et 


postulaui, et ostensum est mihi hoe. 


uideo scalam aeream 


mirae magnitudinis pertingentem usque ad caelum, et an- 
1ogustam, per quam nonnisi singuli ascendere possent: et in 


lateribus scalae omne genus ferramentorum infixum. 


erant 


ibi gladii, lanceae, hami, macherae: ut, si quis neglegenter aut 
non sursum adtendens ascenderet, laniaretur et carnes eius 


inhaererent ferramentis. 


et erat sub ipsa scala draco cubans 


15 Mirae magnitudinis, qui ascendentibus insidias praestabat, et 


exterrebat ne ascenderent. 


ascendit autem Saturus prior, qui 


postea se propter nos ultro tradiderat, quia ipse nos aedifica- 
uerat, et tunc cum adducti sumus praesens non fuerat. et 
peruenit in caput scalae, et conuertit se et dixit mihi: 
20 Perpetua, sustineo te: sed uide ne te mordeat draco ille. et 


dixi ego: Non me nocebit in nomine Iesu Christi. 


1 subito] quasi B 2 esse B 
nitate BC (Ruin.) 
ficia A; benefitia B 
C (Ruin.) 
per B 
ami A; om. B 
+inB 


7 fidens B 


ascendi A 


adducti] adprehensi BC 19 
+ad me BC 20 om. te (sec.) B 
nomine] + domini BC 


2 praetorium] The sentence gains a 
new point when we think of the Mar- 
tyrs as confined in the ‘carcer’ of the 
‘praetorium’; see above, p. 5. The re- 
mains of the Proconsular palace on the 
Byrsa are still to be traced: see Tissot 
Géogr. de V Afrique romaine vol. I. pp. 
649 ff. 


alibi BC 
tanta] et tantese es B 


8 aeream] C; auream B; om. A 
11 erat ibi gladium, lanceam, machere B 
13 ascendens adtenderet BC (+ et B) 14 
15 praestabat] parabat BC 
aedificauerat] C; qui ipse nos edificauerat B; om. A 
in]ad B 


et] + draco C 


et desub 


3 frater] pater B 4 dig- 
6 beneficio] C (Ruin.); bene- 
repromissa ei B ; repromissionibus eius 
9 et] +itaB 10 om. 

12 hami] 
inhaererent] 
quia ipse nos 
18 et (pr.)] ut BC 
conuertit] BC; euertit A se] 

om. ille B 21 non me] nemo B 


17 ultraB 


_ mallem essem] I have restored ‘es- 
sem’ from Cod. A. Cf. Cic. ad Fam. 
vuoi. 14 mallem...cognoscerem (so Klotz; 
earlier edd. read ‘cognoscere’). For 
other.examples see Roby § 1608. 

5 commeatus] A military term, mean- 
ing ‘leave to come and go’; here ‘re- 
lease’: see Holsten’s note. The Greek 


PASSIO 8, PERPETVAE. 67 


‘4 e a / 
movov, Kal idov 4 duran éuol yéyovey Tpastoptov, Ws MaNOV 
> al f 9 ‘ > 3. A 
pe. éxet OéXew civat, Kab ovK adrayod. 
% 

IV. Tére eivév pot 6 aderdds' Kupia aderdy, 7dn év 
peyaro afidyats vTapyes, Toca’Tn ovca ws Ei aiTHoELAS 
> f 3 / U x > ‘N fal ? 4 
ortacias omraciay AaBos av eis TO SeryOyvai oor etzrep 5 
avaBorny exes 7} mabety pédrets. Kayo Hris FSew pe 6pthovoay 

a > s 
Ged, ob ye 5 tocaitas evepyecias etyov, wicTews TANPNS ovCa, 
ernyysthauny avrT@ eitrodaa’ Avpiov cot atayyero. nTnTaynv 
8g, nai éSeiyOn por TodTO’ eidov Kripaxa yarxnv Oavpacrod 

A nr e > 
pnKous’ HS TO phKos Axpis ovpavod’ atevn 5é Hv ws wndeéva bu’ 10 
7a 60 ra} > \ \ 4 > A . 2 ¢ / de A 
auTns Sivacbar et un pwovayoy Eva avaBnvas’ é& éxatépwy Sé TOV 
THS KNimaKosS pepOv av eldos Hv éutremnypévov exer Evpar, 
a A ¢ 
Sopatev, dyxictpav, wayaipar, 6Bedicxwv’ tvaTas 6 avaBawar 
> na X cal J ne 
AaMENOs Kal wn avaBrérrwv Tots aKkovTiots Tas TapKas oTTapay Gein 
> a A ¢ \ 
wy &€ tr avThn TH KAtwant Spaxov vreppeyéOns, ds 81) Tods ava- 15 
Batvovras évydpevev, éxPayBav orrws pr) ToAoow avaBaivey. 
> f \ ¢ , . ww \ oo > CC A e \ 4 
avéBn S€ 6 Latupos’ bs 8) vVotepoy de Huds éExov Trapédwxev 
Ls f . 3 fa! \ \ > ‘ 3 . 3 ,@ f 
EaUTOV’ avTOD yap Kal oiKodoMN Huev’ GAN OTE cuVEeAnPOnpev 
3 tal cy ~ 
ary. OS oY TpOS TO AKpoV THS KAiuaKos TapeyéveTo, éoTpadn, 
\ 3 . , , . 2 N 4 / ¢ , 
cat eitrev’ Ilepirerova, mepipéva oe’ adda BréETrE wy oe O Spakwyr 20 
; x. ry A ~ 
San’ Kai eirov' OU wn pe Brdary, év dvopare Incod Xpiotod. 
¢ a 
Kal uTokatTo THs KNiwaKxos woel hoBovpevds pe Hpeua THY 
6 ris] airets 


9 KAjua Kaxadkhy 12 KAjpmaros 


13 ayylorpwy 


dvaBovj is wrong, conveying only the 
idea of deferred punishment. 

6 cuius beneficio] Cf. ‘turbarum bene- 
ficio’? and ‘mei beneficio’ just above: 
and for Perpetua’s fondness for repeat- 
ing a phrase see above, p. 45. This 
reading leaves ‘experta eram’ the same 
sense of ‘experiencing hardship’ as 
above, p. 64, 1. 12. 

8 scalam aeream] Our authorities 
vary between ‘aeream’ and ‘auream.’ 
The best of them (A) omits the epithet 
altogether. B has ‘auream’; C (with g) 
‘aeream.’ The Short Latin MSS, pre- 
sent the same uncertainty. Aubé, edit- 
ing from several Paris MSS., has simply 


‘scalam erectam’: the texts printed by 
Pillet have ‘aeream’ as well: Holsten 
gives a somewhat abbreviated form 
from Petrus Calo, and this, as well as 
a yet briefer form which follows it in his 
edition, has ‘auream.’ The account in 
the Basilian Menology (see above, p. 22) 
has oxdday xadxnv. On the whole there- 
fore the evidence is in favour of ‘ae- 
ream,’ A friend has suggested to me 
‘aeriam’: but either of the other epi- 
thets suits the context well enough. 

"18 ecarnes eius] Cp. Ep. Vien. et Lugd. 
(Hus. H. HE. v. 1, 24) where rév cwpuarwv 
is used of a single martyr. 


5—2 


68 PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 


ipsa scala, quasi timens me, lente elecit caput: et quasi 
primum gradum calcarem, calcaui illi caput. et ascendi, et uidi 
spatium immensum horti, et in medio sedentem hominem 
canum, in habitu pastoris, grandem, oues mulgentem: et cir- 
5 cumstantes candidati milia multa. et leuauit caput et aspexit 
me, et dixit mihi: Bene uenisti, tegnon. et clamauit me, et de 
caseo quod mulgebat dedit mihi quasi buccellam; et ego accepi 
iunctis manibus, et manducaui: et uniuersi circumstantes dixe- 
ruot Amen. et ad sonum uocis experrecta sum, commanducans 
roadhuc dulcis nescio quid. et retuli statim fratri meo, et intel- 
leximus passionem esse futuram: et coepimus nullam iam spem 
in saeculo habere. 
V. Post paucos dies rumor cucurrit ut audiremur. super- 
uenit autem et de ciuitate pater meus, consumptus taedio: et 
1s ascendit ad me, ut me deiceret, dicens: Miserere, filia, canis meis ; 
miserere patri, si dignus sum a te pater uocari; si his te manibus 
ad hune florem aetatis prouexi; si te praeposui omnibus fratri- 
bus tuis: ne me dederis in dedecus hominum. aspice fratres 
tuos: aspice matrem tuam et materteram: aspice filium tuum, 
20 qui post te uiuere non poterit. depone animos; ne uniuersos 
nos extermines: nemo enim nostrum libere loquetur, si tu 
aliquid fueris passa. haec dicebat pater pro sua pietate, 
basians mihi manus, et se ad pedes meos iactans: et lacrymis 


1 om. ipsa B eiecit] eleuauit BC quasi (sec.)] cum BC 2 calca- 
rem] calcassem B illi] illius C 4 canum]sanum A 5 candidatos 
BC 6 om. me (pr.) B uenies tegnum B 9 om. uocis A 
sum] + et B °10 adhue dulcis] (Ruin.); adhuc dulci B; om. A om. et 
(pr.) B om. et (sec.) B 11 nullam] nulla A cepimus iam nullam B 
13 ut] quod B 13, 14 superuenit autem et] et superuenit B 14 om. et 
(sec.) A 15 miserere filia canis meis] miserere filia patri C; filia miserere 
patri B 16 patri] patris A; canis meis B ajJad B 17 om. ad hune B 
proposui B 18 dedecus] opproprium B 18,19 aspice fratres— 
filium] A; aspice ad fratres tuos, aspice ad filium B 20 - potest B 20, 21 
ne uniuersos nos extermines] et noli nos uniuersos exterminare BC 21 om, 
enim B loquitur B 22 feceris B dicebat]+ quasi B 23 lacrymis 


me] iam lacrimans B ; etiam lacrimans C 


2 calcaui illi caput] The mosaic woman holding a palm and treading 
pavement of a Basilica, which is sup- upon a serpent; cf. Tissot ibid. vol. 1. 
posed to be that mentioned by Victor pp. 805. 

Vitensis (see above, p. 22), represents a 5 candidati] This reading (A) is sup- 


PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 


e a . 3 i 
Keharny Tpoonveykev’ Kai ws els TOY Tpw@TOV BaOpuov 7OedAnca 
éniBnvat, Thy Keharyny avTod ématnaa. Kai etdov éxet Kprrov 
a ‘ / 
péytorov, Kat év péc@ Tod Kyou avOpwrov TodLoy KabeComevoy 
fal \ f \ / . 
Totméevos oyna ExovTa varepweyéOn, Os Apevye TA TpORaTa 
a . , ° , . 
TepietaTnKercay 5& avT@ ToANal yirltades AEevyEtpmovovvT@V’ 5 
9 . na / 
érapas 5é Thy Keparny eOeacato pe kal eiev’ Kaddis énrv0as, 
a an ae f ” / 
TéxvOV. Kab éxarecév pe, Kal ex TOD TUpOdD Ov HAmevyev GwxKév 
: , \ n U XN 
poor woel Yropuiov’ Kat éraBov CevE§aca tas yeipas mou Kal 
> nA > / \ \ \ 
épayov' cal eimayv mavtes ot wapeot@tes’ “Auny. Kal Tpos TOV 
5 a , f, \ 
nryov THs povns éEvrvicOny ert Th OTE wacwMEeVN YAVKU' Kal 
nF , a3 a \oo of a L a. 
evbéws Sunynodunv TO adeXdO Kal evonoaper OTe Séot wabeiv 
\ 3 , 4 5 / 2, {S. by a IA , , ” €uV 
Kab npEaunv éxtore pnoeulav érrida ev TO at@ve TOUT@ exe. 
€ a bd / 
V. Mera &é nuépas orlyas éyvapev médrewy Nas axovaOn- 
. t 4 , \ > a n 9 S / 
ceaOat’ tapeyéveto Sé Kai 6 TaT)p Ex THS TOAAHS aTrodnpias 
i f lad 
papastvopevos, Kal avéBn mpos me TpoTpETTOmEVosS me KaTAaBaNeiy, 1 
a \ , 
Aeyov' Ovyarep, EXénoov Tas ToALas pou’ é€A€noov Tov TaTépa 
an , a a 
cov, eltrep dELos eius dvopacOnvat TatHp gov" pynoOnte ote Tals 
. \ an fal e / bd f Ul 
XEepoiv TavTaLs Tpos TO ToLodTOY aVvOos THS HALKias avHyaryov 
. \ ’ : e\ N > , . \ \ 
oe’ Kal TpoetAOpNY oe UTEP TOS AdEAOU’S Tou" bpa THY onV 
L 2M LN a a 5 , 5 \ er A \ 
pntépa Kai THY THs wNnTpOS Tov adeArgny, Se Tov viov cov Os peTa 
nA : \ ‘ XN \ ¢ a 
oé Snv ov Ovvaras' amd0ov tovs Gupovs Kab wn nas mavTas 
3 , ? \ x ¢ fal A / i 27 ? 
éEoroOpevans’ ovdels yap Huey peTa Tappyaias NadHoes, éay Th 
fal : fal la . 
oot cuuRH. TadTa Edeyev WS TATHP KATA THY TMV yovewy evVOLAV 
a ld aA 
Kat KaTepires jou Tas xeipas Kal éavTov EppiTrtev EuTrpoaOev TaV 


ToOoy ov Kal émidaxpv@v ovKéTe pe Ouyatépa GAA Kupiay 2 


5 AevexXNMovovouvTwy ll évvojoapev 


ported by the Greek version, which like- Spectac. 25, with Oehler’s note. 


69 


ey 


5 


Milk 


wise makes a new sentence, instead of 
giving another acc. case as BC. For 
similar instances where the verb is 
omitted, cf. p. 72, 1.18 et uulnus in facie 
&ec., and p. 74, 1.8 et super margine 
fiala aurea plena aqua. 

8 dixerunt Amen} That the action 
at this point is at least partly Eucha- 
ristic is suggested by this phrase: but I 
do not know of any instance in which 
the ‘Amen’ at the reception is said by 
any but the recipient. Cf. Tert. de 


and honey were given immediately after 
Baptism, and sometimes with the first 
Communion (Oehler on Tert. de Coron. 
8, note h). ‘Iunctis manibus’ is the 
natural action to catch the dripping 
morsel, On the whole question of the 
Elements in the Eucharist see Harnack’s 
Brod und Wasser (Texte und Unters. vit. 
2, pp. 117 ff.). 

15 ascendit] For the local allusion see 
note on ‘praetorium’ above, p. 66, 1. 2. 


70 PASSIO §. PERPETVAE. 


me non filiam nominabat, sed dominam. et ego dolebam 
causam patris mei, quod solus de passione mea gauisurus non 
esset de toto genere meo; et confortaui eum, dicens: Hoc fiet 
in illa catasta quod Deus uoluerit: scito enim nos non in nostra 

5esse potestate constitutos, sed in Dei. et recessit a me con- 
tristatus. 

VI. Alio die cum pranderemus, subito rapti sumus ut 
audiremur: et peruenimus ad forum. rumor statim per uicinas 
fori partes cucurrit, et factus est populus immensus. ascen- 

1odimus in catastam. interrogati ceteri confessi sunt. uentum 
est et ad'me. et apparuit pater ilico cum filio meo, et extraxit 
me de gradu, supplicans: Miserere infanti. et Hilarianus 
procurator, qui tunc loco proconsulis Minuci Timiniani defuncti 
ius gladii acceperat: Parce, inquit, canis patris tui: parce 
15 infantiae pueri. fac sacrum pro salute Imperatorum. et ego 
respondi: Non facio. Hilarianus, Christiana es? inquit. et 
ego respondi: Christiana sum. et cum staret pater ad me 
deiciendam, iussus est ab Hilariano deici, et uirga percussit. 
et doluit mihi casus patris mei, quasi ego fuissem percussa: 
20 sic dolui pro senecta eius misera. tunc nos uniuersos pronun- 
tiat, et damnat ad bestias: et hilares descendimus ad carcerem. 
tunc quia consueuerat a me infans mammas accipere, et mecum 
in carcere manere, statim mitto ad patrem Pomponium diaconum, 
1 nominabat sed dominam] sed dominam me uocabat B dominam] 
domina A om. et B 2 causam] canos B 4 casta B quod 
deus] quodns B 4,5 non in—del] in dei non in nostra potestate futuros B 
5 me] + pater B 8 om. et B 9 partes fori B 9,10 et ascen- 
dimus catastam B 10 in catasta A 11 pater ilico] ibi pater B 
12 graduj]+et dixit B infanti] canos meos BC (Ruin.) helarianus 
B 13 loco] in locum BC defuncti proconsulis minutii teminiani B 
14 dixit parce canos B 16 fatiam et helarianus, ergo christiana es? et ego B 
17 cum staret] contemptaret B om, ad B 18 elariano B deici] proici 
B percussit] percussus est BC 20 dolui] mihi doluit B; enim dolui C 


misera] Miser cum seqg. B uniuersos nos B 22 mammam B 23 pom- 
pinianum BC 


1 sed dominam] Cf. ‘domina soror,’ 4 quod Deus uoluerit] Cf. Acta Mon- 
p. 66, 1. 3. This title of respect is tani 12 (Ruin. p. 234) credebat id fieri 
given to brothers and sons in funeral quod Deus uellet. This confirms the 
inscriptions: e.g.C.I.L. Afr. 333 pommno ~— reading ‘Deus’: for other phrases in 
MEO FRATRI, and 2862 Fruio ET DomINo~ this Martyrdom are borrowed from ours. 
MEO. 12 supplicans] The Greek translator 


PASSIO S, PERPETVAE. 71 


évexdnrer’ eyo Sé wept THS Stalécews Tov TaTpOS AYoUY, OTL év 


ef fal D) fal , t > 3 a 3 fa) > a f 
bA@ TH euw@ yéver povos ovK nyaddaTo év TO eug@ Travel. 


Tapenvonodunv dé avTov eitotaa’ 


n i 3 a 
Tovro yevynoerat ev TO 
ra 


B / 2 , \ 2N 4) aN 4 , e 50 \ v4 ? 2 a 
nuate éxeiv@ [0| éav Oéry 0 KUptos’ yv@Us yap ott ovK ev TH 


nuetépa éEovoia, ddN év TH Tot Oeod éoopea’ Kai exwpicOn 5 


> 9 95 a 3 fal 
am éuod adnpovav. + 


VI. Kal 79 npépa ev § Bpicto nprdynpev iva éxovobepev" 


\ vd > ‘ > \ b] X / ? \ ? \ 3 \ 
Kat WOTrEp éyevnOnpev éebs THY ayopav onen evOus els Ta eyryus 


pépn SunrOev, cal cuvédpapev Trciotos dyAos* ws bé avéBnpev 


eis TO Bhua éFetacbévtes of AovTrol Wpodoynoav’ Hwerdrov Sé 


me 


° 


Ln es , . \ 2p > A \ a : ¢ te, 

Kayo eEeraver Oar’ Kat épavn éxei pera Tod Téxvou fou 6 TaTHp 
5 a) , ’ 

Kal Katayayov pe pos éavTov, etrrev' “ErriOucov éXenoaca 76 


Bpédos. 


\o¢ , f 3 / ’\ , a“ > Ul 
kal ‘INapiavos tis éitporros, 0s TOTE TOU avOvTratou 


ato@avévtos Muivouxiov Ommiavov éEovoiay eidyder payaipas, 


/ . a A a n ft . a a n 
reyes poe’ Deicat THv rodL@v Tov TaTpos gov’ PEetcas THS TOU 15 


b) 
mTaoiov vyTLoTnToOS’ éTiOuaoy VIrép TWTNPLAS TOV AUTOKpAaTOpwD. 


Kayo drexpiOnv' Od Bvo. 


Kat eitrev ‘[Napiaves: Xpiotiavy 


> \ 4 . 9 \ ©€ 9 , e , 
€lL; Kat €lTovV Xpiotiavy Eli. KAL WS éotrovoalev oO TaTHp flou 


a 3 a 
KaTaBareiv we ato THS 6pmoNoyias, KeXeVcaVTOS ‘TNaptavou é&e- 


BrnOn* mpocéte 5é kal TH Pad Tav Sopvddpwv tis éTUTTNTED 20 


> #7, 3 \ , of: > , \ a > a. , 
avTov’ Kayo opodpa prAynoa, éhenoaca TO ynpas avTOU" TOTE 


nas mavtas mpos Onpia KaTaxpiver. Kal yalpovTes KaTinpev 


ets puAaKny. 


éreton Sé vm éuov éOnralero TO ratdiov, Kal 


> 3 a A rr a 3 $0 / f \ ‘\ , 
MET E“ou ev TH PuraKh eia@ler pevev, TE“TTW TposS TOV TraTEpA 


a , > n \ / ¢ \ \ ? 
pou Llopmdvioy Siaxovov, aitodoa TO Bpédpos* 6 b€ matip ovx 25 


4 om.o 14 


probably read ‘et dixit: sacrificans.’ 

13 Minuci Timiniani] On the vexed 
question of the proconsul’s name see 
Mr Harris’s Introduction, p. 9. The 
practical concurrence of Codd. A and B 
leaves no hope of further light from the 
reading of the Greek version. 

18 et uirga percussit] This reading is 
supported by the Gk érvmrrncevy. Hither 
therefore a word has fallen out, or per- 
haps Hilarian himself losing his temper 
struck Perpetua’s father with the wand 
which he bore as judge. 

21 hilares] Possibly this is a play upon 


omiavod 


17 qAapiavos 


the name Hilarianus. The contrast is 
still more striking with the reading of B: 
‘Miser tunc uniuersos nos pronuntiat’ ;4 
but this reading (though the omission of 
any epithet of yfjpas in the Gk is in its 
favour) makes ‘tune’ the second word in 
the sentence. The reading of C is not 
recorded. A play upon words has occur- 
red just before in ‘deiciendam...deici’, 

descendimus ad carcerem] This is ex- 
plained by ‘ascendimus in catastam,’ 
1.9. But they return to the procon- 
sular prison on the Byrsa above the 
town; see above, p. 66. 


72 PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 


postulans infantem. sed pater dare noluit. et quomodo Deus 
uoluit, neque ille amplius mammas desiderat, neque mihi fer- 
uorem fecerunt: ne sollicitudine infantis et dolore mammarum 
macerarer. _ 

5 VII. Post dies paucos, dum uniuersi oramus, subito media 
oratione profecta est mihi uox, et nominaui Dinocraten: et 
obstipui quod numquam mihi in mentem uenisset nisi tunc; et 
dolui commemorata casus eius. et cognoui me statim dignam 
esse, et pro eo petere debere. et coepi de ipso orationem facere 

1omultum, et ingemiscere ad Dominum. continuo ipsa nocte 
ostensum est mihi hoc. uideo Dinocraten exeuntem de loco 
tenebroso, ubi et complura loca erant tenebrosa, aestuantem 
valde et sitientem, sordido uultu et colore pallido; et uulnus in 
facie eius, quod cum moreretur habuit. hic Dinocrates fuerat 

is frater meus carnalis, annorum septem, qui per infirmitatem 
facie cancerata male obiit, ita ut mors eius odio fuerit omnibus 
hominibus. pro hoc ergo orationem feceram: et inter me et 
illum grande erat diastema, ita ut uterque ad inuicem accedere 
non possemus. erat deinde in ipso loco ubi Dinocrates erat 

20 piscina plena aqua, altiorem marginem habeus quam erat sta- 
tura pueri: et extendebat se Dinocrates quasi bibiturus. ego 
dolebam quod et piscina illa aquam habebat, et tamen propter 
altitudinem marginis bibiturus non esset. et experrecta sum, 
et cognoui fratrem meum laborare. sed fidebam me profuturam 

23 labori eius: et orabam pro eo omnibus diebus quousque transi- 
uimus in carcerem castrensem: munere enim castrensi eramus 


2 mammam B desiderauit B 3 effecerunt B et dolore] aut 
dolorem B 4 maceraret A*B 5 subito ante dum B oremus B 
6 profecta] prolatum B om, uox B nomina, Vidicraten A; nomina. 
Vidinograte B 7 mente A 8 memorato casu B 9 patere B; 
pati C (Ruin.) de] pro B 10 multam B deum B 11 hoc]+in 

*oromate C; +in oratione B 12 et complura loca] cum plures B om. tene- 
brosa B 13 ualde post sitientem B 14 moraretur B abiit AB 16° om. 
ita B 17 om. et (pr.) B 18 diadema A; idiantem B; dianten C (Ruin.) 
om, ita B 19 possumus B om. in ipso loco A erat dinogratis B 
20 aquae B habens marginem quam staturam pueri B 22 haberet BC 
24 confidebam B; considerabam C me profuturam] profuturam orationem 
meam BC 25 om. omnibus diebus A 26 carcerem castrensem: munere] 


carcere. Munera B 


PASSIO 8S. PERPETVAE. 


ewxev' wv bs 6 Peds Gxovdunoev ove 6 mais uacOovs éme- 
t .o¥ o 
Oupnoev Exrore, ovTE euoi Tis Tpoayéyover HrEyLovy* tows wa 
[un] Kal TH ToD traidiov dpovTiss cat TH TOV pacBav adyndove 
Katatrovnde. 
A if 
VII. Kat per’ oriyas nuépas mpocevyopéver nudyv ardvTov 
A fal A \ / 

éEaiduns ev pécwm THs mpocevyhs adja havny Kat @vopaca 
Acwoxparnv. Kal &xPayBos éyernOny, did7. ovdérrote et pn TOTE 
avapvynow avtod temoimxKew' HrAynoa O€ eis pYNENY EXOodGA TIS 
avTOD TedXeUTHS. MANY evOéws Eyvwv éepavTny dEiavy ovcoay 
nr A 

aitnow Troincacbat Tept avTod, Kai npEdunv mpos Kupiov peta 
n a + a a 
oTevayuav mpocevyecOar Ta TreioTa’ Kal evléws alTH TH 
vuxtit €dnrwOy pot TodTo, opa@ Acwoxpatny é€epyopevov éx 
/ a ied \ oo» . \ , \ 
TOTOU GKoTELVOU, OTTOU Kal GAAOL TOANOL KavpaTLCopevoL Kat 
n 5 A > \ A . \ 
dupavres qoav, écOnta éyovta puTapav, wypov TH ypoa’ Kal 
TO Tpadua ev TH dre avTOU TedevTay Srrep Tepioy et. eiyer. 
® \ ¢ / ¢ > , \ / € \ 
ovtos 5é 6 Aewoxpdtns, 6 adeAhés pou Kata capa, éErtaeris 
TeOvnxes acberycas Kat THY piv aUTOD yayypaivyn caTrels ws 
tov Oavarov avtod atuyntov yevéoOat waow avOpdrois. eOew- 
pouv ody péya Sidotnpa ava pécov avtod Kai éuod, ws py 
Suvacbar nuds Gddjrows wpocedOectv. ev éxeivm S€ TH TéTH 
> © 9 ¢ 3 , / i ivf / . / 
év @ Hv 6 GdEAGos jrov coruupin @pa qv Bdatos mAHpys Dymo é- 
n ‘ an , cal ‘ 
pav 6é eiyev THY KpNTrida Virép TO TOD Tadiov pHKOS' pos Tav- 
Tnv 6 Aewoxpatns Sseteivero Tiety Tpoaspovpevos* eyo dé FAYOUV 
la . e , 5 / vA XN \ f > 
Store Kai 4 KoduvpRnOpa jv mAnpHS Uaros, Kal TO Tatdiov ovK 
novvato Tueiy Sid THY UIpHrAOTHTA THS KENTidos’ Kal éEvirvicOnp. 
Kal éyvov Kdpvew tov adeAdov pou’ éremoiGew Sé Sivacbai 

a a a , cos ® 
pe avt@ BonOjaa év tais ava pécov nuépass, év ais cathy Onpev 
3 \ of. \ \ “ / . > \ \ > 
els THY GAAnv duvdAaKynY THY TOD xXLALapxYoU' eyyds yap Hv 
THs TapeLBorns ob 7Huér(ropev Onpiopayetv’ yeveO\ov ydp jper- 
3 om. wh 15 legebat cw B moraretur 16 ds ddeAdds 

12 ubi et complura loca erant tene- 


73 


cn 


vo 
12) 


vn 
on 


brosa] Cf. dcta Thomae c. 52 dvOpwirds 
Tis mapédaBé pe awéxOns TH eidég, medas 
ddos,-7 6 Tobrou éoOHs wavy pepuTwmery’ 
amiyyarye O€ we els rwa Témov év G TONAL 
xdouara dbaripxe, x.7.A. For the con- 
nection between the Visions and the 
Apoe. of Peter see above, pp. 37 ff. 

14 habuit] The form ‘abiit? AB may 


be a vulgar Latin form of ‘habuit.’ 


Rénsch quotes ‘habiui’ from Plaut. 
Asin. 11, 3. 32. 

15 carnalis] Cf. Eph. vi. 5 dominis 
carnalibus (|| Col. iii. 22), In Ep. Vien. 
et Lugd, (Hus. H. E. vy. 1. 18) ris cap- 
kivyns dearolyns we may perhaps trace the 
influence of a Latin Version (xara odpxa 
=carnalis=capxivyns: see further in the 
separate note on p. 97). 

20 piscina] See above, p. 29. 


74 PASSIO S, PERPETVAE. 


pugnaturi: 


natale tune Getae Caesaris. 


et feci pro illo oratio- 


nem die et nocte gemens et lacrymans ut mihi donaretur. 
VIII. Die quo in neruo mansimus, ostensum est mihi hoc. 
uideo locum illum quem retro uideram, et Dinocraten mundo 
5 corpore, bene uestitum, refrigerantem ; et ubi erat uulnus, uideo 


cicatricem : 


margine usque ad umbilicum pueri; 


et piscinam illam quam retro uideram, summisso 


et aquam de ea trahebat 


sine cessatione: et super margine fiala aurea plena aqua; et 
accessit Dinocrates, et de ea bibere coepit: quae fiala non defi- 


10 Clebat. 
gaudens. 
esse de poena. 


et satiatus accessit de aqua ludere more infantium 
et experrecta sum. 


tunc intellexi translatum eum 


IX. Deinde post dies paucos Pudens, miles optio praeposi- 
tus carceris, qui nos magnificare coepit intellegens magnam 
1s uirtutem esse in nobis, multos ad nos admittebat, ut et nos 


et illi inuicem refrigeraremus. 


ut autem proximauit dies 


muneris, intrat ad me pater meus consumptus taedio, et coepit 
barbam suam euellere et in terram mittere, et prosternere se 
in faciem, et inproperare annis suis, et dicere tanta uerba 


20 quae mouerent uniuersam creaturam. 


senecta eius. 
™e 


1 natali cesaris cum preced. B 
2 om. gemens A 
tenebrosum esse lucidum B 
8 margine] marginem BOC 


3 die] +autem B 
6 retro] p B 
fiala] + erat BC 


ego dolebam pro infelici 


X. Pridie quam pugnaremus, uideo in horomate hoc uenisse 


Getae] cetae A; om. BC (Ruin.) 
4 om. retro B uideram] + 
6,7 summissa marginum B 
9 quae] et quasi B 


10 saciatus accessit de aqua ludere A; accessit ludere satiatus de aqua C ; accessit 


deludere satiatus de ea aqua B 
dens C 
15 uirtutem] + dei B 
refrigeremus B om. autem B 
19 inproperare] inproperans se B 


1 Getae Caesaris] See above, p. 25, 
n. 3. 

3 die quo in neruo] This was an un- 
usual severity: but it is mentioned 
merely as a note of time (cf. p. 70, 1. 7 
alio die cum pranderemus). The Greek 
translator or his copyist (éo7épa may be 
for 7uépa) found a difficulty in this de- 


infantum C 
14 magnificare coepit intellegens] BC; magnifice coepit intelligere A 
nobis]+ qui A 
17 intrauit B 

20 moueretur A 


11 tunc] et B 13 Pru- 

multos]+fratres BC 16 illeB 

18 om. et (sec.) B 
22 hoe] huc B 


parture from the custom of allowing 
prisoners some relaxation in the day- 
time. 

4 retro]=‘antea’; cf. Rénsch I. u. V. 
343. Tertullian frequently so uses it. 

14 magnificare] If we accept the 
reading of A, ‘magnifice, coepit intel- 
ligere,’ we must suppose that a verb like 


PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 75 


Nev érreteretoOat Kaicapos. cita mpocevEapéevn peta orevaypov 
A \ nw 3 a ¢ / \ \ a la 
oodpas wep) Tov ddeAhod wou nuépas te Kat vuxTos dwpnOjvai 


> A Fyo/ 
phot avTov n&iwoa. 


VIII. Kai evOvs ev ri éorépa ev f ev vépBo éueivaper, 


edelyOn Lot TOUTO. 


ry 


¢ A / *% 2 e ¢ / \ , 
op® *ToTm™* év @ ewpaxe Tov Aewwoxpa- 3 


al 4 v \ fal 3 f \ > 
thy, kabape odpats dvTa, Kal Kades Hudtecpévov Kal ava- 
nA 5 Le”, \ oc \ 
wiyovra’ Kal Orov TO Tpabya HV ovANY Opw' Kat y KpNTIs 
an f , v4 n 3 / b] A, vx 
THS KoAvEBNOpas KaTnYOn Ews TOU oppadiov avToU' Eeppeev 
a a ° \ U a a > 
8é é& avis adiarcirt@s Vdwp' Kal éravw THs KpnTidos Hv 


ypc piadyn peotn’ Kai mpoceAGov 6 Aewoxparns. npEato é£ 10 


aris mivew’ 7 bé diary ovK évérevrrev. Kal éumdnobeis jpEato 


4 > hf 
mative AaYANALOpEVOS OS TA VHTLA’ Kal eEuTVicOnY. Kai évonca 


14 fal al 
OTL weTeTeOn ex TOY TLULMPLOD. 


IX. Kat per drtyas juépas Tovdns tis oTpatiatys 6 THs 


huraxhns TpowoTapevos pera TONAHS THS oTrovoys HpEaTo was 15 


al a 9 N 
Tyav Kat So&alew Tov Oedv, évvoerv SVvapiy peyadny eivat Trept 


nas’ S16 Kal ToAoVs eloeAOety pos Huds OUK ExaAvEY Ets TO 


nas Sia TOV éTAarAdAnrAOV TapapVvOLdy TapHyopeia Oar. 


ryrytorev 


~ “ id ~ 
Se 7 nuépa THY PiroTyUGV Kal EicepyeTaL TPOS LE O TATHP, TH 


axndia papavbeis, kat ipEato Tov Toxyova Tov idtov éxTidrewW 20 


A ta \ 
plrrey te éml ys’ Kal mpnvis KataKkeipwevos KaKoNoyEly Ta 


la) a / . n 4 € a 
éavtod én KaTnyopév Kal NEyoY ToOLlav’TAa pnuaTta ws Tacav 
yy) \ / n . b] \ oe > 4 6 } A \ / 

vvacbar THY KTioW caredoaL’ éyo be érévOovy bia TO TAaXdai- 


Twpov ynpas avTov. 


X. Ipod mids obv rob Onpiomayeiv tds, Brérw bpaya ToLod- 25 


6 Kxadd\ws 12 évvdneoa 
‘contempserat’ has fallen out after the 
adverb. The reading of BC, which I 
have adopted in despair, seems to be a 
correction, and may have been made at 
first in the margin, as the Greek pera 
woAAs THs crovd}s points to the adverb 
‘magnifice.’ It is objectionable (1) as ob- 
scuring the gradual changein the attitude 
of Pudens, who at first treated them badly 
(cf. note on 1. 3), and ended by believing 
(p. 86, 1.6 and p. 92, 1.6): (2) as ex- 
pelling ‘qui’ (before ‘multos’), though 
it is quite in Perpetua’s style (cf. 1. 9 
quae fiala non deficiebat; p. 76, 1. 2 qui 


14 rovdys ricpariwrns 20 


exTeiiew 


erat uestitus). Holsten edited ‘magni 
faciebat’ which is open to the first of 
these objections. 

22 in horomate] For the form cf. 
Ronsch I. w. V. p. 254. 

hoe uenisse] ‘Hoc’ is for ‘hue,’ as in 
Plautus &c.: see Facciolati s. verb. ‘hic.’ 
So on tombs, Hoc MANSVM VENI, and 
ALIVS HOC INFERETVR NEMO. Also in 
Cod. Bezae, Mt. xvii. 17 adferte mihi 
illum hoc. The Greek translator mis- 
understood its meaning, as also did 
Holsten, who put a colon after it. 


76 PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 


Pomponium diaconum ad ostium carceris, et pulsare uehementer. 
et exiui ad eum, et aperui ei: qui erat uestitus discinctam can- 
didam, habens multiplices galliculas. et dixit mihi: Perpetua, 
te exspectamus: uenl. et tenuit mihi manum, et coepimus ire 
3 per aspera loca et flexuosa. uix tandem peruenimus anhelantes 
ad amphitheatrum, et Induxit me in media arena. et dixit mihi: 
Noli pauere; hic sum tecum, et conlaboro tecum. et abiit. et 
adspicio populum ingentem adtonitum. et quia sciebam me ad 
bestias datam esse, mirabar quod non mitterentur mihi bestiae. 
ro et exiuit quidam contra me Aegyptius foedus specie cum adiu- 
toribus suis pugnaturus mecum. ueniunt et ad me adolescentes 
decori adiutores et fautores mei. et expoliata sum, et facta sum 
masculus. et coeperunt me fautores mei oleo defrigere, quomodo 
solent in agonem: et illum contra Aegyptium uideo in afa. 
15 uolutantem. et exiuit uir quidam mirae magnitudinis, ut etiam 
excederet fastigium amphitheatri, discinctatus purpuram inter 
duos clauos per medium pectus, habens galliculas multiformes 
ex auro et argento factas: efferens uirgam quasi lanista, et 
ramum uiridem in quo erant mala aurea. et petiit silentium, et 
20 dixit: Hic Aegyptius, si hanc uicerit, occidet illam gladio; et, 
si hune uicerit, accipiet ramum istum. et recessit, et accessi- 


1 om. carceris B pulsasse B 
A; discinecta candida BC 
B) 4,5 om, et coepimus—uix B 


2 om, et (pr.) B 
3 galliculas] C; calliculas AB (+x auro et argento 
5 peruenimus anelantes A; ambulantes per- 


distinctam candidam 


uenimus B 6 medio arenae B 7 pauere} expauescere B 8 adtonito B 
om, me B 9 bestiam B datum A; donatam B (? lege damnatam) mitte- 
bantur B 10 contra me quidam B 11 et ad me ueniunt B 12 fau- 
tores] factores (om. mei et) B om. et facta sum B 13 masculos B faui- 


sores A; factores B 


afa] aqua BC 15 etiam] iam B 

et BC 17 habens]+et B 

et ferens BC uirga A 19 petit B 
piat B istud A 


3 galliculas] Cf. 1.17. The word is 
used by the scholiast on Juv. Sat. 11. 
67 (Mayor ad loc.) in explaining treche- 
dipna: uestimenta parasitica uel gal- 
liculas currentium ad cenam. 

6 amphitheatrum] Descriptions of 
the amphitheatre at Carthage by El- 
Bekri and El-Edrisi are quoted by Tissot, 


defrigere] defrigare B; defricare C 14 
16 discinctatus] discinctam habens tunicam 
galliculas] C (Ruin.); calliculas AB 


in agone BC 


18 efferens] 


20 et] haec BC 21 acci- 


Géogr. de VAfr. romaine, vol.1. pp. 645 ff. 
in media arena] We might easily 
read the acc. case (cf. note on p. 60, 
1. 12). But the confusion between the 
cases in expressing rest and motion is 
regarded by Sittl as characteristically 
African (Lokal. Verschied. pp. 128 ff.). 
Compare ‘in medio,’ p. 92, 1. 19, 


PASSIO 8S. PERPETVAE. 


>. XN ‘ ? ~ 
tov. Lloprrdvios 6 SiaKovos, dyoiv, AAOev mpos THv Ovpayv THs 
a a i 3 . ‘ 
durakhs Kal Expovoev chddpa° é&eMoica jnvoiga avtT@’ Kal 
3 a . cy X 
Hv évdedupevos éoOnTa Napmpav Kal TrepreCwapévos’ ciyev Sé 
: b ¢ r \ t . se , > é \ 
ToLKiAa vTOOnMaTa Kal Aévyer pot € TWeplwevw, €XUE. Kal 
n f \ 
éxpatnocy Tas yelpas pov, Kal émopevOnuev Ota Tpaxéwv Kal 
Lal EA . 
CKOMGY TOTMY’ Kal ports Trapeyevouela eis TO audiGéatpov 
\ fam. 
Kal elonyayéy pe eis TO pécov Kal rAéyes por’ Mn hoBnOns 
> 4 . Ny XN fal , . \ 3 ar \ iO X\ 
évOabe eipt peta cov, cvyKauvev cot’ Kai amndOev. Kal LOov 
, a WV ? ‘4 wn / f . 3 ‘ 
Brérw Wrelotov byXov aToPAéTovTa TH Oewpia chodpa’ Kaya 
9 a 3 f ow ’ 
hres eldov mpos Onpia pe KatadixacOeioay eOavpalov ort ovK 
3 Y 
éBarrov pot avTad. Kal 7AVev mpds we AiyuTrios Tis dpoppos 
a a a / / \ 
TO OYXNMATL META THY VITOUPYOVVT@Y AUTO MAYNTOMEVOS LOL. KAL 
A f 
épyeTat Tpos pe veavias Tis evpophwtatos TO KddrEL eEacTpA- 
TTOV, Kal ETEPOL LET AUTOD VEeaviat Hpatot, VirnpéTat Te TTOVOA- 
\ 2? / ‘2 , \ 2 , BA . \ e 
otal éwot. Kal eEedvOny cal éyernOnv dppynv’ xai jpEavto ot 
? ‘ , 3 ’ ? , cy 2 > , A 
AVTINNLTTOPES fLov EAaiw ME adELhety, wS EGOS EoTiv ev ayovt 
Kal avtixpus Bréer@ Tov Aiyvarioy éxeivov év TH KovLopT@ KUALO- 
pevov. &&nrOev OE Tis avnp Oavpactod peyébous, trepéyouv Tod 
a A 4 5 3 
dkpov tov auileatpov, Stelwopévos éoOnta Ari eixev ov 
fe > a“ f wv \ f 3 \ ‘ > \ f ? \ 
povoy x TMV OVO Guwv THY TOpPYpay, GNAA Kat ava pécov ert 
a 3 , \ 
tov atHOous ciyev bé Kal Vrodnpata ToiKina éK ypuoiov Kab 
nx f 
apyupiov' éBactalev 5é xai paBdov ws BpaBevtys 7) Mpootatns 
f . oo” 4 \ ! \ ” a 
povopayav’ épepev 5é Kai Kradous yYAwpods EyovTas pha 
a, ‘ 2 \ , or . ® ¢ 2 7 
ypuca’ Kab aiTnoas auyny yevécOar, ep’ OtTtos o Atyurrios 
3N / / > a aA / . v4 % 3% , 
éay TAaVTHY viKnon avEehel avTHY payaipa’ ality dé éav viKnoy 
24 t \ t a . a 2 t 
avTov ApeTat TOY KNabOY TODTOY’ Kal aTéaTH. TpoonOoper 
9 mordv 
19 deEorpévos 


9,10 xd-yo ris elder] Kal ef ris UOer 


22 mpoorarapy 26 relWerar 


77 


bod 
wu 


25 


17,18 Kowdtduevor 


8 adtonitum] Cf. Tert. de Spectac. 25 
pudicitiam ediscet attonitus in mimos? 
de Fug. 1 ecclesia in attonito est: de 
Idol, 24 tuta si cauta, secura si attonita. 
The sense is ‘keenly attentive.’ 

13 defrigere] Ihave kept the reading 
of A, as if may well represent a doublet 
of ‘defricare’: ef. ‘defrictus.’ 

14 afa] This is doubtless the same 
word as ‘haphe’: cf. Martial Epigr. vit. 
67 Harpasto quoque subligata ludit, Ht 
flauescit haphe (é¢7): Senec. Ep. 57 a 


ceromate nos haphe excepit (an athletic 
metaphor for a journey first through 
mud and then through dust—et luto et 
puluere laborauimus): Arrian Epictet. 
mr. 15. 4 wodAnv adi xarameiv (see 
Schweighauser’s note). It has been 
suggested that here ‘afa’ is for "BN; 
and indeed Hilgenfeld supposes a Punic 
original for the writings of Perpetua and 
Saturus: but no satisfactory evidence 
has been adduced for this view. 

21 istum] ‘istud’ A. For the con- 


78 PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 


mus ad inuicem, et coepimus mittere pugnos. ille mihi pedes 
adprehendere uolebat: ego autem illi calcibus faciem caedebam. 
et sublata sum in aere, et coepi eum sic caedere quasi terram 
non calcans. at ubi uidi moram fieri, iunxi manus, ut digitos in 
5 digitos mitterem. et adprehendi illi caput, et cecidit in faciem ; 
et calcani illi caput. et coepit populus clamare, et fautores mei 
psallere. et accessi ad lanistam, et accepi ramum. et osculatus 
est me, et dixit mihi: Filia, pax tecum. et coepi ire cum gloria 
ad portam Sanauiuariam. et experrecta sum: et intellexi me 
ro non ad bestias, sed contra diabolum esse pugnaturam : sed scie- 
bam mihi esse uictoriam. hoc usque in pridie muneris egi: 
ipsius autem muneris actum, si quis uoluerit, scribat. 
XI. Sed et Saturus benedictus hanc uisionem suam edidit, 
quam ipse conscripsit. Passi, inquit, eramus, et exiuimus de 
15 carne, et coepimus ferri a quattuor angelis in orientem, quorum 
manus nos non tangebat. ibamus autem non supini sursum 
uersi, sed quasi mollem cliuum ascendentes. et liberato primo 
mundo uidimus lucem immensam: et dixi Perpetuae: erat 
enim haec in latere meo: Hoc est quod nobis Dominus pro- 
20 mittebat: percepimus promissionem. et dum gestamur ab ipsis 
quattuor angelis, factum est nobis spatium grande, quod tale fuit 
quasi uiridarium, arbores habens rosae et omne genus flores. 
altitudo arborum erat in modum cypressi, quarum folia canebant 
2 uolebat; ego autem] querebat et ego B 3 aere] reB 3,4 quasi 
terram non calcans] BC; terram concaleans A 4 iunexi A*B; uinxi C 
manus]+ita BC 4,5 in digito B 5,6 om. et cecidit—caput B 
6 fauisores A 7 om. et (tert.) B 8 cepit B 9 sanauiuaria A; 
saneuiuariam BC 10 a bestiis A; a bestia B om. esse B 11 esse 
uictoria A; uictoriam inminere BC hoc] hos A om. muneris B 
12 om. ipsius—scribat B scribat]+ visio satvai A 14 quam]+et B 
15 carne] carcere BC cepimus fieri B 16 tangebant-B 17 uwersus 
BC molle A glebam B 17,18 liberato primo mundo] A; liberati 
primum iam mundo B ; liberati primam iam C (Ruwin.) 18 dik perpetua B 
18, 19 quoniam a latere nostro erat B; quoniam erat a latere nostroC 19 haec] 
hoc A dominus nobis B 21 grande] magnum B 22 arboris habens 


rosa B; rosam C (Ruzin.) flores] A* ; floris A*B 23 altitudoj+autem B 
in] ad B canebant| conieci; cadebant AB; ardebant C 


fusion of the terminations see Rénsch Perpetua elsewhere only uses the simple 
Iu. V. p. 276 (‘istum’ for ‘istud,’ and verb, The text moreover is confirmed 
‘ipsud’ for ‘ipsum’). by Acta Iacobi dc. (Ruin. p. 226) cuius 

4 non caleans] ‘concaleans’ A: but pedes terram non ealeabant. It is, how- 


PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 


: a 3 n \ 
dé ddAndos Kal ApEducba tayKpatialew* Exelvos euovd Tovs 
a yh e] fel 
modas Kpateiv nBovrETO* éyo 5é NaKTicpacw THY OYrLy avTOD 
v ° + ddov * én > XN fF *% \ 2 / 7 \ ef 
érumtov’ Kal idov * éripa amo aépos* Kat ypEapny avtov ovTws 
lal a le) XN 3Q7 i 
TUrTew Os pr TatTovca THY yhv. iSodaa 5é ds ovdéera HKLGoV 
: Cal I / 
attov CedEaca Tas yeipds pov Kal daxtvAous SaxtvAOLs EuBa- 
la a a n / . ld x Av > 
Aovca THS Kehadhs avtovd éredaBounv’ Kat éppira avtov ér 
b) a \ ov a ¢ 
des Kal érratnoca THY Kehadny avTov. Kal npEaTo Tas 0 OXAOS 
an i“ ‘ cal ral 
Body’ Kai of omovdactai pov éyaupiov. Kai mpoondOov To Bpa- 
A . / \ > . 
Beuth Kal éraBov tov KAdbov' Kal jomdacaTo pe Kal eimev 
n 3 , vam! , ‘ 
Eipynvn peta aod, Ovyatep’ Kat npEaunv evOvs rropevecbar peta 
Sd \ , \ t 1 2 6g . \ 
d&ns pos MUAY THY Aeyonévny Cwrixyny. Kat eEvrrvicOnv’ Kat 
\ / / ¢ 
évonoa OTe ov mpos Onpia wot adda pds TOV SiaBorov éoT 7 
A / / a \ 
écouevn wadyn’ Kal ovvnKa OTL ViKHOw avTOV. TavTa éws TPO 
A a al . \ a 3 f / 
plas THv piroTyudy eypapa* Ta év TO aupiedtpw yevnoomeva 
f 
6 OéXov cvyypaato. 
\ 

XI. ’ANAd kcal 6 paKapios Latupos THy idiav omtaciav 
> \ é > ¢ a / > / fal 3 , "HS 
autos Ov éauTod cvyypawas épavépwoev ToLavTa eipnKads. N; 

> a , 
dnaiv, Huey Ws TeTovOdTes Kai ex THS capKos éEeAnrAVOELpEY, Kal 
3 / , ¢ \ , 3 + ‘\ > , 
npEauela BactalecOat vio Tecoapwy ayyé\wv mpos avaTonas, 
nw rd 6 3 \ 
Kal at YElpes NOY OVY HirTOVTO" ETropevoucba Sé Els TA avaTEpa, 
e@ fol , 
Kal ov~y UmTiot GNX olov ws Ss 6parfs avaBacews épepdpucOa. 
\ \ 2 / \ nA / lal , ” . 
Kal 87 éEeAOovtes TOv mpOTov Kocpov Pos NapmpoTatov eiSopev 
\ s n 
Kat eitrov impos THY Ilepretovay (mAgoioy yap pov jv)’ TodTé 
éoTw OTrep 6 KUpLoS HuaY ernyyeiAaTo’ pEeTEcAnpapmey THS érray- 
yerias. aiwpoupéven Sé nudy da TOV Tecodpwv ayyédov éyéveTo 
oTaotoy péya, O7rEp Woe KNTOS HY Exwv Podou bévdpa. Kab wav 
4 A > / . \ Sa a é 5 > ¢ \ /, 
yévos TOV avOéwv’ TO bé Vrpos TOV Sévipwr Fv Wael KUTapiccoU 


79 


an 


5 daxrddous] daxrddors 


ever, doubtful whether we should retain 
‘quasi.’ 

9 ad portam Sanauiuariam] Cf. infra, 
p- 90,1. 21. This stands in contrast to 
the ‘porta Libitinensis’ through which 
the dead bodies of gladiators were carried 
on the ‘libitina’: cf. Lamprid. Commod. 
16 galea eius bis per portam Libitinen- 
sem elata est. 

16 tangebat] The plural (BC) is an 
unnecessary correction: ef. p. 88, 1. 8 
animam nostram, and p. 92, 1.20 in 


10 jpEwper 


25 éwpoupévay 


eorum corpore. 

17 liberato] For ‘liberare’ in the 
sense of ‘to pass’ cf. Petron. Sat. 186 
necdum liberaueram cellulae limen, cum 
animaduerto &c, Other examples are 
given in Facciolati. 

22 omne genus flores] The adjectival 
use of ‘omne genus’ is frequently found 
in Lucretius and Varro: so too ‘id genus’ 
and ‘quod genus.’ 

23 canebant] See above, p. 38. 


80 PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 


sine cessatione. ibi autem in uiridario alii quattuor angeli 
fuerunt clariores ceteris: qui ubi uiderunt nos honorem nobis 
dederunt, et dixerunt ceteris angelis: Ecce sunt, ecce sunt: 
cum admiratione. et expauescentes quattuor illi angeli, qui ges- 
5 tabant nos, deposuerunt nos: et pedibus nostris transiuimus 
stadium uiolatum: ubi inuenimus Iocundum et Saturninum et 
Artaxium, qui eadem persecutione wiui arserunt; et Quintum, 
qui et ipse martyr in carcere exierat; et quaerebamus de illis 
ubi essent. ceteri angeli dixerunt nobis: Venite prius, introite, 
10 et salutate Dominum. 

XII. Et uenimus prope locum, cuius loci parietes tales erant, 
quasi de luce aedificati; et ante ostium loci illius angeli quat- 
tuor stabant, qui introeuntes uestierunt stolas candidas. et 
introiuimus, et audiuimus uocem unitam dicentem: Agios, 8, agios, 

15 agios: sine cessatione. et uidimus in eodem loco sedentem quasi 
hominem canum, niueos habentem capillos, et uultu iuuenili ; 
culus pedes non uidimus. et in dextra et in sinistra seniores 
quattuor; et post illos ceteri seniores conplures stabant. et in- 
troeuntes cum admiratione stetimus ante thronum: et quattuor 

20 angeli subleuauerunt nos: et osculati sumus illum, et de manu 
sua traiecit nobis in faciem. et ceteri seniores dixerunt nobis: 
Stemus. et stetimus, et pacem fecimus. et dixerunt nobis 
seniores: Ite et ludite. et dixi Perpetuae: Habes quod uis. et 
dixit mihi: Deo gratias, ut quomodo in carne hilaris fui, hila- 

25 rior sum et hic modo. . 

XIII. Et exiuimus, et uidimus ante fores Optatum episcopum 


1,2 fuerunt quattuor angeli alii B 2 ubijibi C (Ruin.) nos}-+ et 
BC (Ruin.) 3 dederunt]+nos A* om. ecce sunt (sec.) BC (Ruin.) 4 
cum admiratione. et expauescentes] expauescentes cum admiratione BC (Ruin.) 
4,5 gestabant nos] stabant BC (Ruin.) _ 8 pedimus A 6 uiolatum] 
conieci; uiolata A; uia lata B ubi] ibi B iucundum, satyrum, artaxium B 
7 eadem persecutione] eandem persecutionem passi B 8 de] ab B 9 ubi 
essent ceteri. dixerunt autem nobis angeli B prius introite}] primum intro B 
12,13 evant angeli quatuor (om. stabant) B 13 qui introeuntes uestierunt 
stolas candidas. et] introeuntes et nos uestiti stolas candidas B 14  introi- 
uimus]+et uidimus lucem inmensam B unitam] mutatam B dicentium B 
14, 15 agius, agius, agius B 15 eodem loco] medio loci illius BC 17 sinistra] 
+eius B 18 quattuor] uiginti quattuor BC om. seniores B 18, 19 et in- 
troeuntes] introiuimus B 19 cum]+magnaB = admiratione]+et B 20 om. 
nosB 2lom.nobis(sec.)B 22 stetimus]stemusB 23 dixi Perpetuae] dixit per- 
petuaB 24 dixitmihijdixiB 24,25 hilariorem et hic (om.modo)B 26 obtatum A 


PASSIO S, PERPETVAE, 


LKOs, dxatatravoTws O€ KaTedépeTo Ta Sévdpa Ta PUAAG aUTa?. 
noav dé pe? judy év avT@ TO KyT@ oi Téooapes aryyedoL, GAXz- 
Awv évdokorepor, Up av epepoucba* mToovpevous Sé yyas Kat 
Oavpatlovtas * Kal avéOnxav, Kal avéXaBov' Kat odov * NaBovTes 
dif Oopev TO aradiov Tots jyetépots Trociv. éxel evpouev “Tov- 
xodvdov Kab Yatupov Kal ’Aptakiov, tos év alta TH Sioypo 
favtas Kkpewacbévtas’ eidopev 5é Koivtov tov paprupa tov év 
TH purakh arrobavovta’ éfnrodpev Sé Kat rept THv Nowmev rod 
dpa eiciv’ Kal etrrov of dryyehos mpos nuas’ Acdte mpétov tow 
iva aotacnade Tov KUptoy. 

XII. Kat #A@opev wAnciov tod Torov éexeivov tov éyovTos 
toixous Gaavel éx dwrds @xodopnpévous, Kal Tpo THS OUpas Tob 
Tomou éxelvou eiaeAOovtes of Tésaapes ayyerou évédvoay nudas 
NevKds oToAds’ Kal elondAOopev Kai HKovoapev hovny nywpévny 
ANeyovt@v’ “Arytos, Aylos, aytos, axatatavotas. Kai ecldopev 
éy péowm Tod ToTou éexeivou KabeCopevoy os avOpwrov Todor’ 
ov at Tpixes bmorat YLdvos Kal veapov TO TpdcwToV avToOU' 
modas 6€ avTod ov eOcacapeOa. mpecBuTepor dé Técoapes ex 
deEidv Kal técoapes é& evwvipor joav avtod' oriaw Sé Tév 
Teccapwv TodXol TpecBUTepor. ws 5é Oavpatovtes ciaenNnrAvOa- 
pev kal éornpev évdtriov Tod Opdvov, ot Téaaapes Ayyedou errhpav 
nas, Kal epiryncapev avrov, Kal TF yetpl mwepiéhaBev Tas dyes 
nav’ ot S€ dowrol mpecButTepot elmov mpos Huds’ Yraddpev 
Kal eipnvotromnoavrTes amreaTahnpev vO 

\ 
Kat 


\ / 
Kal mpocevéd peda. 
TOY mTpecBuTépwv, AeyovTwv’ IlepevecOe Kal yaipecGe. 
eivrov’ Ile ja, & 0 éBovr Leivev’ Te Oed ya 
pmetova, éyes 0 éBovAov. Kai cimrev’ Te Ged yapis, 
iva, &s ev TapKl peTa Yapas éyevouny, TrElova YapS voy. 
XIII. "EEnAOopev 88 Kal cidouev pd tav Oupay ’Omrrarov 


81 


cn 


10 


mt 
nm 


6 uiolatum] See above, pp. 39f.; and 
compare the rare word ‘uiolatio’ for the 
scattering of violets on graves: DIE 
PARENTALI MEO, ITEM XI. KAL. APR, DIE 
VIOLATIONIS, ITEM XII, KAL. IVNIAS DIE 
ROSATIONIS, Inscr. ap. Bibl. Vallicell. 26, 
p. 261 (quoted by White and Riddell). 

9 ceteri angeli] Cf. ‘ceteris angelis,’ 
1. 3. The reading of BC gives no clue 
to the meaning of ‘ceteri.’ 

14 Agios] For the survival of the Greek 
form of the Ter Sanctus, cf. S. Germain 


R. 


(+ 576), quoted by Duchesne Culte Chrét. 
p. 182: incipiente praesule ecclesia Aius 
psallit, dicens latinum cum graeco. We 
find both forms also in the Mozarabiec 
Liturgy. 

15 sine cessatione] Cf. 1. 1. This 
phrase occurs several times in the 
Proper Prefaces of the Gothic Missal 
(Migne P. L. 72 pp. 231, 233, 277, 317). 

21 traiecit nobis in faciem] For a 
possible interpretation of this difficult 
phrase see above, p. 27. 


6 


82 PASSIO S, PERPETVAE. 


ad dexteram, et Aspasium presbyterum doctorem ad sinistram, 
separatos et tristes. et miserunt se ad pedes nobis, et dixe- 
runt: Componite inter nos, quia existis, et sic nos reliquistis. 
et diximus illis: Non tu es papa noster, et tu presbyter? ut 
s'uos ad pedes nobis mittatis? et moti sumus et conplexi illos 
sumus. et coepit Perpetua graece cum illis loqui: et segre- 
gauimus eos in uiridarium sub arbore rosae. et dum loquimur 
cum eis, dixerunt illis angeli: Sinite illos refrigerent; et si quas 
habetis inter uos dissensiones, dimittite uobis inuicem. et con- 
ro turbauerunt eos. et dixerunt Optato: Corrige plebem tuam ; 
quia sic ad te conueniunt quasi de circo redeuntes, et de factioni- 
bus certantes. et sic nobis uisum est quasi uellent claudere 
portas. et coepimus illic multos fratres cognoscere, sed et mar- 
tyras. uniuersi odore inenarrabili alebamur, qui nos satiabat. 
15 tunc gaudens experrectus sum. 

XIV. Hae uisiones insigniores ipsorum martyrum beatissi- 
morum Saturi et Perpetuae, quas ipsi conscripserunt. Secundu- 
lum uero Deus maturiore exitu de saeculo adhuc im carcere 
euocauit, non sine gratia, ut bestias lucraretur. gladium tamen 

20 etsi non anima certe caro eius agnouit. 
XV. Circa Felicitatem uero, et illi gratia Domini eius- 


2 nobis et] nostros B 
tate C non] nonne © 


2, 3 dixerunt]+ nobis B 4 illis]+optati B;. +op- 

es papa noster] papa noster es B; pater noster es C 
ut] quid C 5 nobis] nostros BC moti sumus] misimus nos B 5,6 
conpleximur illos (om. sumus) B 6 om. graece A 7 uiridario B 8 
sinite illos refrigerent] quiescite et refrigerate BC (Ruin.) om. si B 10 ob- 
tato A; obtate B 11, 12 factionibus] BC; fatigationibus A 13 om. sed et B 
18, 14 martiras A; martyres B 14 uniuersi] ubi B saciabat A; sanabit B 
15 gaudens]+et B experrecta A 16 hae] Holst.; et AB insigniores] 
sunt in signo B 19 reuocauit B gladium] gaudium B 20 etsi] 
et B 21 ueroj]+nam B 


1 presbyterum doctorem] The use of 
substantives in apposition instead of 
attributes is regarded by Sittl as specially 
African. See the examples which he 
gives (Lok. Versch. p. 110), e.g. ‘ex- 
hibitor magistratus’ in Arnobius. So 
we have above, p. 74, 1. 13 ‘miles optio 
praepositus carceris,’ and below, p. 84, 
1, 6 ‘sociam quasi comitem,’ 


19 ut bestias lucraretur] By his death 
in prison Saturus ‘saved himself the 
beasts.’ Cf. Cic. Verr. 1. 1. 12 lucretur 
indicia ueteris infamiae (i.e. ‘I shall say 
nothing about them,’ ‘I shall make him 
a present of them’). A closer parallel 
is Ammian. Marcell. x1x. 4. 3 (speaking 
of the Trojan war): hinc cum decennali . 
bello Graecia desudaret, ne peregrinus 


PASSIO S. PERPETVAE, 


ee .? t \ t \ \ 2 
Tov émiokotroy Kai “Aomaatov Tov mpecRiTepoy mpos Ta apt- 
oTEpa pépn Stakeywpiopévous Kal TreptAvTroUs. 

\ XV ? € a ” ¢ om, t ct A \ 
mpos Tovds mobas nuav epacav nuiv' AtaddrAdEate nas pds 
GAHXouS OTe EEeANAVOATE Kai OUTWS Huds adyKaTe. Kal élTra- 
fev mpos avtovs’ Ovyt ov mamas nuétepos et, Kal od mpe- 
oButepos; iva ti oltas wpoceTmécate Tois Huetépois Tociv; 

‘ f / ’ AY X v ¢€ 
Kat omrayyvicbévtes TepieAaBopev avTovs Kat okato % 
Tlepwerova ‘EAAnuar per avTav opmirciv, Kat avexwopnoaper 


KL WEGOVTES 


\ ’ a > \ aA ¢ \ \ f n er \ 
avy autos eis TOV KHTOV UmO TO dévdpov TOU podov. Kal 
NadovvTwv avTav pel ynudv arexplOnoay of dryyedor mMpos 

> t, MDS > ‘ > , a2 , 
avtovs’ “Kagate avrovs avayvéa, cal @ twas deyortacias 
” > ¢ Lal v ¢€ a > f \ 3 / 3 A 
éxveTe el” EavTar, apere vyseis ANNALS. Kal éTeTANEAaY aVTOLS 

\ 4 F) , .? t \ nol . a ‘ 
kat eitrav “Orrat@’ ‘Enavop@woat To mAG0s cou’ ovTw yap 
cuvépyovTar TpOS oe, Wael ATO lITOdpopLay erravepyopevot Kal 

\ > fal a J / \ 3 \ € t 
Tept avTav diroverxodvres. evouifouev 5é avdtovs ws Béreuv 
amrokAcioa, Tas TUAaS. Kal np~aueba exe ToAKOVS TOV adEA- 

a > i > / s \ . fF . b] a \ 
fav ériywooKew, Gddaye Kal Tovs paptupas’ étpedoucba Sé 
TWAVTES OOH aveKOinyHT@ Hrs ovK éxyeptalev Huds: Kab edOéws 
yxaipov éEvrrvic Onv. 

XIV. Abra: ai dpacess éuhavéctara: Tov paptipwv Larvpov 
kat Uleprerovas as av’tol cuveypaavto’ tov yap Yexobdvdov 

/ 2 “a / 4 ¢ / . 2 \ A a 
TAXELOV EK TOU KOTpoV peTeTTéE“rraTo [6 Deds]* Ev yap TH puAaKy 
THS KAnoEws HELOn oY TH YapiTL TaVvTwS KEpddvas TO fH 
Onpiopayjoay’ wANY eb Kal pn THY WuynY adrrodvYE THY TdpKa 
avtTod dueEnnOev TO Eisos. 

XV. “AAA cab th Byrcxnraty n yapis Tov Peod TovavTy 


7 omdaxvnobévres 18 éou7] ws uh 


satiabat 22 om. 6 Oeds 


83 


Lan 


° 


in) 
ry 


20 


25 


ovx éxdprasev] forte legebat non 


poenas dissociati regalis matrimonii 
lueraretur, i.e. ‘should escape the penalty 
of his outrage.’ Cf. Acts xxvii. 21 xep- 
bfjcal re Thy UBpw radbryy Kal THY Syulay, 
lucrique facere iniuriam hance et iacturam 
(Vulg.). The parallel therefore with 
Ignat. Rom. 3 évatuny rdv Onpiwv falls to 
the ground. 


20 etsi non anima certe caro] I have 


been unwilling to transpose ‘anima’ and 
‘caro’ against all the MSS. The re- 


ference to Le. ii. 5, supposed by the 
Greek translator who introduces dtet- 
“Oe for ‘agnouit,’ is not certain. 
The meaning seems to be ‘he escaped 
the beasts, but not the sword: his body, 
though not his soul, knew the sword’; 
and we may perhaps compare Matt. x. 
28. He may have been beheaded in the 
prison; or ‘the sword’ may be a figure 
of speech for the sufferings which caused 
his death. 


6—2 


84 PASSIO S. PERPETVAE, 


modi contigit. cum octo iam mensium uentrem haberet, (nam 
praegnans fuerat adprehensa) instante spectaculi die, in magno 
erat luctu, ne propter uentrem differretur; quia non licet praeg- 
nantes poenae repraesentari: et ne inter alios postea sceleratos 

s sanctum et innocentem sanguinem funderet. sed et commar- 
tyres grauiter contristabantur, ne tam bonam sociam quasi 
comitem solam in uia eiusdem spei relinquerent. coniuncto 
itaque unito gemitu ad Dominum orationem fuderunt ante 
tertium diem muneris. statim post orationem dolores inuase- 

rorunt. et cum pro naturali difficultate octaui mensis in partu 
laborans doleret, ait illi quidam ex ministris cataractariorum : 
Quae sic modo doles, quid facies obiecta bestiis, quas contemp- 
sisti cum sacrificare noluisti? et illa respondit: Modo ego 
patior quod patior; illic autem alius erit in me qui patietur 

15 pro me, quia et ego pro illo passura sum. ita enixa est puellam, 
quam sibi quaedam soror in filiam educauit. 

XVI. Quoniam ergo permisit et permittendo uoluit Spiritus 
Sanctus ordinem ipsius muneris conscribi, etsi indigne ad supple- 
mentum tantae gloriae describendae, tamen quasi mandatum 

20 sanctissimae Perpetuae, immo fideicommissum eius exequimur, 
unum adicientes documentum de ipsius constantia et animi 
sublimitate. cum a tribuno castigatius eo tractantur, quia ex 
admonitionibus hominum wanissimorum uerebatur, ne subtra- 
herentur de carcere incantationibus aliquibus magicis ; in faciem 


1 mensium] mensuum A; meti suum B 1, 2 nam praegnans fuerat] 
non pregnatus erat B 2 instante spectaculi die in magno] expectans expec- 


taculum diem. Imago B 3 luctae C (Ruin.) uentre A differeretur A ; 
possit deferri B 3, 4 pregnantes penas presentari B alios] aliquos B 
5, 6 commartyres]+eius B 7 comitantem B om, in B derelinquerent B 
8 itaque]+et B gemito ad deum B fecerunt B 9 et statim B 
dolores}-++-eam B 10 naturali] natura B 11 catarectariorum A; cata- 
ractareorum B 12,13 om. sic A faties cum abiecta fueris B quia con- 
tempsisti et B 13 noluisti? et] uoluisti B dicens ego modo B 14 
illic] ile B pro me patietur B 15 puella A 16 om, quaedam B 
filia A edocanit AB 17 promisit B 18 etsij ut si A indigne] B ; 
indigna A 19 describendae] describenti A; illorum describende B 20 
exequamur B 21 continentiae et de anima B 22 tractanti A 22, 28 
cum— quia] quia tribuno castiganti [-e C (Ruin.)] eos et male tractante, quoniam BC 
ammonitionibus A 23 uerberatur B 


PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 


286 b] 4 \ a > . a ” / 
€600n. éxelvn yap cudAANPOEioa oKTa punvav Exovoa yaoTépa, 
mavu wdupeto, Stott ouK eEeoTtw éyKipova Onptopaxeiv i Timo- 
a tA ~ 
peioPat, pnmws voTepov peta Grwv dvociwv éxyvOn TO aipa 
b] fal X\ 3 fad 3 AY \ e U ? a I 
auTns TO aO@ov. adAG Kal of GUpMapTUPES AUTHAS TEpiAvVTrOL 
> 0 tf \ \ ‘oe \ p>) £ > ¢€ a 
jRoav opoopa oUT@ Kadny cuvepyov Kal Ooel cuVvodoiT por ev 68@ 
fol + oA > / \ f / \ / > 
THS avTHs édmtOos pur OérovTes KaTadeitrev. mpo Tpitns ovv 
npépas TOD Wabous avTaY KoLWe aTevayu@ évabévTes Tpocevyny 
\ x 
Tpos Tov KUptovy éroimmoavTo’ Kal evOds peTa THY TpocevynV 
Qa / a 3 \ 
w@dives aUTHVY TULeTYOV, KATA THY TOD oydSdou pNVos PYoLV Yare- 
\ \ fal b) 
mal. Kal meTa TOV ToKETOY Kapovaa Aye. Edn Sé TUS auTr 
lal nr > fad 
TOV TapaTnpovvT@Y virnperav’ Ki viv obtws adyels, TE yess 
fal al , e / f > 
motjoat BrAnOeioa pos Onpia, dv Kateppovnoas bre émOveu 
t \ > Qt a > ' 3 n. a 
KaTeppovncas Kal ovx nOéAncas Odoat; KaKeivn amrexplOn’ Nov 
> A / a\ f . > aA \ Ls > XN e¢ / ¢ \ 
eyo Tacyw 0 Tacyw’ éxel b€ GANS EeoTiY O TAaTXwV VTFEp 
A , ¢ \ ) a 
éuod: éaras év éwoi iva wabn, Swot éyo Tacyw Virép avTod. 
érexev O€ Kopactoy, 0 pia Tév adeAdav cvrAdAaBotca eis Ovyatépa 
avébpewrev avrn. 
XVI. ‘Hyiv 6€ avakiows otow émétperpev TO Gyvov mredua 
2 f \ / \ > XN nm ‘4 f 
avaypavrat thy Takww THv emi Tals pidoTipiats TapaKoNovdy- 


85 


Cn 


Lal 


° 


cacay’ TAnY ws évTadpaTe THS paxapias Tlepmerovas padXov 20 


\ ¢ , ¢ fa) 3 n \ A 
dé Ws KeAevopaTL UINpETODVTES avaTANpODMEY TO TpocTAaxOev 
Cc oA ¢ de » / i3 / 8 / 3 a » a v 
nptv. ws 5& wretous nuépar Sveyivovto év tH hvAaKkn ovTwov 
A : ¢e 3 fal f fal 
atTav, 4 peyaroppav Kal avdpeta ws adyOas Lepirerova, rob 
XeALapYoU amTnverTEpoY avTOLs TpocPEpopévou, TLV@Y POS AUTOV 
f , \ fad fal i 3 a 
paraiws StaBeBawcapcvov To Seiv hoBeioGar uniws ér@dais 
a a aoc L 2 7 > ? L . 
payixals THs huAaKhs vTreEéNOwow, évweTriov arrexpiOn Aéyouca 


9 diet 


11 cataractariorum] ‘Cataracta’ seems 
to be a portcullis in Liv. xxvur. 28. In 
Jerem. xx. 2, 3 it is the uxx. word for 
‘the stocks.’ This suggests a possible 


bestiis ? 


25 


otherwise agrees with A in this passage: 
Quae sic modo doles, quid facies obiecta 


18 ordinem ipsius muneris] Cf. supra, 


meaning for ‘cataractarius’ here: no 
doubt it is a technical name for a prison 
official. The phrase ‘ cataractariorum 
ministris’ is borrowed in Acta Montani 
&c.c. 17 (Ruin. p. 236). 

12 Quae sic modo] ‘sic’ is supported 
by the abbreviated lection in the Breviary 
of Quimper (see above, p. 21), which 


p. 78, 1. 12 ipsius muneris actum &c. 
For a discussion of the reading of the 
following sentences see the separate note 
on p. 100. 

19 mandatum] This is used of a last 
injunction which can be legally enforced: 
ef. Cic. pro Rosc. Amer. c. 38 itaque 
mandati constitutum est indicium non 


86 PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 


el respondit: Quid utique non permittis nobis refrigerare noxiis 
nobilissimis, Caesaris scilicet, et natali eiusdem pugnaturis ? 
aut non tua gloria est, si pinguiores illo producamur? horruit et 
erubuit tribunus; et ita iussit illos humanius haberi, ut fratri- 

5 bus eius et ceteris facultas fieret introeundi, et refrigerandi cum 
eis; iam et ipso optione carceris credente. 

XVII. Pridie quoque cum illam cenam ultimam, quam 
liberam uocant, quantum in ipsis erat non cenam liberam sed 
agapen cenarent, eadem constantia ad populum uerba ista iacta- 

ro bant, comminantes iudicium Dei, contestantes passionis suae feli- 
citatem, inridentes concurrentium curiositatem ; dicente Saturo: 
Crastinus satis uobis non est, quod libenter uidetis quod 


odistis? hodie amici, cras inimici. 


notate tamen nobis facies 


nostras diligenter, ut recognoscatis nos in die illo. ita omnes 
15 inde adtoniti discedebant: ex quibus multi crediderunt. 

XVIII. Inluxit dies uictoriae illorum, et processerunt de 

carcere in amphitheatrum, quasi in caelum, hilares uultu decori ; 


si forte gaudio pauentes non timore. 


sequebatur Perpetua 


lucido incessu, ut matrona Christi, ut Dei delicata: uigore ocu- 


1 ei] et B respondit]+perpetua et dixit B permittis nobis] dimisisti 
nos B 2 nobilissimi BC si licet et natalis A; scis qua natale B 2,3 
eius sumus pugnaturi (om. aut) B 3 pinguior est illue B 4 om. ita B 
humanius habere BC; manibus hiberi A 6 iam et] tamen A 7 illa cena 
ultima A 9 agapen] adipem B om. ista B 10 domini A con- 
stantes B passioni A suae] sue et B 11 inritantes A; inredeantes B; 
irridentes C 12 crastinus]+ dies B uobis satis B quod] quid C; 
qui B 13 uidistis B nobis] uobis BC (Ruin.) 14 illo]+iuditii B ; 
+iudicii C omnes] multi BC (Ruin.) 15 discesserunt B crediderunt] 


+PASSIO VT SUPRA A 
timore] pauore B 
delicata] dilecta BC 
spectu B 


minus turpe quam furti. ‘Fideicom- 
missum’ is rather an obligation of 
honour: see above, p. 52. 

2 nobilissimis] The combined evi- 
dence of A and g shews that this is the 
true reading, ‘Nobilissimus’ is a con- 
stant epithet for a Caesar, and is applied 
to Getain inscriptions. Here the epithet 
of the Caesar is transferred to the con- 


17 in (pr.)] ad B 
19 lucido] placido uultu et pedum B 
uigorem oculorum suorum deitiens ab omnium con- 


hilares}+ et B 18 si forte] quasi BC 


om. ut (sec.) B 


demned persons (noxiis) who are to 
grace his festival by their death. Hence 
‘ Caesaris scilicet’; where if ‘nobilissimi’ 
(BC). be read, the point is lost, and 
‘ scilicet’ is out of place. 

11 inridentes] Possibly ‘inritantes’ 
(A) should be retained in the sense of 
‘setting at nought,’ ‘frustrating,’ from 
‘inrito’: cf. Ronsch I. u. V. p, 165. 


PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 


nw 3 al 
Atari nuiv dvarapBavew ove émiTpérrets GvopacTois KaTadixols 
/ / > / \ \ 7 4 \ , 
Kaicapos yeveOriors avarkwOnoopévois; pun yap ovyt on b0€a 
, \ n 
éativ, éb bcov Tioves mpocepxYoucOa; mpos Tadta eppstev Kab 
b] f ¢ 4 > Ff f ) \ / 
édvcwmnOn 6 viNapXos, EKéheuTEV TE avTOVS PidavOpwTroTEpov 
diaryesv, Os Kal Tov GdeAPoy avTijs Kai NovTrovs Twas Sedvvjc Oar 
> a \ 3 / 3 b tal / \ 3 XN € nw 
eloedOely Kal avarauBavery peT avTOY. TOTE Kal AUTOS O THS 
gurakhs tpoeatas évrictevcer. 
a ‘4 14 a a 
XVII. *AdAad Kal apd puds OTe TO Exxarov éxetvo Selmrvon, 
dep édeVOepov ovoualovow, bcov 5é éf EavTots ovK érEvOEpov 
a“ 3 > > f 3 f a ? al fe, \ \ 
Selrrvov GAN ayamnv érexadovy TH avTayv Tappnoig’ mpos Oé 
Tov OyAov Tov éxeice Tapect@ta pynyata é&érewtrov peta 
ToAAHS Tappyncias avTois amethoovTes Kpicwv Geov, avOopordo- 
yoUpevot TOV wakapLopoy TOD TaOoUS EaVTOV, KATAYENBVTES THY 
an , 
Weplepyeiay TOV cuVTpeyovT@V, LaTUpov AéyovTos’ "H avpsov 
e / al a , oe a a 
nuépa vty ovK eTapKEl; Ti NOéwS OpAGTE OVS pLoelTE’ ANwEpoV 
f- a 
iros atptov éyOpoi; mAny érienpemoacle Ta TpdcwTTA Hav 
? a ivf \ > a ¢ lal > b] , a e la ‘sf 
eripe@s iva Kat émiyvate nuds év éxetvn Th Nuépa. ovTwsS 
cf 2 a 2 , > / 2 e a 
Gravres éxeiOev éxmdntropevoe eywpifovro: é€& dv TAciotor 
ériatevoav. 
> lh e fal 
XVIII. *Esréraprpe 5€ juépa tis viens avtov: Kat mponr- 
ial fal 4 
Gov éx THs purAaKS eis TO adiOéaTpov ws eis OVpavoy amTLOVTES, 
t. \ \ \ nN , tA > f a 
itapot Kat haidpol TO Tpocwmr@, MToovpevos ef TUYOL Yana 
a 3 t 
fParrov 7 Poko. 
c . / xX n b] / ? @ x “ \ a , 
¢$ watpova Xpiotod, éypnyope ofOarpe, kal TH Tpocow et Ka- 


3 , \ ¢ , c 7 
neorovber Oe 7 Ileprerova tpaws Badifovca, 


3 mioves] wXEloves 
paonrat 


1d A€yorros] Adwyros 15 bpiv] jew 


19 ut matrona Christi] ‘Matrona,’ ‘the suchas C.I.L. Afr. 2861 


87 


on 


al 
a 


pucetre] 


true wife,’ is frequently opposed to D. M.S. 
‘meretrix’; eg. Hor. Ep. 1 18. 3 ut IVLIAE DELICATAE 
matrona meretrici dispar erit atque MERENTI 
Discolor. This to some extent prepares DIDIVS FRVCTVS Bf 
the way for the startling use of ‘ deli- LATIC 


cata’ which follows. 

ut Dei delicata] A bold expression, 
altered in BC and omitted altogether in 
the Greek. ‘Delicata’ is applied to 
Perpetua below, p. 90, 1. 12; but there 
its sense is obvious and quite different, 
Its meaning here, ‘ favorite’ or ‘darling,’ 
may be illustrated from Inscriptions, 


v. AN. XXXXIII 

In another African Inser. (ib. 10889) 
DELICATVS and SCHOLASTICVS are names 
of race-horses. With the restoration of 
the true text the supposed reference in 
‘ Christi Dei’ to Ignat. Smyrn. 10 Xpioroh 
Geod (cf. Trail. 7), always uncertain, 
disappears entirely. 


88 PASSIO S. PERPETVAE, 


lorum deiciens omnium conspectum. item Felicitas, saluam se 
peperisse gaudens ut ad bestias pugnaret, a sanguine ad sangui- 
nem, ab obstetrice ad retiarium, lotura post partum baptismo 
secundo. et cum ducti essent in portam, et cogerentur habitum 
5 induere, uiri quidem sacerdotum Saturni, feminae uero sacra- 
tarum Cereri; generosa illa in finem usque constantia repugna- 
uit. dicebat enim: Ideo ad hoc sponte peruenimus, ne libertas 
nostra obduceretur; ideo animam nostram addiximus, ne tale 
aliquid faceremus: hoc uobiscum pacti sumus. agnouit iniustitia 
ro lustitiam: concessit tribunus, quomodo erant, simpliciter in- 


ducerentur, 


Perpetua psallebat, caput iam Aegyptii calcans. 


Reuocatus et Saturninus et Saturus populo spectanti commina- 
bantur de hoc. ut sub conspectu Hilariani peruenerint, gestu 
et nutu coeperunt Hilariano dicere: Tu nos, inquiunt, te autem 


15 Deus. 


ad hoc populus exasperatus, flagellis eos uexari pro 


ordine uenatorum postulauit. et utique gratulati sunt, quod 
aliquid et,de dominicis passionibus essent consecuti. 
XIX. Sed qui dixerat Petite et accipretis petentibus dederat 
eum exitum quem quisque desiderauerat. nam, si quando inter 
20se de martyrii sui uoto sermocinabantur, Saturninus quidem 
omnibus bestiis uelle se obici profitebatur: ut scilicet gloriosi- 
orem gestaret coronam. itaque in commissione spectaculi reuo- 
catus leopardo expertus etiam super pulpitum ab urso erat 


2 perisse B ad (p7.)] a AB 
portam cum essent B habitu A 


bant A enim] ergo B ne] de B 
addiximus] C; adduximus AB 

11 om. Perpetua A 
tanti perminabantur. B 
nerant B 
B 15, 16 per ordinem BC 
18 diz B dedit B 

20 uoto] uocis B sermocinabatur B 
22 coronam] curam B 
pardum experti BC 


5 sacerdotum Saturni] For the 
worship of the African Saturn cf. Berger 
and Cagnat, Un Sanctuaire de Saturne 
a Ain-Tounga, Paris, 1889. 


5, 6 sacratarum Cereri] See Mr 


om. ad sanguinem ABC 
5—7 saturnini feminarum uero sacrorum 
generosa in finem usque constantiam repugnabit B 


16 et utique] utique illi B 
19 cum exittum que in quis desiderauerat accepit B 


itaque]+cum B 


4 et delati in 


6 cererum A 7 dice- 
8 adduceretur B animas nostras BC 
10 iustitiam]+et BC tribunus]+ ut BC 


11, 12 reuocatus satyrus et saturninus populum expec- 
13 de hoc] Dehine BC 
14 inquiunt] iudicabit C ; om. B 


ut] iam B perue- 
15 ad] non ad B flagellas 
17 et de] ex B 


21 ut scilicet] scilicet ut felicem et B 
spectaculi]+ipse et BC 23 leo- 


Harris’s notes (p. 62 and Introd. p. 5). 
The omission of any reference to Per- 
petua’s husband is strange; but his 
ingenious suggestion is not altogether 
convincing, 


PASSIO 8. PERPETVAE., 


¢ / \ e U 
Opolws Kat y PnrtknTaTn 
A A n e la - 
Xaipovea éri TH ToD ToKeTOD vycia iva Onpiopaynon, amd aipa- 
> \ , \ 7 
Tos els alua, aro palas Tpos povopayiav, wédroVGa Novocacbat 


TaBadrrXovea Tas TaYTMY dpacels. 


\ \ f lal é La / a 307 ivf 
peta Tov ToxeTov, Bartiope Sevtépw, TouvTécts TS idiw aiware. 
ed \ \ a 3 , ? / bd] f 
OTE O€ Hryyicav mpo TOU audWeaTpou, nvayKxatovta évdvcacbar 

a ¢€ X bd e / i ¢ X ral fal t 
oXnpaTa, ot wey Appeves tepewv Kpovov, at dé Onretas THs Anpy- 
; , 
Tpas’ QrXr 7 evyevertatn éxeivy [leprretova trappycia nyovi- 
gato &ws TéXous: ereyer yap: Asad TodTO éExovoiws eis TovTO 
¢ A A \ aA 
eAnrAvOapev, va n édevOepia nuav un ntTnOn: dia TodTO THY 
apuynv nov Tapeddxapev, va pndéy Tov ToLol’TeV Tpakwpev’ 
n a , i 
ToUTo cuverakapeba pel vuav. eréyvw y adixia THY diKaLoov- 
yyy’ Kal peTérerta eTéTperey 6 YtALapyos iva ovTaS cicayOa- 
\ a 
aw ws noav’ Kat 4 Ueprerova épadrev, thy Kepadrny tod 
a e “ ‘ 
Aiyurriov 76 watotoa. ‘Peovxatos 5é Kai Yaroupviros Kat 
, n a / i 
Latupos TO Oewpodvts 6yAW TpoTwpirovY: Kal yevdmevor Ewtrpo- 
¢ t ! \ t ” . Lf oa \ 
abev ‘Trapsavov, kinpacw Kat vedpacw epacav’ Sv nuas Kal 
V ¢ / A An > \ cow a 3 \ 
oé 0 beds. ampds TadTa aypiwbeis 0 OXAOS pacTiywOHVaL avTous 
, / 
éBonoev’ adda of Gytor nyaddtacOnoay bTL vrémewav Te Kal 
TaY Kuptaxov Taba. 
XIX. °AAX 6 efrey Aiteicbe Kal Advecde €OmKev Tols aitn- 
, \ , ivf v4 7 A 5) , yy 
cacw TavTny THY do€av olay ExacTos avTOv émeOuunoer. eltroTeE 
a fal a a / 
yap pel Eautayv rept THS EvYS TOD papTUpiov cuVEeNaXOUP, Da- 
a a n / a 
Toupviros wey Tao Tots Onpiows BANOHVvaL EavTov Oérew [éXeyer] 
t vA > la / 3 i PJ 3 fal fa) “a 
mwavtTws iva évdokdtepov atépavoy amroAadByn. év apyn yoov THs 
, 2 A ,e , ' 2 . 2 \ \ 
Oewpias avTos peta “Peoveatov wapbadw vrréuevev’ adrAa Kal 


4 Seurdpw] b¢ vorépp 11 cuverdtwucda weOacuveraverdar wed” budy 
pldouv] forte legebat concionabantur 23 om. eye 


89 


an 


20 


25 


15 wpocw- 


8 animam nostram addiximus] A 
bold metaphor derived from the oath of 
the ‘ uoluntarii,’ who sold themselves to 
a ‘lanista.’ For another metaphorical 
application of this oath, ef. Petron. 
Sat. 117 itaque ut duraret inter omnes 
tutum mendacium, in uerba Eumolpi 
sacramentum iuravimus, uri, uinciri, 
uerberari, ferroque necari, et quidquid 
aliud Eumolpus iussisset, tamquam 
legitimi 
animasque addicimus. 


10, 11 concessit...inducerentur] It 


gladiatores domino corpora 


seems unnecessary to insert ‘ut’ with 
BC: though for its omission Catul. 114. 
5 (concede sit dines) is the only passage 
that I can find quoted. 

15, 16 pro ordine uenatorum] Cf. 
Tert. ad Mart. 5, ad Natt. 1. 18, 

18 Petite et accipietis] See above, p. 49. 

22 in commissione] Cf. Cic. Ep. ad 
Ait. xv. 26 iam ab ipsa commissione ; 
Suet. dug. 43 commissione ludorum qui- 
bus theatrum Marcellinum dedicabat. 

22, 23 reuocatus] This has been taken 
uS @ proper name and so the whole 


90 PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 


uexatus. Saturus autem nihil magis quam ursum abomina- 
batur: sed uno morsu leopardi confici se iam praesumebat. 
itaque cum apro subministraretur, uenator potius qui illum apro 
subligauerat, subfossus ab eadem bestia, post dies muneris obiit. 
spaturus solummodo tractus est. et cum ad ursum substrictus 
esset in ponte, ursus de catiea prodire noluit. itaque secundo 
Saturus inlaesus reuocatur. 
XX. Puellis autem ferocissimam uaccam, ideoque praeter 
consuetudinem comparatam, diabolus praeparauit: sexui earum 
ro etiam de bestia aemulatus. itaque dispoliatae et reticulis in- 
dutae producebantur. horruit populus, alteram respiciens puel- 
lam delicatam, alteram a partu recentem stillantibus mammis. 
ita reuocatae et discinctis indutae. prior Perpetua iactata est, et 
concidit in lumbos. et ubi sedit tunicam a latere discissam 
r3ad uelamentum femoris reduxit, pudoris potius memor quam 
doloris. dehinc requisita, et dispersos capillos infibulauit. non 
enim decebat martyram sparsis capillis pati, ne in sua gloria 
plangere uideretur. ita surrexit, et elisam Felicitatem cum 
uidisset accessit, et manum ei tradidit et suscitauit illam. et 
20 ambae pariter steterunt, et populi duritia deuicta reuocatae sunt 
in portam Sanauiuariam. illic Perpetua a quodam tune cate- 
chumino, Rustico nomine, qui ei adhaerebat, suscepta, et quasi a 
somno expergita (adeo in Spiritu et in extasi fuerat) circumspi- 
cere coepit, et instupentibus omnibus ait: Quando, inquit, pro- 
25ducimur ad uaccam illam, nescio. et cum audisset quod iam 


3 
g 


1 uexati sunt BC 2 sedjet B leopardisse B conficisse AB con- 
sumebat B 3 cum]-+iam BC aper C 3, 4 aprum subministrauerat BC 
4 suffossos B diem BC 5 substrictus] subreptus B; subrectus C 6 exire B 
noluit]+ Pudens miles (milis B) de industria efferatorum (effratorum B) adfirmasset 
portas putris carnibus magis ne mitteretur (mittetur B) efficit (effigit B) BC (Ruin.) 


itaque] ita BC 8 om. ideoque B 9 consuetudinenem paratam B 
sexuigearum B 10,11 spoliateB om. et reticulis indutae BC 11 pro- 
mouebantur BC alteram respiciens] aspitiens B 12 dilectam B 13 et 
discinctis indutae] discinguntur. Inducitur B iactata est et] iacta B 14 
incidit B lumbis B ubi sedit] ut conspexit BC tonicam A a lateribus 
conscisam B 15 femorum adduxit B 16 requisita et] a quo recurrit B 
17 ne in] non B 19 accessisset ei manum etradidit et subleuauit B 24 
porta B sane uiuariam A; om.B ajadA 22 qui ei] quia tunc B sus- 
cepta] suscepit B 22, 23 de somno expergefacta B fuerat] fuerit A; fuerat. 


Nam B 24 stupentibus B 25 nescio]+ quam BC (Ruin.) et] sed B 


PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 91 


A ra ’ \ 
Yartepov ert THS yepvpas vrs dpxpv SvectapaxOn. atupos Sé 
ovdey GAXO 7} Apkov ameatpépeTo’ Kal évt Sryyywate Twapdadews 
Terxelova0ar avTov éremoOe’ wate Kal TH oul Staxovovpevos 
3 , U , fe. ¢ \ fA] \ ¢€ A a > \ 
éovpn pdvov, cxowwin mpocdebeis’ 0 Se Onpatns 6 TE avi avTov 
\ ¢€ \ n @ \ 43] i e g e f¢ a 
mpocBarov vie Tod Onpds KateTpeOn obTws ws weF jpyépav TOV 5 
A ° aA ? \ \ \ wv \ c XN 
hirotyudy amo0avely. adda Kal mpos apKkov SiadeHels vryins 

, , > \ A , 9 aA ¢ ow > 17. 
mani Siépervev’ éx yap TOD Cwypiov avTns 7 apKos ovn eOédyoev 
3 nw 
eFer civ. 

a ’ 

XX. Tals paxapias 5 veaviow ayptwotarny Sapadw 7TOoI- 
pacev 6 SiaBoXos, TO OHAV avTav TapalnrA@y bid Tod OAnpiov' io 
Kai yuprobeicat your mpoonyovto’ bev ameatpady 6 dxXos, 

, \ ‘ / f \ be blé 6 Lal f 
piay pev tpvdepav xopny Brerrwv, THY O€ GAAnV pwacdOols oTa- 
fovcay yadda, ws mpochatwas Kujcacay’ Kal avarndpbcioar 

, \ , a - 3 , ¢ t — 
manu, Kat Sucrvous mrepiBrAnGetoas, évdidvoKorvtar trovdapactw 
d0ev eiaeNOovcdy avtav, 7 Ileprerova mpetn Kepaticbeioa 15 
érecev er dopvos’ Kai avaxalicaca Tov yiTeva ex THS TAEUPAS 
auTHS suvayayodoa, éaoKéTacev TOV EAUTTHS NPOV, ALdovs “aAdov 
punpoveicaca } Tovev' aidovpévn, pndanws hpovticaca TOV 
> / e XN > , , \ > / f 
adynoovev’ Kai émifntioaca Bedovny ta éoTapaypéva ouve- 
ouykev, kal Tas tpiyas THs Kepadys Teptédnoev' ov yap empe- 20 
qev Th paptupt Opikly omapayOecioats opdcbas’ iva py ev Th 
idia ryun Sonn TevOetv. [Kai xepaticbeicay idodaa thy PnrLKn- 

A , fal 3 
TaTny, TpoondOev avTy| Kal KpaTncaca TIS YELpos AUTTS Hryeipev 
avuTnv. Kab éotnoav apa’ THS bE TKANPOTHTOS ToD dyAoU éxVE- 
, 3 , > \ t \ a ee 
KnOeions avehndOnaay eis thy TiAnY THY EwoTtiKny' xed 7 25 
¢ ? € 
Tlepmrerova vie Tivos Katnxoupévov ovopuate ‘“Povetixov, 5 Ta- 
a oA a 7 
petoTnKkes avtn, ws é& varvov éyepOcica (oUTas év Tvetpate 

la ” n \ / , 
yéyovev Exotacw traodaa), Kai TepiBrcbapévn OapBovvTwv 
e , Mj e 
arravtwv épn* lore Baddopeba rpos thy Saparw jv Néyouew ; 

‘ 3 , v4 v 3 - \ b] / bf , $ a 
Kal axovoaca ott On éEedkndrvOe mpos avTHy, ov mpoTEpoy érri- 30 


6 60d bebFs 7 diépewov 15 KparnOijoa (sic) 17 aiéob 21 ora- 
paxdjoay 22, 23 ‘cod. om. [ ] transiliens a cal xeparioOeicay ad kai xparjoaca,’ 
Harris 29 BadrrAwneba. 
passage has been changed in BC. But 6 in ponte] The ‘pons’ may be a 
ef, infra, ll. 7, 13. bridge crossing the ‘fossa’ which some- 

super pulpitum] See a woodeut given _ times surrounded the arena. 
by Le Blant of a man bound to a post noluit] I have treated the curious 


on a slightly raised platform, and a addition in BC as a gloss, as it is not 
lion springing to get at him (Rev. dr- foundin A org. 
chéol. 1889, vol. xin. p. 155). 


92 PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 


euenerat, non prius credidit, nisi quasdam notas uexationis in 

corpore et habitu suo recognouisset. exinde accersitum fratrem 

suum et illum catechuminum adlocuta est, dicens; In fide 

state, et inuicem omnes diligite; et passionibus nostris ne scan- 
3 dalizemini. 

XXI. Item Saturus in alia porta Pudentem militem exor- 
tabatur, dicens: Ad summam, inquit, certe, sicut praesumpsi et 
praedixi, nullam usque adhuc bestiam sensi. et nunc de toto 
corde credas. ecce prodeo illo, et ab uno morsu leopardi con- 

rosumor. et statim in fine spectaculi, leopardo eiecto, de uno 
morsu tanto perfusus est sanguine, ut populus reuertenti illi 
secundi baptismatis testimonium reclamauerit: Saluum lotum, 
saluum lotum. plane utique saluus erat, qui hoc modo lauerat. 
tunc Pudenti militi inquit: Vale, inquit, memor fidei meae; et 
15 haec te non conturbent, sed confirment. simulque ansulam de 
digito eius petiit, et uulneri suo mersam reddidit ei heredita- 
tem, pignus relinquens illi et memoriam sanguinis. exinde 
iam exanimis prosternitur cum ceteris ad iugulationem solito 
loco. et cum populus illos in medio postularet, ut gladio pene- 
zo tranti in eorum corpore oculos suos comites homicidi adiun- 
gerent, ultro surrexerunt, et se quo uolebat populus transtule- 
runt: ante iam osculati inuicem, ut martyrium per solemnia 
pacis consummarent. ceteri quidem inmobiles, et cum silentio 
1 uenerat B uexationes AB 2 et] C; et in B; om. A recogno- 
uisset]+ Et illum cathecuminum A et exinde accersito B 3 est]+eos B 
3, 4 ut in fide starent et inuicem se deligerent B 6 om. Pudentem A 7 
dicens; Ad summam inquit certe] A; dicens, Adsum certe BC praesumpsi] 
promisi C 7, 8 om. et praedixi, nullam usque adhuc bestiam sensi BC 
8 et nunc]et nunc ut C; nuntiei B = = 9 ecce producor illue C; et cum producar 
illue B ab uno] et nune BC 10 leopardi obiectus B; leopardus obiectus 
Cc 11 morsu]+eius B reuertenti illi] reuertendi B 12, 13 baptismi B 
declarauerat dicens. Saluum locum plane. Vtique B 13 qui hoe modo lauerat] 
om. B; qui hoc spectaculo claruerat (?C) Ruin. 14 om. inquit (pr.) B in- 
quit] inquit et (2) A; ait B  memor}menito B  meae] Holst.; mei AB 15 
confortent simul qui B annulum © 16 petit B uersam B om. el B 
17 pignus] pinguéns A beatam hereditatem relinquens ei pignus (illi pugnos 
B) et memoriam tanti sanguinis BC 17, 18 deinde iam animis B 18 iu- 
gulatione A in solito B 19 et] sed B in medium BC postolaret A ; 
postulasset B ut]+et B 19, 20 penetrante B 20 corpore eorum B 
committentes homicidia B 21 ultro] uulso B quo] quod A uoluerat B 
22 osculati]+in (supra lin.) A martyrem B 23 consumarent A; +et B 
et cum silentio] consilio B 


PASSIO 8, PERPETVAE, 


‘ NY al “ U 3 a OYA / 
orevoey Tply 7) onueia Twa TNS BrAAaRns ev TH Wig TopaTe 
/ 
éwpdxer’ avaderyOévtav Sé Kkadhécaca tov idiov ddergov cat 
t a ?, 
avtoy Tov KaTnXOvpEvoy Tapexare iva év Tioter Stapeivwow 
Q 3 , 3 a \ a / > / \ 
Kal aAANNOUS ayaT@ow, Kal Tots TAOnpacW Eéxeivors pH TKaV- 
a / on 
dartcOaotv ToLvovTots ovo. 
/ 
XXI. Kat év érépa wiry 6 Datupos Te otpariaty Tovdevte 
A \ 
mpotwpiret, KaMdrAov Aéywv OTe Kara thy mpdrcEw tHv éunp, 
¢ \ a OA A , v4 / 5:4 4 . 2? \ \ 
os Kal mpoetrov, ovdé Ev Onpiwy irpaTo mov Ews apre’ idod Sé 
a A Ie of bi by , t Yoo ey 
vov, wa é Orns Kapdias SiatricTevons, Mpocépyomat, Kal ev Evi 
, ! n . \ 29\ 2 b a ! 
Snypate Tapdarews Tedevodpar’ Kal evOds év Téder THS Oewpias 
U PS x a A 2B 8 \ > € Xv on a v4 T TOU 
mapsaris avT@ é€BAnOn, Kal év évi SHypart Tod aipatos Tov 
“ @ / ¢ a , 
aylou éverrAnacOn* TocovTov aipa épp’n, ws NoytcOjvat SevTépov 
Barticpod paptipiov’ Kabds kal éredaver 6 dyA0s Body Kal 
réyov' Karas édovow, Kadds éXovTM. Kal pny vyuns Hv oO 
! fal 
ToTe TH oTpatioTy Tovdevre én" 
/ a, \ fo) 
‘Tryiawe kal pynwoveve mictews Kal é€uod’ Kal Ta ToLadTa Kal 
U a aA f 
oTEPEWTATW GE addrOV 7 TapataTw. Kai SaKTUALOY aiTnoas 
a \ \ aA A , 7 »” a 
map avTov kal évOels avTo Td idiw aipate Edwxev avTe paka- 
/ 3 \ 4 ' 
play krAnpovopiav, apes pvnunv kal évOnnnv aiparos tHALKov- 
Tov. peta tadta otwov eurvéwy Et. amnyOn peta Kal Tov 
x a / / . > \ Y € 
adrov TO cvvynder TOT ets chayny bE Oo dXXOS FTHEOEV avTOUS 
a“ 4 a 
els pécov perayOnvat, ows did TOV ayiov copatov éXavve- 
, . \ ¢ 
peevov TO Eidos OedowrrTat’ Kal of paxdprot paptupes EéxovTes 
> / ‘\ > U ; tal 
nyépOncav’ noxXvvovTo yap OdLyous wapTupas éyew éml TO pa- 
V4 4) / ? a \ 89 60 ? fa) ad co 
kapio Oavatw avTadv. Kat 8) éMovtwv avtady brrov 6 bydos 
/ A /- > , 
éBovreTo, Tp@Tov KaTepihnoay AA HXovS iva TO puoTHpLOV Sia 
a . 4 , , 
TOV OiKELMY THS ThTTEWS TENELWOMOW' Kal peTéTreITA dopévas 
/ \ \ a / / . A n. 
Uréwevvay THY did TOD Ethous Tiywwpiav' ToAN@ Se paddov 6 


OLOUT@ TPOTM AENOVMEVOS 
ToLovT@ TpoTG pevos. 


2 dvadexPjoaca 12 devrepov 15 TWovderriw 


93 


= 
on 


9 consumor] The Greek translator 
took this for ‘consummor’; but the 
word as it stands is more natural. 

12 Saluum lotum] See above, p. 8, 
and Mr Harris’s note ad loc. (p. 68). 

14 fidei meae]‘fidei mei’ AB. Possi- 
bly, following the Greek, we should read 
‘ fidei et mei,’ 


19 in medio] See note on p. 76, 1. 6. 

22 ante iam osculati}] The kiss of 
peace is not given in the midst of the 
amphitheatre, as the Greek version 
implies, and as the writer of the Thub- 
urbitan Acts (see above, p. 25) makes 
his martyrs give it. 


94 PASSIO S. PERPETVAE. 


ferrum receperunt: multo magis Saturus, qui et prior ascen- 
derat, prior reddidit spiritum; nam et Perpetuam sustinebat. 
Perpetua autem, ut aliquid doloris gustaret, inter ossa con- 
puncta exululauit; et errantem dexteram tirunculi gladiatoris 
5 ipsa in iugulym suum transtulit. fortasse tanta femina aliter 
non potuisset occidi, quae ab inmundo spiritu timebatur, nisi 
ipsa uoluisset. 
O fortissimi ac beatissimi martyres! o uere uocati et electi 
in gloriam Domini nostri Iesu Christi; quam qui magnificat et 
1o honorificat et adorat, utique et haec non minora ueteribus ex- 
empla in aedificationem Hcclesiae legere debet, ut nouae quo- 
que uirtutes unum et eundem semper Spiritum Sanctum usque 
adhuc operari testificentur, [et] omnipotentem Deum Patrem et 
Filium eius Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum, cui est clari- 
rs tas et inmensa potestas in saecula saeculorum. amen. 


1 prior}]+scalam BC 2 reddendo BC Perpetuam] perpetua A; perpe- 
tuum B sustinebat} exspectabat BC 3 ut]+ipsa B gustasset inter 
quostas B conpuncta] conpune (sic) A; puncta B 4 gladiatoris trunculi 
B 5 transtulit] posuit B fortasse]+ enim B aliter] alibi B 6 quae] 
que B; quiA 8 uere] uiri B 9 quam] A; quoniam C; om. B 9, 10 
om. et honorificat C 10 adorat] honorat sanctos BC utique]+ habebit (-bat 
B) uitam aeternam BC non minora] nomina A; minora BC 11 om. in B 
aedificatione A legere] lege B debet] debemus BC ut] B; et A 11, 12 
noua quoque uirtutis B 13 testificentur, et] Holst.; testificemur A 13, 14 
ad hoe credamus operari, ut testificetur omnipotentis Dei et filii eius Iesu Christi 
Domini nostri gloria BC cuius claritas in saecula saecuiorum.aMEN, B 


8 uocati et electi] See above, p. 50. should be noted that the MS. has ov« tcov, 
10 non minora] The evidence of the which may have come from ‘minora’ 
MSS. seems to point to this rather than (BC). 
to ‘non minus’ which Holsten edited. 18 testificentur, et] I have inserted 
The latter reading has the support of the ‘et’ with Holsten: but the whole passage 
Greek as amended by Mr Harris: but it is very corrupt in the MSS. 


PASSIO 8. PERPETVAE, 


> / ¢c 8 , \ , > f 3 / A ‘\ 
atupos, 6 51 mpoTepos TV KAiwaxa éxeivny avaBas, Os Kab 
BA \ Tt , 3 / ¢€ Oe I Ul log \ 
érevoev THY Lleptrerovay avaBaivev. 17 5é Ieprerova, iva kal 
fad / A > a 
QUT) yevonTat TOV TovaY, TEplL TA GoTéa VUYEloa AAGKAEEY, Kal 
\ ‘ > / 
merrAavnerny THY SeEtay ameipov povopayou KpaTicaca Tpoc- 
A a t . cay “ 

Hyayey TH KaTaknetds éauTyis' lows THY TOTAavTHY Yyuvaika TOD 
adxaSaptov mvevpatos poBovpévov Kat ghovevOnvat pr Bovdo- 
pévov. 

°O, avépioratos Kal paxapiotato. pdptupes Kal oTpaTi@tar 
éxrextot, eis Sdfav Kuptov “Incod Xpiotod KexrAnpévor. Tes 

b) i 
peyarvvopey Uuas 7) pakapio@per, yevvaloTaToL oTpaTL@Tat ; 
> & a fal ¢ 
OvY Nocov TOV Traralav ypadhav, & Eis oiKodouny exKANTIas 
3 , U al 
avayiwooKerOat opeihes 7 TavapeTos ToXlTEla TOV paKkaplov 
> 

paptupay * * * * * * 80 dv ddkav avatréwropev TO 
TATpt TOV AioOvaV, Gua TO movoyevet aVTOU Vid TO Kupio Nav 
> A A ‘ ¢ , , . @ ¢ , \ \ f 3 
Incot Xpiotd ovy ayiw mvedpate’ 6 4 Soka Kal TO Kparos Eis 

\ a 
TOS aidvas THY aidvay. any. 


2 pnoev 4 werhavnpdrn 5 rot] tad 11 ov« toov 


on 


10 


5 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


1, Variants of A and B not included in the apparatus criticus. 


60,5 aequae A 7 presenti A 10 queque A 11 saecundum A 
14 filieque A 62,8 ibeccillitas A disperatio A 9 estimet A 15 
martiribus A 18 cathecumini A 22 aequae A cathecuminum A; 
caticuminum B 22 uberam B 26 inquid B 27 patrum B afectione A 
64,4 michi A 9 spacio A michi A 11 recipimus B 12 die B 
13 benefitio B premio A 66,4 postulé A 5 que B 9 mire AB 
celum B 10 possim B 11 scale B 14 inhererent AB 15 mire B 
16 satyrus B 19 scale B 68,1 lentae A 3 orti immensum A (sed eum 
notis transpositionis) 4 habito B 5 adspexit B 6 michi B 9 
expta sum AB  cummanducans B 11 seculum B 14 tedio AB 17 etatis 
B 70,2 gauissus B 3 conforjfortaui A 7 pranderemur A 
9 inmensus B 15 infantie B 16 helarius A 21 dampnat B 72,7 
michi B 8 commemerata A 9 cepi B 11 dignigratem B 12 
estuantem A 14 fatie B; facie A dinogratis B 15 per infirmitate B 
16 facié carcerata A; cancerata fatie B hodio (corr, in hodie) A ominibus 
A 17 facerem B 20 alcorem B 21 dinogratis B 23 exporrecta 
A; expta B 26 crastensem A 74,3 man|mansimus A 4 dino- 
gratem B 7 umbiculum B 9 dinogratis B cepit AB 9,10 defi- 
tiebat B 11 exporecta A; expta B 12 pena A 13 milis B obtio A 
14 cepit B 17 tedio AB cepit B 19 fatiem B 20 que B 
76,2 apperui B 6 amphiteatrum A; amfifeatrum B 7 cumlaborabo B 
8 aspitio B 10 egiptius A fedus spetiae B 18 ceperunt B 14 egyptium 
AB 15 uoluntatem A mire B 16 anpitheatri A; anfiteatri B 
20 egiptius A; egyptius B 78,1 cepimus B fatiem B cedebam AB 
3 cepi B cedere B 5 apprehendi A 6 cepit AB 8 gloriam B 
9 expta AB 13 satyrus B 14 inquid B 15 cepimus B 18 
inmensam B 20 iestamur B 21 spacium grandé A 23 cipressi A 
80,8 querebamus AB 12 edificati A; edificate B 12,13 quatuor B 


17 dextera B 20 suleuauerunt A 21 fatiem B 82,6 cepit B grece A 
7 rose B 9 discensiones B 13 cepimus B 15 exptus B 16 martirum A 


84,5,6 commartires A 6 sotiam AB 12 que B 17 permijtendo A 
18,19 ad sublimdi.tante B 21 aditientes B 24 fatiem B 86,2 cassaris A 
3 orruit A tribunos B 5 frerit A 6 obtione A credentem A 
9 constantiam B 10 iuditium B 11 dicentes adtyro B 13 hodistis AB 


faties B 15 antoniti B 16 illuxit A uictorie AB 17 amphitea- 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 97 


trum AB celum B 88,3 obsetrice A reciarium A loturam B 
11 egyptii A 14 ceperunt B 20 martirii A 21 uellere obici B 
22 expectaculi B 23 pulpetum B 90,1 satyrus B nichil A 2 pre- 
sumebat A 4 bestiam A 5 satyrus B 7 satyrus B inlesus AB 
8 baccam A 9 preparauit AB 10 emulatus AB dispoliate A 11 orruit 
A 13 ite B reuocate AB 19 helisam (?) A; elisan B 20 ambe AB 
reuocate B 21, 22 ecathecumino A; caticumina B 22 adherebat AB 
24 cepit B inquid B 25 baccam A 92,3 cathecuminum A ; cati- 
cuminum B 6 satyrus B aliam portam A 7 presumpsi AB 8 predixi A 
9 morsi B 10 in finem expectaculi B 14 pudendi B 15 hee B 
16, 17 ereditatem A 18 exanimes A 22 solempnia B 23 immobiles B 
94,1 satyrus B 5 gugullum B 6 immundo B 10 hee B 11 


edificationem B 


2. Note on Retranslations from a Latin Version of the N. T. in Ep. 
Vienn. et Lugd. apud Euseb. H. E. v. 1. 


The direct quotations in this letter give us but little guidance as to the 
character of the text of the N.T. used at this time in the Churches of Gaul: 
but the language of the writer is everywhere interwoven with Scriptural 
reminiscences, and in these he seems to betray a greater familiarity with a 
Latin Version than with the original Greek. In the following investigation I 
shall take the passages which suggest this phenomenon in their order, giving 
references to the sections in Heinichen’s edition. 

1. §12 peyadros érronOnuev did ro adnAov THs Gpodoyias, ov Tas éemupepo- 
feévas xoddcets hoBovpevot, GAAa TO TéAOS GHhopayvtes Kal TO amoTEcEly TWA 
dedidres. This may contain a retranslation of ‘intuentes exitum’ (= dvabew- 
pouvres THY éxBaow) Heb, xiii. 7. 

2. §17 de hs érédecEev 6 xpioros ote Ta Tap dvOparrois cbredf Kat ade.dn 
kai evxaradpovnra atwopeva peyddns karagiovra mapa Oem Sdéns. Several 
passages seem partially interwoven here, but we may perhaps find a reference 
especially to 1 Cor. i. 28 ra a@yévy tot Kéopou kai Ta eLouGevnpéva e&ehéEaro 6 
Geds k.7.A.; and in this case we have a retranslation based upon ‘ignobilia 
mundi et contemptibilia eligit Deus.’ Cf. infra § 42 7 puxpa cal doOevns Kal 
evkatadporntos, where doOevjys takes us back to the same context in 
S. Paul. 

3. § 17 dca riy mpos adriv dydmny, thy év duvdpes Secxvpérny kal ph év elder 
kavyopéevny. This recalls 1 Cor. iv. 19 ydoouat od tov Adyov Tay mepvato- 
pevov dddd thy Svvayiv, together with 2 Cor. v. 12 mpos rods ev mpocdmr@ 
kavy@pévous kat py ev xapdia. ere ev mpoodme reappears as éy etdec through 
the medium of the Latin ‘qui i facie gloriantur.’ 

4, §18 ris capkivns Seoroivys aitas. See note on p. 73 above. I 
have to thank Mr P, M. Barnard of Christ’s College for having in the first 
instance called my attention to the fact that this was a retranslation of 
‘carnalis,’ and also for help in the further investigation of the subject. 


R 7 


98 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


5. § 18 pndev gxovres pyKére 6 womoovow adry. Cf. § 21 pnére pndev 
eixov 0 roijcovow adrg. In Luc. xii. 4 the Vulg. translation of kal pera 
TadTa py exovrev mepicoorepdv TL TouRoa is ‘et post haec non habent amplius 
quid faciant.’ Cod. Bez. has ‘nequa habentium amplius quid facere’; Cod. 
Palat. (e), ‘et postea non habet amplius aliquid facere.’ Mnxére appears to 
have replaced mepioaorepov through the medium of ‘amplius.’ 

6. § 22 dnd ris odpaviov mnyjs Tod Udaros THs (wns Tov eErdvros €x TIS 
vndvos Tov xptorod Spocitopevos kat évdvvapovpevos. This is based on 
Apoc. xxi. 6 éyd 76 Supaure ddow ek Tis myyis Tov BSaros rhs Cons Swpeay, and 
Jn. vil. 37, 38 dav ris dupa epyécOw mpos pe kal muvéro. 6 mioTevor eis epe, 
KaOads eirev 7 ypady, worapot ék tis KotAias avrod pevoovow Datos CavTos. 
The interpretation of this latter passage has been disputed, partly owing to 
the difficulty of connecting the words as they are ordinarily punctuated with 
any ‘Scripture’ of the O.T. This difficulty is somewhat lessened if we 
connect 6 micrevor eis éué with the previous word muweéra, and so leave it open 
to refer the words éx rijs xotAias avrov to Christ Himself. This interpretation, 
whatever be its merits or defects, was undoubtedly the one familiar to our 
writer who represents ‘de uentre eius’ of the Latin Version by éx ris vndvos 
Tov xptorod. And the same interpretation is suggested by the colometry of 
the Old Latin. Cod. Bez. reads 


dicens si quis sitit ueniant 

et bibat qui credit in me 

sicut dixit scriptura. flumina dentre 
eius fluent aquae uiuae. 


Cod. Palat. (¢c) reads likewise 
Si quis sitit 
ueniat et bibat 
qui credit in 
me. 

Sicut scriptum 
est flumina de 
uentre eius 
fluent aquae 

Vibae. 


Thus the use of this passage by our writer has a threefold interest. It 
suggests that he was more familiar with a Latin Version than with the 
original Greek of S. John’s Gospel, so that in retranslating ‘de uentre’ he 
misses éx tis KotAias and substitutes ék rys wmdvos: it indicates that the 
Version he used was that which we speak of as the Old Latin: and it gives 
very early authority for an interpretation which is now generally discarded 
(see Westcott adloc.). Mr F. C. Burkitt of Trinity points out to me that this 
interpretation is suggested by the quotation of the passage in the Speculum 
(Corp. Script. Eccl. Lat. x11. p. 700) after Jerem., ii. 13 ff, the section being 
entitled ‘Quod Dominus fons uitae nuncupetur.’ 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 99 


tard 


7. § 27 érépas pynxavas 6 diaBodos éerevdet. In Eph. vi. 11 (pos ras peOo- 
Sdsias rod SiaBdAov) the Vulg. has ‘aduersus insidias diaboli’: but Tertullian 
adv. Mare. v. 18 has ‘ad machinationes diaboli,’ and this must point to the 
true restoration of Ambrosiaster in loc. ‘aduersus nationes,’ especially as he 
afterwards in his comment speaks of ‘omnia machinamenta diaboli.’ ‘Machi- 
nationes’ would naturally reproduce itself as pnyavas. 

8. § 30 os dmd Tar oTpati@ray eri T6 Biya Koptobeis...émBonoets TmavToias 
ToLovpevav, Gs avtov dvTos TOU XptoTov, awedidov thy Kady paprupiav. The 
writer clearly has 1 Tim. vi. 13 in his mind, Xpiorod “Incot rod paptrupyoavros 
émi Tovriou IHethdrov thy kaj Gpodoyiav. The people cry out against Pothinus 
as though he were himself the Christ: he is Christ-like at least in ‘witnessing 
the good confession’ before his judge. The Vulgate here has ‘Christo Jesu 
qui testimonium reddidit sub Pontio Pilato bonam confessionem.’ Tertullian 
(De Praescr. 25) and Ambrosiaster (ad loc.) give ‘testatus est’ (Tert. v.1 
‘testificatus’): but the Vulgate rendering has a flavour of antiquity about it. 

9. § 40 avrot gaya yudpevor (V.1. yevopevot) TG Koop. Cf. 1 Cor. iv. 9 dre 
Ogarpov eyevOnpev TO koopeo. Here Oéaua represents the Latin ‘spectaculum.’ 

10. § 48 pndé aicOnow évdtparos vupdexod. Cf Mt. xxii. 12 ovk évdedu- 
pévov évdvpa yapov. The word vupdixés in this place has caused much trouble 
to the commentators (see Heinichen ad loc. vol. 111. pp. 183 ff.). It is however 
a retranslation of the Latin, which reads ‘non uestitum ueste nuptiali’ (ues- 
timentum nuptiale e). Cf. infra § 55 os eis vupdixdv Seimrvov KxexAnuévn, with 
Apoc. xix. 9 eis ré Seimvov Tov yaov rod apviov (cenam nuptiarum). 

11. § 58 6 avopos dvopnoaro ert, cal o Sixaois StxatwOnrw ért. Here we 
have a direct quotation of Apoc. xxii. 11, introduced by the words iva 7 ypapy 
mAnpoby. The original Greek text is 6 dduav ddinodre et, Kai 6 pumapds 
pumavOnre eri, kat o Sikatos Sixatoovvny momoadre ért. Our writer therefore 
quotes from memory, and his recollection seems here again to be of the Latin 
Version. The Vulgate has ‘qui nocet noceat adhuc, et qui in sordibus est 
sordescat adhuc, et qui iustus est iustificetur adhuc.’ But Tichonius ad loc. 
(Hom. 19) gives ‘qui iniustus est iniusta faciat adhuc.’ And Primasius ad doc. 
also says ‘nam et alia translatio: gut iniustus est, ait, iniuste faciat adhuc.’ 
”Avopos then seems to be a retranslation of ‘iniustus, and possibly d:xatoOjre 
(for which however there is some slight Greek evidence) may have come from 
‘iustificetur.’ 

12. c. 2 §5 edvov dravtas, édéopevov dé ovdéva’ Kai Urép Tay Ta Setva 
StarOevrwy nUyovro. We have here a clear reference to the power of ‘binding 
and loosing’ spoken of in Mt. xvi. 19, xviii. 18; but dé is the word in either 
case, and not decpevo, which may be explained as a retranslation of the Latin 
‘ligare.’ The second clause may refer to Luc. vi. 28 mpocevdyeoOe mept trav 
énnpeatovroy tyas. Here the Latin is ‘orate pro calumniantibus uos’ (orate 
pro eis qui uobis iniuria faciunt e). 

By adhering to the order of the narrative I have necessarily placed some 
of the less convincing examples first; but I think that a fair case is made out 
on the whole for believing that the Gallican Churches were familiar with a 


7—2 


100 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


Latin Version of the New Testament : and examples (6), (7) and (11) connect 
that Version with what is commonly known as the African Old Latin. 


3. Note on the reading of the text inc. xvi. (p. 84, UW. 18 ff). 


Holsten edited in this passage 
‘etsi indigni ad supplementum tantae gloriae describendum.’ 

This is unsatisfactory, not only because it twice deserts his own MS, 
and the other two, but also because it does not yield the required sense. 
‘Gloria’ refers to the martyrdom itself and not to the imprisonment of the 
martyrs and their visions. So that ‘supplementum tantae gloriae’ is an 
awkward collocation. What is left unfinished and needs completion is not the 
martyrdom but its record. ‘To complete the description of this great glory’ 
is the task before the writer. I have therefore restored ‘describendae’ by 
the aid of B; and this is not far from ‘describenti’ of A. ‘Indigni’ (Holst.) 
may perhaps be right: the Greek seems to confirm it. A reads ‘indigna,’ 
B ‘indigne’; and this latter gives a fair sense when taken either with ‘con- 
scribi’ or with ‘exequimur.’ . 

In the next sentence (1. 22) I have retained the reading of A, merely 
changing ‘ tractanti’ into ‘tractantur’ (Holst. ‘tractarentur’). But the coin- 
cidence of BCg in the participial form makes me somewhat uncertain whether 
we have yet recovered the true reading of this passage. 


4, The Shorter Latin Acts of the Passion of S. Perpetua. 


T reprint for the sake of reference these Acts from Aubé (Les Chrétiens 
dans Pempire romaim, 2nd ed. pp. 521 ff), who edits them from Biblioth. Nat. 
fonds latin 5269, 5279, 5297, 5311, 5318, 5349. They are given somewhat 
differently by Pillet (Hist. de S. Perpeétue) from fonds latin 14650, and from 
Bruxelles 207—8 (printed in Anal. Bolland.). The MSS. of them are legion. 


Facta persecutione sub Valeriano et Gallieno consulibus, comprehensi 
sunt uenerabiles uiri iuuenes Satyrus et Saturninus, duo fratres, Reuocatus et 
Felicitas soror eius et Perpetua quae erat de nobili genere et habebat patrem 
et matrem et duos fratres et fillum ad mamillam: annorum enim erat illa 
duorum et uiginti. apud Africam in ciuitate Tuburbitanorum. 

Minutius proconsul dixit ad eos: Inuictissimi principes Valerianus et 
Gallienus iusserunt ut sacrificetis. Satyrus respondit: Hoc non sumus 
facturi, Christiani enim sumus. proconsul iussit eos recludi in carcerem ; 
siquidem hora erat prope tertia. 

Audiens uero pater Perpetuae eam esse comprehensam cucurrit ad carce- 
rem, et uidens eam dixit : Quid hoc fecisti, filia? dehonestasti enim genera- 
tionem tuam. nunguam enim de genere nostro aliquis missus est in carcerem. 
Perpetua uero dixit ad eum: Pater, ecce, uerbi gratia, uides uas iacens aut 
fictile aut cuiuslibet generis? et ille respondit: Video, quid ad haec? Per- 


ADDITIONAL NOTES. 101 


petua dixit: Numquid aliud nomen potest habere quam quod est? at ille 
respondit: Non. Perpetua dixit: Nec ego aliud nomen accipere possum 
quam quod sum Christiana. tune pater eius audito uerbo irruit super eam, 
uolens oculos eius eruere ; et exclamans, confusus, egressus est foras. 

Orantes uero et sine cessatione preces ad Deum effundentes, cum essent 
multis diebus in carcere, quadam nocte uidens uisum sancta Perpetua alia die 
retulit commartyribus suis ita dicens : 

Vidi in uisu hac nocte scalam erectam [aeream az] mirabili altitudine 
usque ad caelum, et ita erat angusta ut nonnisi unus per eam ascendere 
posset. dextra uero laeuaque inerant fixi cultri et gladii ferrei, ut nullus 
circa se nisi ad caelum respicere posset. sub ea uero iacebat latens draco 
teterrimus ingenti forma, ut prae metu eius quiuis ascendere formidaret. 
uidi etiam ascendentem per eam Satyrum usque ad sursum, et respicientem 
ad nos et dicentem : Ne uereamini hunc draconem qui iacet ; confortamini in 
gratia Christi; ascendite et nolite timere, ut mecum partem habere possitis. 
uidi etiam iuxta scalam hortum ingentem, copiosissimum et amoenum ; et in 
medio horto sedentem senem in habitu pastorali et mulgentem oues, et in 
gyro eius stantem multitudinem candidatorum : et aspiciens ad nos uocauit 
ad se et dedit nobis omnibus de fructu lactis. et cum gustassemus, turba 
candidatorum responderunt Amen. et sic prae clamore uocum sum experge- 
facta. 

At uero illi cum haec audissent gratias agentes insufficienter Domino 
cognouerunt se ex reuelatione beatissimae Perpetuae ad martyrii coronam 
dignos esse effectos. 

Post haec uero procedens Minutius proconsul et sedens pro tribunali eos 
exhiberi praecepit: dixitque ad eos: Sacrificate diis; sic enim iusserunt 
perpetui principes. Satyrus respondit : Deo magis oportet sacrificare quam 
idolis. proconsul dixit: Pro te respondes, aut pro omnibus? Satyrus dixit : 
Pro omnibus, una enim est in nobis uoluntas. proconsul ad Saturninum, 
Reuocatum, Felicitatem et Perpetuam dixit: Vos quid dicitis? at illi respon- 
derunt : Verum est: unam gerimus uoluntaterm. 

Proconsul iussit uiros a mulieribus separari : et ad Satyrum dixit : Sacrifica, 
inuenis, et ne te meliorem quam principes iudices esse. Satyrus respondit : 
Meliorem me iudico apud uerum principem et praesentis et futuri saeculi, si 
colluctando pati meruero. proconsul dixit : Suade tibi, et sacrifica, inuenis. 
Satyrus respondit : Hoc ego non sum facturus. 

Proconsul ad Saturninum dixit: Sacrifica uel tu, iuuenis, ut ualeas uiuere. 
Saturninus respondit : Christianus sum, et hoc mihi facere non licet. 

Proconsul ad Reuocatum dixit : Forte et tu sequeris uoluntatem ilorum. 
Reuocatus respondit : Eorum plane propter Deum sequor desideria. procon- 
sul dixit: Sacrificate ne uos interficiam. Reuocatus respondit: Deum ora- 
mus ut hoc mereamur. . 

Proconsul eos remoueri praecepit, et Felicitatem et Perpetuam sibi iussit 
offerri. dixit autem ad Felicitatem: Quae diceris? respondit: Felicitas. 
proconsul dixit : Virum habes? Felicitas respondit : Habeo quem nune con- 


102 ADDITIONAL NOTES. 


temno. proconsul dixit: Vbi est? Felicitas dixit: Non est hic. proconsul 
dixit: Quo genere est? Felicitas respondit: Plebeius. proconsul dixit: 
Parentes habes? Felicitas dixit: Non habeo: Reuocatus uero congermanus 
meus est. uerumtamen his maiores parentes habere non potero. proconsul 
dixit : Miserere tui, puella, et sacrifica ut uiuas; maxime quia te infantem in 
utero habere uideo. Felicitas respondit : Ego Christiana sum, et haec omnia, 
mihi propter Deum contemnere praecepta sunt. proconsul dixit: Consule 
tibi, doleo enim de te. Felicitas respondit: Fac quod uis; mihi enim per- 
suadere non poteris. 

Proconsul ad Perpetuam dixit: Quid dicis, Perpetua? sacrificas? Per- 
petua, Christiana, inquit, sum, et nominis mei sequor auctoritatem, ut sim 
perpetua. proconsul dixit: Parentes habes? Perpetua respondit : Habeo. 

Audientes uero parentes eius pater, mater, fratres, et maritus simulque 
cum paruulo eius qui erat ad lac, uenerunt, cum essent de nobili genere. et 
widens eam pater eius stantem ante proconsulis tribunal, cadens in faciem 
suam dixit ad eam: Filia, iam non filia sed domina, miserere aetati meae 
patris tui, si tamen mereor dici pater; miserere et matris tuae, quae te ad 
talem florem aetatis perduxit, miserere et fratribus tuis, et huic infelicissimo 
uiro tuo, certe uel paruulo huic qui post te uiuere non poterit. depone hanc 
cogitationem tuam. nemo enim nostrum post te uiuere poterit, quia hoc 
generi meo nunquam contigit. Perpetua uero stabat immobilis, et respiciens 
in caelum dixit ad patrem suum: Pater, noli uereri: Perpetuam enim filiam 
tuam, si non obstiteris, perpetuam filiam tuam possidebis. 

Proconsul dixit : Moueant te et excitent ad dolorem lacrymae parentum 
tuorum, praeterea uoces paruuli tui. Perpetua dixit: Mouebunt me lacrymae 
eorum, si a conspectu Domini et a consortio horum sanctorum, cum quibus 
secundum uisionem meam fratribus bonis sum copulata, fuero aliena inuenta. 

Pater uero iactans infantem in collum eius et ipse cum matre et marito 
tenentes manus eius et flentes osculabantur dicentes: Miserere nostri, filia, 
et uiue nobiscum. at illa prospiciens [w./. proiciens] infantem eosque 
repellens dixit: Recedite a me operarii iniquitatis, quia non noui wos. 
non enim potero maiores et meliores uos facere quam Deum qui me ad hanc 
gloriam perducere dignatus est. 

Videns uero proconsul eorum perseuerantiam, data sententia Satyrum, 
Saturninum et Reuocatum flagellis caesos, et Perpetuam et Felicitatem 
exalapatas, in carcerem recipi praecepit, ut in Caesaris natale bestiis mitte- 
rentur. et cum essent in carcere iterum uidit uisionem Perpetua: Aegyptium 
quemdam horridum et nigrum, iacentem et uolutantem se sub pedibus 
eorum; retulitque sanctis fratribus et commartyribus suis. at illi intelli- 
gentes gratias egerunt Domino, qui, prostrato inimico generis humani, eos 
laude martyrii dignos habuerit. 

Contristantibus uero iis de Felicitate quod esset praegnans in mensibus 
octo, statuerunt unanimiter pro ea precem ad Dominum fundere. et dum 
orarent, subito enixa est uiuum. quidam uero de custodibus dixit ad eam: 
Quid factura es cum ueneris in amphitheatrum, quae talibus detineris 


ADDITIONAL NOTES, 103 


tormentis? Felicitas respondit: Hic ego crucior; ibi uero pro me Dominus 
patietur. 

Facto itaque die natali Caesaris, concursus ingens fiebat populi in amphi- 
theatrum ad spectaculum eorum. procedente uero proconsule, eos ad 
amphitheatrum perduci praecepit. euntibus uero eis sequebatur Felicitas, 
quae ex sanguine carnis ad salutem sanguinis [w./. salutis sanguinem] 
ducebatur, et de obstetrice ad gladium, et de lauatione post partum balnei 
sanguinis effusione meruit delauari [w./. relauari]. adclamante uero turba, 
positi sunt in medio amphitheatri nudi, ligatis post tergum manibus; et 
dimissis bestiis diuersis, Satyrus et Perpetua a leonibus sunt deuorati. 
Saturninus uero ab ursis erutus gladio est percussus. Reuocatus uero et 
Felicitas a leopardis gloriosum agonem impleuerunt. 

Horum ergo famosissimorum et beatissimorum Martyrum, sanctissimi 
fratres, qui passi sunt sub Valeriano et Gallieno imperatoribus apud Africam 
in ciuitate Tuburbitanorum sub Minutio proconsule die nonarum Martiarum, 
fideliter memoriis communicantes actus eorum in ecclesia ad edificationem 
legite, precantes Dei misericordiam ut orationibus eorum et omnium 
sanctorum nostri misereatur, atque participes eorum efficere dignetur, in 
gloriam et laudem nominis sui, quod est benedictum in saecula saeculorum. 
amen. 


APPENDIX 


THE ACTS OF THE SCILLITAN MARTYRS 


THE ORIGINAL LATIN TEXT 
TOGETHER WITH 


THE GREEK VERSION AND THE LATER LATIN 
RECENSIONS 


THE ACTS OF THE SCILLITAN MARTYRS. 


THE Acts of the Scillitan Martyrs were printed by Baronius under 
the year 202, apparently from two or three MSS., some of the 
readings of which he records. They were reprinted by Ruinart 
who added a somewhat different recension from a Colbertine MS., 
and also a fragment of about ten lines of yet another recension 
which Mabillon had found at Reichenau (Mab. Vet. Anal. Iv. 155). 

The recension of Baronius mentioned Severus and Antoninus 
(i.e. Caracalla) as the reigning Emperors, and the Colbertine recen- 
sion also spoke of more than one Emperor, though no names were 
given. This being so, it seemed that the Martyrdom could not be 
referred to an earlier date than the year 198, in which Caracalla 
received the title of Augustus. On the other hand Mabillon’s 
fragment spoke of one Emperor only, but did not mention his 
name. The three recensions agreed in naming Saturninus as the 
proconsul; and, as Tertullian tells us (Ad Scap. 3) that he was 
the first to draw the sword on the Christians in Africa, it was 
difficult to place the Martyrdom later than 200. 

The names of the Consuls only introduced fresh confusion, as 
they were given in so corrupt a form that it seemed hopeless to 
try and identify them. Mabillon gave: Praesidente bis Claudiano 
consule. Baronius: Kaistente (alias praestante; alias praesente) 
Claudio (alias Claudiano) consule. The Colbertine recension 
omitted them altogether. M. Léon Renier suspected that the 
word bis pointed to a Consul’s name underlying the preceding 
word, and wished to refer the Martyrdom to 180, Praesens IT. and 
Condianus. This earlier date harmonised much better with 
Tertullian’s notice of Saturninus, but it was only possible to 


THE ACTS OF THE SCILLITAN MARTYRS. 107 


accept it if Mabillon’s fragment were regarded as representing the 
more original form of the Martyrdom. 

The ingenious conjecture of M. Renier has been completely 
justified with the accession of fresh documents. In 1881 Usener 
published the Martyrdom in a Greek form from a MS., dated 890, 
in the Bibliothéque Nationale at Paris’. This opened with the 
names of two Consuls, though still in a corrupt form (émi Tépcap- 
tos To Sevrepov Kat Kravdvavod tév viratwr), and spoke through- 
out the piece of the Emperor in the singular number. Moreover it 
represented a shorter recension than either that of Baronius or 
the Colbertine, and it bore throughout an impress of greater 
originality. 

All difficulty as to the date was thus at an end; but a new 
controversy was raised as to the origin of the Greek form of the 
Martyrdom. Usener at once declared it to be a translation from 
a lost Latin original. In this he was followed by Hilgenfeld, who 
_ added that it bore a closer relation to the fragment of Mabillon 
than to the other recensions. Duchesne made a like observation, 
but gave no opinion on the question of a Greek or Latin original. 
On the other hand, Aubé contended that the original document 
was written in Greek, as he had himself suspected before Usener’s 
discovery was made known’. Bonnet and Sittl pronounced the 
same judgment’. 

After examining Aubé’s arguments I felt convinced that 
Usener’s decision was the correct one; and I believed moreover 
that if we had the whole of the document represented by Ma- 
billon’s fragment we should probably be in possession of the source 
of all the three recensions hitherto published. I have been con- 
firmed in this view by the discovery of the very document which 
T had desired to find; and I now publish it in the belief that we 
have at last the original Latin form of the Martyrdom. On the 
30th of August, 1890, I found in the British Museum a codex (No. 
11,880) assigned to the ninth century, containing the Scillitan 
Martyrdom in a form agreeing exactly with Mabillon’s fragment, 
as far as that fragment goes. The remainder of the piece, for 

1 Index Scholarum, &c. Bonn, 1881. 


2 Etude sur un nouveau texte des Actes des Martyrs Scillitains, Paris, 1881, 
3 Sittl, Local peculiarities of Latin, p. 112, 


108 THE ACTS OF THE SCILLITAN MARTYRS. 


here we have it in its entirety, will be read with the greatest 
interest, not only as a fresh contribution to our knowledge of 
popular African Latin of the second century, but also as a simple 
and inspiring narrative of the brave endurance of the early African 
Christians. It is brief, almost to obscurity; and we can readily 
understand that it would need to be paraphrased and enlarged for 
Church purposes, so as to provide a somewhat longer and less 
difficult lection for the commemoration of the Martyrs. In its 
contents it is, as might be expected, in closest correspondence with 
the Greek form: and we may pronounce over it at once the same 
eulogy with which Aubé greeted the appearance of the Greek 
itself: ‘c’est infiniment plus simple, plus grave, plus impersonnel 
et plus court que les autres textes.’ 

Shortly after my first discovery I found in the State Library 
at Evreux a 13th century MS. (No. 37, f. 55), and in the Hof- 
Bibliothek at Vienna (No. 377) an 11th century MS., of the same 
Passion. Both of these offer texts which correspond very closely 
to that of the MS. in the British Museum. Their modifications 
consist almost entirely of additions; and they help to restore a 
few passages where the earlier MS. is at fault. I have recorded 
their variants in the critical notes, but I have adopted none of 
them into the text, unless they were justified by the other re- 
censions. 

I have collated afresh the Paris Codex of the Greek version, 
and have printed it without modification as it stands in the MS. 
I have also reprinted for the sake of reference the Latin recension 
given by Baronius, and that from the MS. of the Abbey of Silos in 
Spain (Bibliotheque Nat., fonds latin n. a. 2179) as given in Aubé’s 
edition. This MS. gives an earlier form of the Colbertine recen- 
sion, which comes from fonds latin 5306 (‘olim Colbertinus’). 

In the critical notes A= Brit. Mus. 11,880 (9th cent.) B= 
Vienna 377 (11th cent.), and C= Evreux no. 37 (13th cent.). 


When we compare the newly found Latin text with the 
Greek, we note that it does not, like that and one of the Latin 
recensions, prefix the title of ‘Saint’ to each of the Martyrs whose 
words are recorded. It does not describe the exultation of Spe- 
ratus when judgment is pronounced, but simply records his words: 


THE ACTS OF THE SCILLITAN MARTYRS. 109 


‘Deo gratias agimus.” Similarly it does not give the full thanks- 
giving of all the Martyrs, but simply repeats: ‘Deo gratias.’ It 
says nothing about ‘sending up the Amen,’ which is a common- 
place of Martyrologists. The close of the piece, moreover, has 
been altered and expanded in the Greek, in which the locality of 
the Martyrs is named, and the exquisite phrase ‘regnant cum 
Patre et Filio et Spiritu Sancto’ has been rejected, as it has been 
also in both the recensions of the Latin. All these points may be 
regarded as evidence of the superior antiquity of the newly found 
Latin form. 

As regards its relation to the two Latin recensions hitherto 
known, it is sufficient to refer to them as printed below, where their 
interpolations and modifications will be found in italic type. But 
it is worth while to note that almost every word of the ancient 
form is preserved in one or other of these recensions, which have 
modified their original in different directions. 

Although it is scarcely probable that the theory of a Greek 
original will be revived after the publication of the present Latin 
text, it may be well to examine some of the arguments by which 
the theory has been supported. 

Aubé’s main argument is founded on the brevity of the 
Greek form as compared with the two Latin recensions. But 
our new Latin document is shorter still: so that the argument 
from brevity changes hands, and henceforth tends to shew that 
the Greek is itself a translation and to some extent an amplifi- 
cation. The two texts printed side by side below will speak for 
themselves in this matter: but we may select a few conspicuous 
examples. 

In the opening sentence, and again near the close, we have 
the additional date é7rep éotiv "lovrio cf’, to explain to Greek 
readers ‘xvI Kalendas Augustas.’ 

In the following sentence caxds dey Oévtes, which Aubé rightly 
disliked and which he wished to replace by xaxas ANexyGévres or 
kaxes SioyOévres, explains itself quite well when we regard it as 
a literal translation of ‘male accepti. The same remark will 
apply to yaAnvidoas as a translation of ‘ tranquillas.’ 

There can be no doubt that in the phrase cata rev nuetépwv 
(epéwy, either the translator or a copyist (as Aubé supposes) has 


110 THE ACTS OF THE SCILLITAN MARTYRS. 


blundered in putting ‘epéwy for tepdv. We now see that the 
Latin before him was ‘de sacris (not ‘sacrificiis ’) nostris.’ 

The word w@avorns need no longer cause us trouble, when 
we regard it as a poor equivalent of ‘ persuasio.’ 

We have good instances of paraphrase or amplification in the 
following : 


Nolite huius dementiae esse parti- My BovdnOare ris rotadrns pavias 
cipes. kal mapappoovwns yevér Oat  SecyOqvat 
TULPETOYXOL, 
In re tam iusta nulla est delibe- "Ey mpaypart otras éyxpire ovdepia 
ratio, xabiorarat Bovdrn 7 dtackeyts. 
Quae sunt res In capsa uestra ! ‘Owotat mpayparetat trois tperépous 


aTOKEWWTaL OKEvETLW; 


The modification of the close of the piece has already been 
referred to, and deserves particular attention. It is impossible to 
believe that there, any more than in the passages just quoted, the 
Latin text could have been produced by an abbreviation of the 
Greek. 

The curious phrase ‘iniquitati nullam operam praebuimus’ 
has no counterpart at all in the Greek: but any one who attempts 
to find a rendering for it will pardon the Greek translator, if he 
used the licence of a paraphrast and purposely omitted it. If 
this explanation of its absence be admitted, the flourish of amplifi- 
cation, of which Aubé justly complained at this point in the later 
Latin recensions, can no longer be alleged in favour of the origin- 
ality of the Greek. 

The main body therefore of Aubé’s argument is seen to have 
disappeared altogether. All that remains is the argument from 
the names of the Consuls, and the argument from the proclama- 
tion of the herald after sentence had been pronounced. 

With regard to the first of these we now read by the aid of 
the Vienna MS., ‘Praesente bis et Claudiano consulibus’; so 
that here we have a form obviously more correct than that in the 
Greek, which has hitherto been the nearest to the truth. The 
explanation of the mistake in the various Latin texts is not far to 
seek ‘Praesente’ was taken, at a very early period, as a parti- 
ciple; and so it threw the whole sentence out of gear. It was 
itself transformed into ‘ praesidente,’ ‘ praestante,’ and ‘existente’: 


THE ACTS OF THE SCILLITAN MARTYRS. 111 


it soon cast out the ‘bis’; and, when only one proper name was 
left, ‘consule’ took the place of ‘consulibus, and so the error was 
complete. In the Greek the corruption was of a different cha- 
racter, and only affected the spelling of the first Consul’s name. 
As to the second Consul, all our witnesses give ‘Claudiano, and 
I have accordingly printed this, and not ‘Condiano, in the text. 

With reference to the order given to the herald, the Colbertine 
recension reads ‘per praeconem duci iussit, a quite impossible 
reading. The Greek gives Ova Tov xnpuKxos Ta TOY ayiwy papTipeVv 
ovopata KnpuxOnvat mpocétagev. This no doubt gave the true 
sense: but we now see that it is a somewhat clumsy paraphrase 
of ‘per praeconem dict iussit.’ 

Among the names thus proclaimed by the herald we find in 
the Greek Kasdeorivoy (cod. Kereorivov), which answers to 
‘Laetantium’ in the Latin texts. Aubé supposes, at the sug- 
gestion of Renan, that ‘Laetantium’ arose from a division of the 
Greek KaiAeotivov into cai and Xeotivov, the copula being then 
dropped because the other names in the list were without it. 
This is ingenious. The new Latin text leaves the matter where 
it was: but I cannot think that so precarious an argument can 
have any force, when it stands absolutely alone. 


112 THE ACTS OF THE SCILLITAN MARTYRS. 


PASSIO SANCTORVM SCILITANORVM. 


Praesente bis et Claudiano consulibus, xvI Kalendas Augus- 
tas, Kartagine in secretario inpositis Sperato, Nartzalo et 
Cittino, Donata, Secunda, Vestia, Saturninus proconsul dixit : 
Potestis indulgentiam domi nostri imperatoris promereri, si 

5 ad bonam mentem redeatis. 

Speratus dixit: Numquam malefecimus, iniquitati nullam 
operam praebuimus; numquam malediximus, sed male accepti 
gratias egimus; propter quod imperatorem nostrum obseruamus. 

Saturninus proconsul dixit: Et nos religiosi sumus, et 

10 Simplex est religio nostra, et luramus per genium domni nos- 
tri imperatoris, et pro salute eius supplicamus, quod et uos 
quoque facere debetis. 

Speratus dixit: $i tranquillas praebueris aures tuas, dico 
mysterium simplicitatis. 

13  Saturninus dixit: Initianti tibi mala de sacris nostris aures 
non praebebo; sed potius iura per genium domni nostri impera- 
toris. 

Speratus dixit: Ego imperium huius seculi non cognosco ; 
sed magis illi Deo seruio, quem nemo hominum uidit nec uidere 

20 his oculis potest. furtum non feci; sed siquid emero teloneum 
reddo: quia cognosco domnum meum, regem regum et impera- 
torem omnium gentium. 


PASSIO SCILLITANORVM. C; INCIPIT PASSIO SANCTORVM MARTYRVM SCYLLITANORVM, 
ID EST SPERATI, NAZARI, CITTONI, DONATAE, BISTEAE. B 


1 Praesente bis et Claudiano consulibus] B; In diebus illis presidente bis 
Claudiano consule A; Presente Claudiano consule C 2 Cartigine B; aput 
Kartaginem C Nartzalo et Cittino] A; et Naharo, Cittono B; Nareallo 
Cithino C 3 Bistea B; et Bestia C Saturinus B semper 4 domini 
B; dnic 5 redeatis]+ et sacrificetis diis omnipotentibus BC 6 num- 
quam] numquid B nullamj]ullam Cc. 7 prebemus A; prohibuimus B 
8 obseruamus]+et timemus et adoramus et ipsi cotidie sacrificlum nostrae laudis 
offerimus BC 10 nostra religio B genium] C; ingenium A; regnum B 
domini, om, nostri B 11 eius salute A om. quod B 12 om. quoque BC 
13 dicit A 15 initianti] A super rasuram; initiant B; iniciasti, om. tibi C 
mala] male C aures]+meas C 16 sed potius iura] A; potius iurate BC 
ingenium A om, domni nostri BC 18 agnosco A 19 deo seruio] A; 


THE ACTS OF THE SCILLITAN MARTYRS. 113 


MAPTYPION TOY ATIOY KAI KAAAINIKOY MAPTYPOZ 
ZTTEPATOY. 


A a e 

‘Ent Iépoavtos To Sevtepov cat Kraviitavod trav virdrwr, 

, = a ry ’ ef 2 v3 te 9 a \ 
™po ts Kadavdav avyovoTwy OTrep éotiv ‘lovAip ul, év TO KaTa 

/ / wv U v fal 
Kap@Oayévva BovareuTnpio iYxOncay Tapactacipot L1rEepatos 
a a , ,? 4 \ 
Nadprfanros cai Kuerrivos Aovdta Xexovvda xai Eotia, mpos 
“ a e 3 t ’ . -RSY A) \ na a . 
ovs Latoupvivos 6 avOvTratos gnaw vvacGe Tapa Tod HmeV 5 
3 A \ f , 
avToKpatopos cuyyapioews aEvwOnvat, dav dpa coppova AoyLo- 
\ bd] 
pLov avaxaréonalbe. 
fal 3 , 
“O 8€ dytos Sarepatos arexpivato Néyov' Ouvdérrore éxaxoup- 
\ XN a / 
yjoapev, ovdérote KaTnpacapeba, aXdd un Kal Kaas Sey OévTes 
n lel lal a aA , 
evyaptoTovpuen, érerd) TO Oed nyav nai Bacrre? SovrEvopev. 10 
a .? N ae , 
Latoupvivos 6 avOvratos épyn’ “ANAA Kal jyeis OpnoKevomer, 
. a A . \ 1 3 n 
Kat atrAH 9 Kad nuas Opnoxeia KabéornKev’ Kat 8) ouvdopev 
lad a / ¢€ aA 
Kata THS cupTreduKuias evdalpovias Tod SeaTOTOU HuoVv Bact- 
\ \ a a . t\ \ ¢ a 
NEWS Kat UIrép THs avTOD cwTHpias ikeTevowev’ 0 Kal dyads 
WTAVTWS XPT} TroLetD. 5 
A 5 ' \ \ 

‘O 6€ &ytos Yreparos eirrev’ “Kay yadnvidaas pot Tas ods 

akoas Tapacyols, Ep@ TO THs GANOods aTASTHTOS uTTHpLOV. 
a 4 

Latoupvivos 6 avOvmTartos épyn’ “EvapEapévov cov mrovnpa 
Aéyew KaTa TOY NuETepwov tepéwv TAS aKods jLov ov TpocOnow’ 

3 > 9 f a \ a 3 4 a“ / ¢ a 
aXN omocate Maddov KaTa THS evdatpovias TOD SeaTrOTOV HUY 20 
avToKparopos. 

‘O Gytos Sareparos Adve’ “Eyo tv Bacirelav Tod viv aiadvos 
ov yiwwdoKke' aivd € Kal NaTpevW TH CuO Oe@, dv ovdels TAP 
> @ a a 
avOporwv teBéata.’ ovdé yap olovte tovTOLS Tols aiaOnTois 
v ‘ ’ , . 2 >» \ , \ of 
Oppact. KNOTHY OV TEeTOLNKA’ AAN ei TL Kab TPATOw, TO TENDS 25 
arotivups, 6Te éemiywvdoKw Tov KUpLoY nudv Kat Bacihéa TOV 

/ / fad a 
Bactréov Kai Seorrorny ravtev Tay eOveav. 


soli seruio deo B; seruio C 20 oculis]+carnalibus BC potest]+ nisi oculis 
cordis: si fidem habuerimus uidebimus (uidemus C) lumen uerum BC non] A; 
nig B; nunquam C siquid emero] AC; quidé mei noro B theloneum BC 
21 domnum]+deum B regem regum et imperatorem] sic restitui ex cod. 


Baroniano et uersione graeca; et imperatorem regum A super rasuram; imperatorem 
regum et BC 


R. 8 


114 THE ACTS OF THE SCILLITAN MARTYRS. 


Saturninus proconsul dixit ceteris: Desinite huius esse per- 
suasionis. 
Speratus dixit : Mala est persuasio homicidium facere, falsum 
testimonium dicere. 
5  Saturninus proconsul dixit: Nolite huius dementiae esse 
participes. 
Cittinus dixit: Nos non habemus alium quem timeamus, 
nisi domnum Deum nostrum qui est in caelis. 
Donata dixit: Honorem Caesari quasi Caesari; timorem 
ro autem Deo. 
Vestia dixit : Christiana sum. 
Secunda dixit: Quod sum, ipsud uolo esse. 
Saturninus proconsul Sperato dixit : Perseueras Christianus? 
Speratus dixit: Christianus sum: et cum eo omnes con- 
15 senserunt. 
Saturninus proconsul dixit: Numguid ad deliberandum 
spatium uultis ? 
Speratus dixit: In re tam iusta nulla est deliberatio. 
Saturninus proconsul dixit: Quae sunt res in capsa uestra ? 
20  Speratus dixit: Libri et epistulae Pauli uiri iusti. 
Saturninus proconsul dixit: Moram xxx dierum habete et 
recordemini. 
Speratus iterum dixit: Christianus sum: et cum eo omnes 
consenserunt, 
2s  Saturninus proconsul decretum ex tabella recitauit: Spera- 
1 dixit: ceteris desinite A; dixit: desinite B; dixit: desine C huius] + modi 
B 1, 2 persuasionis esse C 3 respondit B dixit]+siquidem BC 
facere] A; perpetrare BC 5 huius] furoris huius et BC 5, 6 participes 
esse BC 7 Cithinus C dicit A; respondit BC om, nos A habe- 
mus]+ cotidie B om. alium A 8 om. deum A nostrum]-+TIesum 
Christum A caelis}+ ipsum solum timemus (timere studemus C) ex toto corde 
nostro et ex tota anima nostra (+ Saturninus dixit C) tu quid dicis, Donata BC 
9 respondit Donata BC Caesari quasi] Caesaris do C 10 deoj+ 
Saturninus dixit: tuquid dicis, Bestia (Bistea B wé semper) BC 11 Bestia 
respondit BC sum]+nec aliud (aliam C) me esse profiteor. Saturninus 
dixit: quid tu dicis, Secunda BC -12 respondit Secunda BC - ipsum esse 
uolo C 13 christianus]+ esse BC 14 respondit BC omnes] -+ 
unanimiter BC 16 proconsul dixit] A; respondit BC numquid] nisi C 
17 uultis spatium A 18 respondit C iusta, nulla est commutatio A; 


bona non est deliberatio BC (Cf. Acta S. Cypriani Ruin. p. 217 in re tam iusta 
nulla est consultatio) 19 om. proconsul B capsa] B; causa A; ca C 


senor Sin a ik lind Sal 


THE ACTS OF THE SCILLITAN MARTYRS. 115 


Zaroupvivos o 6 avOUtatos én mpos Tos Aouous" ’"AméaTnTE 
amo THs arobeixGetons TAUTNS miBavornros. 
‘O aytos Sarepatos én “Exeivn eotiv éricdadys wiOave- 
4. 2 , ' N , 
TNS, TO avdpopoviay KatepyalecOat } rpevSouaptupiav Kata- 
oKxevate. 5 
a ey . \ a a 
Laroupvivos 6 avOvTatos eitrev’ Mn BovaAnOyte ths ToravTns 
pavias kal mapadpootvys yevér Oat 4 SevyOjvat cuppétoyot. 

‘O 68 dytos Kirrivos trodaBev amexpivato’ ‘Hyets ovx 
” vg a a > \ f A @ \ ¢€ fa) \ 
éxowev Erepov dv hoBnOdpev, et pon KUptov Tov Beov nyav Tov 
€v TOLS OUPaVOtS KATOLKOUYTA. 10 

¢c \ nd n 4 e \ \ \ A 7 ¢ 

H 8 ayia Aovata éby* Thy péev tiny TO Kaicaps os 

fol a ¢ a 3 

Kaicap:, tov PoBov dé TS Oe@ Nudv amrodidoper. 

“H 6€ ayia ‘Eotia Neyer’ "Eye yptotiavy Kabiorapas. 

"Ett 0€ 4 ayia Yexoovda epn’ “Orrep eipi, Kat Peapicivas 
Topevop.at. 5 

Torte Zaroupvivos 6 avOuTratos TO ayiw Lrepat@ cimev' 
? 
Enipévers Goavtos XploT eaves ; ; 

‘O aytos Zreparos eirev’ Xpiotiavds Urapyo. To avo &é 
Kat ot NoLtrol TravTes Aytoe eitrav. 

Latoupvives o avOvmatos ébn' Mn apa mpos dtacKkerrey 
dvapovns ypncere ; 

e cf cal ” ° 3 , t/ 5] , b] 

O ayios Sareparos bn “Ev mpaypate ob tws éyxpite ovbe- 

, B) 

pia Kabioratat BovrAr 7} dSiacKerpss. 

Latoupvivos 6 avOutratos ébyn* “Omolas mpayyatetat Tots 
Upmetépots ATOKELVTAL TKEVECL ; 

‘O arytos Saepadros eimev’ Ai xa? nuds BiBroe Kai ai 

i 3 ‘ f ” a ¢ 7 b] , 

TpocemiTovTos émiatoAal LlavAou Tod dciov avdpes. 

Laroupvivos 6 avOvrratos &pn* Upobecpia tpsdxovra nuepav 
vpty éoto eb Tas coppovnante. 


iS) 
° 


LS) 
on 


ct a a > 3 ‘ 3 , . \ 9 
O dxytos Sarepatos Tap avta dmexpivato’ Xpictiavos ape- 30 
U a 
TabeTOS TUYYaVw. ToUTO dé Kal of AoLTTOL 6puoOumaddy cUvaTFeE- 
bbéyEavro. 


Téte Latouvpvives 6 davOiTatos tHv Tepl avTav whdov 


20 libri] A; uenerandi (-da B) libri legis divinae BC Pauli]+apostoli BC 
21, 22 habe tenere condenemini B 23 om. iterum C sum] + et indesinenter 
dominum deum meum colo et adoro (et trinitatem deum credo et adoro et colo 
B) qui fecit caelum et terram, mare et omnia quae in eis sunt BC 25 pro- 
consul] + dixit C on. decretum B recitaui C 


8—2 


116 THE ACTS OF THE SCILLITAN MARTYRS. 


tum, Nartzalum, Cittinum, Donatam, Vestiam, Secundam et 
ceteros ritu Christiano se uluere confessos, quoniam oblata sibi 
facultate ad Romanorum morem redeundi obstinanter perseue- 
rauerunt, gladio animaduerti placet. 
5  Speratus dixit: Deo gratias agimus. 
Nartzalus dixit: Hodie martyres in caelis sumus: Deo 
gratias. 
Saturninus proconsul per praeconem dici iussit: Spera- 
tum, Nartzalum, Cittinum, Veturium, Felicem, Aquilinum, 
1o Laetantium, Ianuariam, Generosam, Vestiam, Donatam, Secun- 
dam duci iussi. 
Vniuersi dixerunt : Deo gratias. 
Et ita omnes simul martyrio coronati sunt, et regnant cum 
Patre et Filio et Spiritu Sancto per omnia secula seculorum. 
15 amen. 


1 Nartadum B; Nartallum C Cithinum C — Bestiam C 2 Christiano 
ritu BC se uiuere] C; seruire B; uiuere A quoniam] et quod BC 
2, 3 oblata sibi facultate] B; post (om. post A) oblatam sibi facultatem AC 
4 animaduerti] animas percuti B 5 deo]+omnipotenti insufficienter (-tes 
B) BC 6 Nartadus B; Nartallus C sumus] esse meruimus BC 8 om. 
per praeconem B dici iussit] A; iussit duci (+sanctos ut decollarentur C) BC 
9 Nartadum, Cittonum B; Narcallum, Cithinum C © Beturium AC; Biturium 
B 10 Laetacium B; Laecatium C TIanuarium B om, Generosam 
A Bestiam C 11 om. duci iussi BC 12 uniuersi]+uero B; + uno 
ore C gratias]+et laudes qui nos pro suo (+sancto B) nomine ad glorio- 
sam passionem perducere dignatus est BC 18—15 et ita—amen] et statim 
decollati sunt pro nomine Christi (+ Amen C) BC 


THE ACTS OF THE SCILLITAN MARTYRS, 117 


‘ ‘A 4 . \ A 
éEehovycev oVTw Tepléxovcav' Tov Lrepatov, Naprkaddov Kal 
a n 3 a 
Knrtrivov, Aovaroy te “Kotiav cai Sexobdvébav, nal rods abavtovs, 
al a € A f- 
Gaol TH XploTiaviK@® Oeow@ EavtTovs KatemnyyeiAavto ToXL- 
fl 3 a fo) 
revecOat, eel Kal yaplotiKns avtois mpoGecpias Tod pds Ti 
“A a 3 a 
Tay opwuéveav érravenOelty rrapaboow, axrtvels THY Yyvomnv 
> a a 
Siépervay, Eier Tovtovs avatpeOjvar SéSoxrat wap’ rutv. 
/ a A 
Tore tolvuv 6 adbdodopos Tod Xpiotov [repatos erradropevos 
a A An a / 3 
evyaptotiay TO Oe@ Hudy TH WpoTKEKAHKOTL aUTOVS Eis TOV 
dmép avTov Oavatov avétepapev. 
‘O 8&8 dywos Ndprfarros yaipwr cirev’ Sypepov adnOds 
paptupes év ovpavois Tuyyavopuev evapectot TH Gee. 
Tote toivyy Yatovpvivos 6 avOvmatos 81a Tod KypuKos Ta 
a > sf 
TOY ayiwy papTUpwv ovoyata KnpvyOhvat mpocérakev, TovTécte 
A a 3 f- 
Tov Xeparov, Naptfarrov, Kytrivov, Overovpiov, Dirn«ca, 
an a fad ? n 
"Axouivov, Kereotivov, "lavouvpiav, Pevepdocav, “Eotiav, Aova- 
XN Ul a > ‘ e \ 6 O 
Tav kat Yexovvdav. Tynvixadta ody wavtes ot aytoe Tov Oedy 
a ¢ 4 54 . \ > A , 
SofoXoyobvtes Guohavws épacKkov' Lol evyapioTodmev, Tproaye 
KUpLE, Kal oe peyaduUVomeEY, OTL TOY aydsva THS Gworoyias trews 
, a a 
éTeXelmoas, Kal Siapéves cov 7 Bacircia eis Tovs aidvas Tay 
77 3 a 
ai@varv, anv. 
Kal dvarepravtav. avradv To apny éredewOnoay TH Eider, 
. , 9 i = > 3 € t eo 9 A 3 \ 
pnvi “Tovria tf. joav odv oppdpevot of arytos amd *loyxrn 
‘ a 4 , \ / 4 
THs Novundias, xataxevrar dé wAnoiov KapOayévyns pnrpo- 
t . 3 r L 3 4 ’ \ a A 
morews' euaptipnoay 66 émi Uépcavros cai Kravistavod rév 
f ’ a 
vratav Kat Laroupvivov avOuTatov, Kal’ nuds dé Bactrev- 
fo i ¢€ nw > fa) fal @® A 
ovTos Tov Kupiou nuwv Inaod Xpictob’ @& mpéret waca Soka, 
\ N , \ fal a 
TUL Kal TpoTKLYNOLS GUY TO Tavayio Kal Cworro.@ TvevpaTe 
Le) > A A 
viv Kal dei Kai Eis TOUS aidvas TOV aidveY. any. 
3 / a \ fal 
ErrAnoOn ovv Ge@ To paptiptov tHv ayiwv Yarepatov, Napr- 
/ f lad a 
farov, Kytrivov, Ovetoupiou Kat tev adv avtois. 


Lert 


= 
on 


20 


30 


118 THE ACTS OF THE SCILLITAN MARTYRS, 


ACTA PROCONSVLARIA MARTYRVM SCILLITANORVM. 


Ex Annalibus Ecclesiasticis Baronii, Ad annum 202. 


fxistente Claudio consule XJV kalendas Augustas Carthagine meiropolt, 
statuto forensit conuentu, preceperunt magistratus adstare sibt Speratum, 
Narzalem, Cittinwm, Donatam, Secundam, et Vestinam. Ht adstantibus eis 
Saturninus proconsul dixit: Potestis weniam a dominis nostris imperatoribus 
Seuero et Antono promereri, si bono animo conuerst fueritis ad deos nostros. 

Speratus dixit: Vos minime aliquando malum fecimus, neque iniquitatem 
sequentes in peccatis egimus operationem, nec aliquando cuiqguam malediximus, 
sed male suscepti a uobis, gratias egimus semper. Quamobrem dominum uerum 
et regem adoramus. 

Saturninus proconsul dixit: Et nos electz sumus, et mitissima est elegantia 
nostra ; et iuramus per genium domini nostri imperatoris, et pro salute 
illius intercedimus, quod et uos facere debwistis. 

Speratus dixit : Si tranquillas adhibeas mihi aures tuas, dicam mysterium 
mansuetudinis. 

Saturninus proconsul dixit: Dicente te de mysterio non inferam mala: 
tantum iura per genium regis nostri. 

Speratus dixit: Ego imperatoris mundi genium nescio, sed celesti Deo 
meo seruio quem nudlus hominum uidit, nec uidere potest. Ego enim nec 
furatus sum aliquando ; sed quodcumque emam tributum do quoniam cognosco 
eum dominum meum; sed adoro Dominum meum Regem regum et omnium 
gentium Dominum., 

Saturninus proconsul dixit: De cetero a tumultu garrulitatuim quiescite, 
et accedentes sacrificate dits. 

Speratus respondit: Illa est mala concitatio, gue facit homicidium et 
falsam accusationem aduersus aliquem. 

Saturninus proconsul ad alios conuersus dixit: Nolite furoris huius in- 
sipientie participes fiert, sed timete potius regem nostrum, obedientes preeceptis 
evus. 

Cittinus dicit: Nos non habemus alium quem timeamus nisi Dominum 
Deum nostrum qui est in ccelis. 

Saturninus proconsul dixit: Detrudantur in carcerem, ponantur in ligno, in 
diem crastinum. 


Sequenti die Saturninus proconsul, sedens pro tribunal, eq wsentar? 
iubet. Qui cum adstitissent dicit ad feminas: Honorate regem m et sacri- 
Jicate dis. 


Tune Donata dixit : Honorem guidem Cesari tanquam Cesari, Deo autem 
nostro honorem et orationem offerimus. 


THE ACTS OF THE SCILLITAN MARTYRS. 119 


Bibliothéque Nationale (fonds Latin. Nouvelles Acquisitions, No. 2179). 


PASSIO SANCTI ET BEATISSIMI SPERATI ET COMITVM EIVS QVI PASSI SVNT 
CARTHAGINE IN CIVITATE, SVB SATVRNINO PROCONSVLE, DIE XIII KAL, AVGVST. 


In diebus illis adductos in secretario Carthaginis ab apparitorum officio 

' Speratwm, Narzalum, Donatam, Secundam e¢ Vestigiam, Saturninus proconsul 

his omnibus generaliter dixit: Potestzs indulgentiam @ dominis nostris impe- 

ratoribus promereri si ad bonam mentem redeatis et Deorum cerimonias 
obseruetis. 

Sanctus Speratus dixit: Numquam male egisse conscti sumus, iniquitati 
opem atque adsensum non prebuimus. Nzul/i unquam maledixisse recolimus ; 
sed male tractati ac lacessit? semper Deo gratias egimus, si quidem et pro 
eis orauimus quos intuste patiebamur infesios. Pro qua re et imperatorem 
nostrum adtendimus a quo nobis hee uiuendi norma concessa est. 

Saturninus proconsul dixit: Et nos religiosi sumus et simplex est nostra 
religio et iuramus per genium dominorwm nostrorwm, pro salute eorwm suppli- 
camus, quod et uos facere debeatis. 

Sanctus Speratus dixit : Si tranquillas preebueris aures tuas dicwm myste- 
rium christiane simplicitatis. 

Saturninus proconsul dixit: Incipienti tibi dicere malum de sacrificits nos- 
tris aures non prebebo. Sed potius iurafe per genium dominorwm nostrorum 
imperatorum ut istius mundi letitia perfruamini nobiscum. 

Sanctus Speratus dixit: Ego imperium huius seculi non cognosco sed 
magis illi fide spe deseruio Deo quem nemo hominum uidit, nec uidere potest. 
Facinus quod legibus publicis et diuinis comperitur esse damnauile non feci. 
Si quid autem in publicum emero [et] de exactoribus publicis euenit, uectigalia 
reddo. Imperatorem omnium gentium Deum et Dominum meum agnosco. 
Querelas nulli intult, sustinere non debeo. 

Saturninus proconsul ad ceeteros ora conuertit et socios Sperati sic adorsus 
est dicens: Desinite huius esse persuasionis eaultores qua Speratus inlectus est, 
quoniam st uos eius habuerrt professio socios, nihilominus habebit et peena. 

Sanctus Speratus dixit : Mala est persuasio falsum testimonium dicere, s¢ 
mala utique prouatur concessio st contra diuinis legibus agitis et publicis quibus 
wite humane ordo disponitur. Persuasio uero diuine culture sectanda est 
potius quam deserenda. 

Saturninus proconsul dixit: Jn preteritis tam ego admonut ut huius 
dementiz non annuatis esse participes. 

Sanctus Cittinus dixit: Won a nobis aliud oportet audire, o proconsul, nist 
et que soctus noster Speratus confessus est. Scito enim quod non habemus 
alium quem timeamus nisi weum Deum et Dominum nostrum qui est in 
ceelo. * 

Sancta simuliter Donata adiecit: Honorem Cesari quasi Cesari reddimus, 
timorem autem et cultum Christo Domino preestamus. 


120 THE ACTS OF THE SCILLITAN MARTYRS. 


Stans Vestina dixit: Ht ego christiana sum. 

Secunda similiter dixit : Ht ego credo in Deo meo et uolo in ipso esse; duis 
autem tuis non seruimus, neque adoramus. 

Saturninus proconsul auditis his preecepit eas seruart. 

Aduocatis uiris dixit Sperato: Perseueras ut christianus sis ? 

Speratus dixit : Etiam perseuero et omnes audite quia christianus sum. 

Audientes omnes gui cum illo retenti fuerant, consenserunt confessiont 
illius dicentes: Sumus et nos partter christiant. 

Saturninus proconsul dixit: Nee liberationem, nec remissionem uultis? 

Speratus respondit: In certamine iusto nulla est remissio. Fac quod uis. 
Nos enim pro Christo gaudentes morinur. 

Saturninus proconsul dixit: Qué sunt libri guos adoratis legentes? 

Speratus respondit: Quatuor Huangelia Domini nostri Iesu Christi et 
Epistolas sancti Pauli apostoli et omnem diuinitus inspiratam Scripturam. 

Saturninus proconsul dixit: Spatiwm trium dierum iribuo uobis ut resi- 
piscatis. 

Speratus dixit: Christianus sum et omnes gui mecum sunt et a fide Domini 
nostri Iesu Christi non discedimus. Fac quod uis. 

Proconsul uidens etiam ipsorum mentis stabilitatem et fider firmitatem dedit 
in eos sententiam per exceptorem, dicens sic: Speratum, Narzalem, Cittinum, 
Veturium, Felicem, Acy/linum, Leetantium, Ianuariam, Generosam, Vestinam, 
Donatam, e¢ Secundam christianos se esse confitentes et imperatort honorem et 
dignitatem dare recusantes, capite truncart precipto. 

Hee cum essent ex tabella recitata, Speratus et qui cum eo erant omnes 
dixerunt: Deo gratias conferimus qui dignatur nos hodie martyres accipere in 
ceelis pro confessione sua. 

His dictis ducti sunt, et flexis genibus unanimiter, cum iterum gratias Christo 
agerent, truncata sunt singulorum capita, 

Consummati sunt Christi martyres mense Iulio, die septimo decimo, et 
intercedunt pro nobis ad Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum cut honor et gloria 
cum Patre et Spiritu Sancto in secula seculorum. Amen!. 


1 J have reprinted these two recensions from Aubé Etude &e. pp. 30 ff., italicis- 
ing those portions of them which are not found in the original text of the Martyr- 
dom. We have thus an interesting study of the way in which Martyrdoms were 
modified and expanded for Church use. 


THE ACTS OF THE SCILLITAN MARTYRS. 121 


od 


Vestigia uero uenerabilis sequuta est dicens: Hoc semper meditabitur cor 
meum et labia mea pronuntiabunt quia christiana sum. 

Sancta uero Secunda similiter ait: Quod sum christiana, ipsa esse uolo et 
a meorum sociorum professione nutto obstante recedo. 

Saturninus proconsul Sperato sancto dixit: Perseueras wt wideo esse 
christianus. 

Sanctus Speratus dixit: Hane perseucrantiam non mets uiribus sed diuini 
muneris me habere confido. Proinde si uis fixam cordis mei habere sententiam 
guia christianus sum, guidquid mihi et suppliciis inferre uolueris libenter pro 
nomine Domini Det mei Iesu Christi suscipiens sustineam. 

In hac ergo confessione exercert Det martyres consenserunt. 

Saturninus proconsul dixit: Forsitan ad deliberandum spatium uultis 
accipere ? 

Sanctus Speratus dixit: In rem tam bonam qua ert secunda deliberatio? 
Tune enim deliberauimus nos culturam Christi non deserere, quando baptismt 
gratia renouati et diabolo abrenuntiauimus et Christi uestigia secutt sumus. 

Saturninus proconsul dixit: Que sunt, dictte mihi, res doctrinarum in 
causa et religione uestra ? 

Sanctus Speratus dixit: Libri Zuangeliorwm et epistole Pauli uiri sanctis- 
simi apostoli. 

Saturninus proconsul dixit : Accipite moram triginta dierum wt retractetis 
huius secte confessionem. Forsitan ad deorwm sacra[s] ceerimonials] reuerti- 
mini. 

Sanctus Speratus dixit : Nos triginta dierum spatium non petimus. Nam 
ipst erimus post triginta dies qui et hodie sumus. Nec in triginta dierum moras 
poterit professionem nostram in aliquo permutari; sed potius obtarem et hoc 
[te] spatium deliberandi accipere ut de tam turpt cultura ydolorum christiane 
religionts amator existeres. Cceterum si non es dignus accipere, suspende moram, 
sententiam recita t[ujam. Nam quales nos hodie cernis tales post hance induciam 
futuros esse non dubites. 

Cernens Saturninus proconsul sanctorum perseuerantiam decretum ex tabella 
recitauit: Speratum, Narzalum, Cittinum, Donatam, Vestigiam et omnes 
qui christiano ritu uiuere se confessi sunt e¢ quotquot oblatam sibi facultatem 
redeundi ad deorum culturam obstinanter non receperunt gladio animaduertere 
placet. 

Sanctus Speratus dixit: Gratias Deo agimus. 

Narzalus sanctus dixit: Hodie martyres in ccelo sumus. Deo gratias. 

Saturninus proconsul per preeconem sanctos inbet adduci zd est Speratum, 
Narzalum, Citinum, Vezerium, Felicem, Aquilinum, Letantium, Ianuaria{m], 
Generosa[m], Donatam, Vestigiam atgue Secondam et ali uenientes ad locum 
martyrit beatas Deo animas tradiderunt. 

Dominus uero Iesus Christus suscepit martyres suos in pace cut est honor 
et gloria cum Patre et Spiritu Sancto wna et cowgualis essentia in secula 
seculorum. Amen. 


INDEX OF LATIN WORDS IN THE PASSION OF 
S. PERPETUA. 


The references in darker figures are to the portions written by the 
Martyrs themselves. 


absentia 64, 8 auditus 62, 15 

accersitus 92, 2 

addicere, animam 88, 8 baptisma secundum 92, 12 
adducor 66, 18 baptismus secundus 88, 3 
adiutores 76, 10, 12 baptizor 64, 9 

adloquor 64, 18; 92, 3 barbam euellere 74, 18 
administro 62, 5 basio 68, 23 

admiratione, cum 80, 4, 19 benedictus 64, 15; 78, 13 
admonitiones 84, 23 beneficio c. gen. 64, 13, 20; 66, 6 
adtonitus 76, 8; 86, 15 beneficium 62, 12 

aedificatio 60, 2; 94, 11 buccella 68, 7 

aedifico 66,17; 80, 12 

Aegyptius 76, 10, 14, 20; 88, 11 Caesar 74,1; 86, 2 

aestimo 62, 9 calco 68, 2 bis; 78, 4, 6; 88, 11 
acetates temporum 60, 9 calx 78, 2 

afa 76, 14 cancerata facies 72, 16 

affectio, 62, 27 candidati 68, 5 

agape 86, 9 careo c. acc. 64, 7 

Agios, agios, agios 80, 14 carnalis 72, 15 

agon 76, 14 carnes 66, 13 

alicubi 66, 2 caseus 68, 7 

amen, dicere 68, 9 castigatius 84, 22 

anhelo 76, 5 castrensis 72, 26 bis 

ansula, 92, 15 cataractariorum ministri 84, 11 
antiquitas 60, 8 catasta 70, 4, 10 

aper 90, 3 bis catechuminus 62, 18, 22; 90, 21; 92, 3 
ardere uiuus 80, 7 cauea 90, 6 

argumenta diaboli 64, 6 celebro 62, 7 

Artaxium 80, 7 Ceres 88, 6 

Aspasius 82, 1 cessatione, sine 74, 8; 80, 1, 15 
auctoritas 60, 7 Christiana 64, 4; 70, 16, 17 


audior 68, 13; 70, 8 cicatrix 74, 6 


1234 INDEX. 


circiter 62, 23 diastema 72, 18 
circumstantes 68, 4, 8 dicto 64, 10 
circus 82, 11 differor 84, 3 
clamo 68, 6; 78, 6 digero 60, 3, 5; 62, 7 
claritas 62, 16; 94, 14 dignatio 62, 10; 66, 4 
clauus 76, 17 Dinocrates 72, 6, 11, 14, 19, 21; 74, 4, 9 
commanduco 68, 9 discincta 76, 2; 90, 18 
commartyres 84, 5 discingor 76, 16 
commeatus 66, 5 dispoliatus 90, 10 
commemoror 72, 8 distribuo 62, 6 
commendo 64, 19 diuinitas 62, 9 
comminor 88, 12 documentum 60, 4; 84, 21 
commissio spectaculi 88, 22 domina 66,3; 70,1 
componere 82, 3 dominicae passiones 88, 17 
concussura 64, 13 donatiua 62, 5 
conficior 90, 2 draco 66, 14, 20 
conforto 60, 4; 64,19; 70, 3 
conlaboro 7%6, 7 ecclesia 62, 4; 94, 11 
conpuncta 94, 3 educo 84, 16 
conserua 62, 19 effero 76, 18 
constantia 84, 21; 86, 9; 88, 6 eicio 68, 1 
constituo praemio 64, 15 eniti puellam 84, 15 
consuetudinem, praeter 90, 9 episcopus 80, 26 
consummo 92, 23 erubesco 86, 4 
consumor 92, 9 ertlo 64, 6 
consumptus taedio 68, 14; 74, 17 euerto 62, 27 
contestor 86, 10 exanimo 92, 18 
contristo 70, 5; 84, 6 exemplum 60,1; 94, 10 
conturbo 82,9; 92, 15 exeo (=morior) 78, 14; 80, 8; 82, 3 
conualesco 64, 22 exequor 84, 20 
conuersor 62, 9 exinde 92, 2, 17 
coronam, gloriosiorem 88, 22 exitus 82,18; 88, 19 
crastina dies 66, 7 exortor 92, 6 
crastinus 86, 12 expauesco 64, 11; 80, 4 
creatura, uniuersa 74, 20 experior c. acc. 64, 12; 66, 6; c. abl. 88, 23 
curiositas 86, 11 experrectus 68,9; 72, 23; 78, 9; 82,15; 
cypressus 78, 23 expergita 90, 23 

expolior 76, 12 
dedecnus hominum 68, 18 extasis 90, 23 
defectus 64, 18 extermino 68, 21 
defrigere 76, 13 exululo 94, 4 


deicere 62, 27; 68, 15; 70,18 bis; 88,1 exuperatio 60, 11 
delicata, Dei 86, 19; puella d. 90, 12 


depono animos 68, 20 fabulor 66, 6 

deputor 60, 7 factiones (circi) 82, 11 
desperatio fidei 62, 8 fastigium 76, 16 

desub 66, 21 fautores 76, 12, 13; 78, 6 


diaconus 64, 15; 70, 23; 76,1 Felicitas 62, 19; 82, 21; 88,1; 90,18 


INDEX. 125 


femus 90, 15 inridentes (v. 1. inritantes) 86, 11 
ferramenta 66, 11, 14 insidias praesto 66, 15 
feruorem facere 72, 2 instrumentum 62, 4 
fiala 74, 8, 9 instupeo 90, 24 
fideicommissum 84, 20 interrogor 70, 10 
fidenter 66, 7 intersum 62, 13 
filioli 62, 13 inuicem 74, 16; 82, 9; 92, 4, 22; ad inu. 
flagellum 88, 15 72,18; 78,1 

Tocundum 80, 6 
galliculae 76, 3, 17 iudico 60, 9 
gesto 78, 20; 80,4; 88, 22 iugulatio 92, 18 
gestu et nutu 88, 13 iugulum 94, 5 
Geta 74, 1 ius gladii 70, 14 
gladiator 94, 4 
gloria 78, 8; 84,19; 86, 3; 90, 17 lacto 64, 18 
gloria Dei 62, 7 lancea 66, 12 
gloria Domini 62, 14; 94, 9 lanior, 66, 13 
graece loqui 82, 6 lanista 76, 18; 78, 7 
gratulor 88, 16 lectio 60, 3; 62, 7 
gustare, aliquid doloris 94, 3 lente 68, 1 

leopardus 88, 23; 90, 2; 92, 9, 10 
habitus 68, 4; 88, 4; 92, 2 leuo 68, 5 
hamus 66, 12 libera, cena 86, 8 
hereditas 92, 16 libero (=transeo) 78, 17 
Hilarianus 70, 12, 16, 18; 88, 13, 14 locus tenebrosus 72, 11, 12 
hoe (=huc) 74, 22 lucror 82, 19 
homicidii, comites 92, 20 ludo 74, 10; 80, 23 
honorifico 94, 10 lumbi 90, 14 
honoro 60, 4; 62, 3 
horoma 74, 22 maceror 64, 14; 72, 4 
horreo 86, 3; 90, 11 machera, 66, 12 
hortus 68, 3 magnificare 74, 14; 94, 9 
humanius haberi 86, 4 magnitudinis, mirae 66, 9, 15; 76, 15 
mammae 72, 2, 3; 90, 12 

ilico 70, 11 mandatum 84, 19 
illo 92, 9 manduco 68, 8 
imbecillitas 62, 8 masculas, fieri 76, 13 
immundus spiritus 94, 6 matertera 68, 19 
incantationes magicae 84, 24 matrona Christi 86, 19 
induco 76, 6; 88, 10 matronaliter nupta 62, 21 
inedia 64, 18 memoria sanguinis 92, 17 
inenarrabilis 82, 14 ministro 64, 15 
infibulo 90, 16 Minucius 70, 13 
ingemisco 72, 10 mittere se 64, 5; 82,2, 5; mittere pugnos 
iniustitia 88, 9, 10 78, 1 
inlaesus 90, 7 morsu, uno 90, 2; 92, 9, 11 
inluceo 86, 16 mulgeo 68, 4, 7 


inpropero 74, 19 multiformis 76, 17 


126 


multiplex 76, 3 
mundus, primus 78, 17 


natale 74,1; 86, 2 
necessario 62, 6 
necessarius 60, 6 
neglegenter 66, 12 
neruus 74, 3 
nobilissimus 86, 2 
noceo c. acc. 66, 21 
nouissime 64, 13 
nouissimior 60, 11 
nouitior 60, 10 


obducor 88, 8 

obicior 84, 12; 88, 21 

obstetrix 88, 3 

obstipui 72, 7 

omne genus flores 78, 22 

operor 60, 2; 62,10; 94, 13 

Optatus 80, 26; 82, 10 

optio 74, 13; 86, 6 

orationem facere 72, 9, 17; 74, 1; 0. 
fundere 84, 8 

ordo martyrii 62, 23; o. muneris 84, 18; 
pro o. uenatorum 88, 16 

oriens 78, 15 . 

osculor 78, 7; 80, 20; 92, 22 

ostendor 66, 4, 8; 72,11; 74,3 

ostium 76, 1; 80, 12 


papa 82, 4 

paries 80, 11 

passio 66, 5; 68, 11; 70, 2; 86, 10 

passiones 92, 4; p., dominicae 88, 17 

pax (osculum) 80, 22; 92, 23 

Perpetua 62, 20; 66, 20; 76, 3; 78,18; 
80, 23; 82, 6,17; 84, 20; 88, 11; 90, 
13, 21; 94, 2, 3 

persecutio 80, 7 

perseuero 64, 1 

pertingo 66, 9 

pignus 92, 17 

piscina 72, 20, 22; 74, 6 

plebem tuam 82, 10 

Pomponius 64,14; 70, 23; 76,1 

pons 90, 6 

populus immensus 70, 9; p. ingens 76, 8 


INDEX. 


posteri 60, 6 

postulo 66, 4, 8; 72, 1; 88,16; 92, 19 
praegnans 84, 2, 3 
praepositus carceris 74, 13 
praesens tempus 60, 7 
praesumo 60, 8; 90, 2; 92, 7 
praetorium 66, 2 

prandeo 70, 7 

presbyter doctor 82, 1; presbyter 82, 4 
proconsulis, loco 70, 13 
procurator 70, 13 

producor 90, 11, 24 

profecto 64, 6 

proinde 60, 6 

pronuntio 70, 20 

prophetiae 62, 2 
prosecutores 62, 26 

prout 62, 6 

proximo 74, 16 

psallere 78, 7; 88, 11 
Pudens 74, 13; 92, 6, 14 
pulpitus 88, 23 


quandoque 60, 6 
Quintus 80, 7 


reclamo 92, 12 

refrigero 64, 8, 16; 74, 5, 16; 82, 8; 86, 
1,5 

releuor 64, 22 

rememoror 62, 14 

renuntio 66, 7 

repraesentari, poenae 84, 4 

repraesentatio 60, 3 

repromitto 62, 3, 11; 66, 7 

reputo 60, 10 

requisita 90, 16 

retiarius 88, 3 

reticulis indutae 90, 10 

retro 74, 4, 6 

revelationes 62, 10 

Reuocatus 62, 18; 88, 12 

reuocor 88, 22; 90, 7, 13, 20 

rosae, arbor 78, 22; 82, 7 

rumor cucurrit 68, 13; 70, 8 

Rusticus 90, 22 


sacerdotes Saturni 88, 5 


INDEX, 


sacratae Cereri 88, 5 

sacrum, facio 70, 15 

salutare Dominum 80, 10 

saluum lotum 92, 12, 13 

Sanauiuaria, porta 78, 9; 90, 21 

Saturninus 62, 19; 80, 6; 88, 12, 20 

Saturnus 88, 5 

Saturus 66, 16; 78, 18; 82, 17; 86, 11; 
88, 12; 90, 1, 5, 7; 92, 6; 94, 1 

scala 66, 8, 11, 14,19; 68, 1 

scandalizor 92, 4 

Secundulus 62, 19; 82, 17 

segrego 82, 6 

seniores 80, 17, 18, 21, 23 

sensu, suo 62, 25 

sermocinor 88, 20 

simpliciter 88, 10 

solemnia pacis 92, 22 

sollicitudo 64, 14, 21; 66,1; 72,3 

sollicitus 64, 18 

spatia, saeculi 60, 11 

statim 64, 22; 68, 10; 70, 8, 23; 72, 8; 
84, 9; 92, 10 

statura 72, 20 

stillantibus mammis 90, 12 

stolae candidae 80, 13 

subfossus 90, 4 

subito 66,1; 70,7; 72, 5 

subleuo 80, 20 

subligo 90, 4 

sublimitas 84, 22 

subministror 90, 3 

substrictus 90, 5 

sufferentia carnis 64, 10 

summam, ad 92, 7 

supertienio 68, 13 

supinus 78, 16 

supplementum 84, 18 


127 


sursum uersi 78, 16 
suscito 90, 19 
sustineo 66, 20; 94, 2 


tabesco 64, 19, 20 

tegnon 68, 6 

Tertius 64, 14 

testificor 60, 1; 94, 18 
testimonium 62, 11; 92, 12 
Timinianus 70, 13 

tirunculus 94, 4 

traicere in faciem 80, 21 
tribunus 84, 22; 86, 4; 88, 10 
tunica 90, 14 


uacca 90, 8, 25 

uaco 64, 17 

ubera 62, 22 

uelamentum 90, 15 

uenatores 88, 16 

ueneratio 60, 8 

uentrem habere 84, 1; uenter 84, 3 
uexatio 92, 1 

uexo 64, 6; 88, 15; 90,1 

Vibia Perpetua 62, 20 

uiderint 60, 8 

uiolatum, stadium 80, 6 
uiridarium 78, 22; 80,1; 82, 7 
uirtus 60, 9; 62,4; 74, 15; 94, 12 
uisio 62, 2; 66, 4; 78, 18; 82, 16 
umbilicus 74, 7 

uolutare 76, 15 

uotum, martyrii 88, 20 

urceolus 64, 2 

ursus 88, 23; 90, 1, 5, 6 

usurpo 64, 21 

utique 86, 1; 88, 16; 92,138; 94, 10 


INDEX OF GREEK WORDS IN THE GREEK VERSION 
OF THE PASSION OF S. PERPETUA. 


a&BéEBaros 63, 8 érravopBobv 83, 13 
dyxtorpov 67, 13 emirnpeodo ba 87, 16 
ddnpovety 71, 6 émlrpomes 71, 13 
dxaramavoTws 81, 1, 15 ev\bynoor 61, 2 

adyndwv 73, 3 etotrayxvia 63, 30 
dvdBacts 6uanry 79, 21 

dvaBory 67, 6 Sayptov 91, 7 

avamvoy 65, 19 forixh wiry 79, 11; 91, 25 
avexdtiynros 83, 18 

dv Ooporoyets Oar 87, 12 Hrcclae 61, 15 

avOumaros 71, 138 jrAuevye 69, 4, 7 
avridjumrrwp 77, 16 

avridnyrs 63, 12 Onddgw 63, 25; T1, 28 
atiwpa 63,11; 67, 4 Onpromaxeiv 73, 29; 75, 25; 83, 24; 8, 
avroxpdéropes 71, 16 2; 89,2 

abxpds 65, 21 


Berovy 91, 19 immodpoplat 83, 14 
edov7 91, 


BpaBeurijs 77, 22; 79, 8 Karws éXovow 93, 14 


kardouxot 87, 1 


, 73,17 
yeryypawa 73, carapépecdat 81, 1 


yaupiav 79, 8 


vyereOdov 78, 29; 87, 2 xarnxovpevos 63, 20, 24; 91, 26; 93, 3 
cédevopa 85, 21 

daxrvriov 93, 17 ceparigea 91, 15, 22 

dduaris 91, 9, 29 codupByOpa 73, 21, 24; 75, 8 

bdornwa 73, 19 xudpiccos 79, 27 

dixooraclat 83, 11 

Sopipopos 71, 20 Aaxricpara 79, 2 


Aevxetmovely 69, 5 
éypiyryopos 87, 24 


eipyvorrotely 81, 24 paxapiopos 87, 13 
éxOapBos 73, 7 papaiverbar 65, 21; 69, 15 
éviiddoxouat 91, 14 pacacba: 69, 10 


éfoxws 63, 23 povaxos 67, 11 


povoyeryns 95, 14 
povouaxia 89, 3 
povéuaxos 77, 23; 95, 4 
pvoTyptov 93, 26 


vépBov 75, 4 
vovae 61, 1,5 


6Berioxos 67, 18 
éArvyémiaTos 63, 8 
éupartov 75, 8 
ovAy 75, 7 


mayxpariagew 79, 1 

mavaperos Tonktreia 9d, 12 
maparnpelv 63, 29; 85, 11 
mapoaris 89, 25; 91, 2; 93, 10, 11 
mapenBory 73, 29 

meprepyea 87, 14 

mweprrapBavew 81, 22; 83, 7 
mepihutos 65, 23 ; 83, 2 

mpairwptov 67, 1 


kt, 


INDEX. 
mpooTdrys povopdyur 717, 22 
pddov dévdpov 79, 26; 83, 9 
odpxes 67, 14 
cuxopavriat 65, 15 


ou\NapBavew 63, 19 
sucoptyyw 91, 19 


renecovobat 61, 1 
byiawe 93, 16 

dirayopetw 6d, 10 
bréfwopa 91, 14 
vroupyev 77, 12 


piroripiat 79, 14; 85,19; 91, 6 
prteypovy 73, 2 


xiNiapxos 73, 28; 85, 24; 87, 4 


Wuwpulov 69, 8 


I 


9 


INDEX OF SUBJECT-MATTER. 


Abraham, Testament of, 39 
Africanism, 46, 60, 76, 82 
Amphitheatre at Carthage, 76 
Anulinus, as a persecutor, 25 
Augustine; view as to Dinocrates, 29 


Barlaam and Josaphat; relation to 
Apocalypse of Peter, 37 f., 41 

Baruch, Rest of Words of, 39 

Basilica of Perpetua, 22, 68 

Bezae, Codex, 48, 75, 98 

Breviaries, Commemoration of Perpetua 
in, 20f., 85 


Calendar, Carthaginian 15, 24; Buche- 
rian, 23 

Carthage; proconsular palace, 5, 66; 
basilica of Perpetua, 22, 68; amphi- 
theatre, 76 

Commemoration of Perpetua; date of, 
17; in Breviaries, 20f., 85 


Date of martyrdom of Perpetua, 24 


Esdras, Apocalypse of, 40 
Eucharist, elements in, 69 


Furseus, vision of, 41 


Gebhart, Von ; conjectural emendations 
by, 5, 61 

Geta, 86; his name erased, 25 

Gladiators, oath of, 89 

Glory, of martyrdom, 50 


Greek version of Perpetua, 61 ff.; dis- 
covery of, 1f.; relation to Latin text, 
2 ff. 

Greek words used by Perpetua, 43 


Hermas, Shepherd of; relation of the 
Visions to, 28 ff.; early Latin Version 
of, 85; Tertullian’s view of, 36 


Ignatius, supposed references to Epistles 
of, 83, 87 


Legal phraseology in Martyrdom of 
Perpetua, 52f., 85 
Lyons; see Vienne 


Manuscripts of Passion of S. Perpetua, 
10 ff.; mutual relations of, 12ff.; addi- 
tional variants from, 96 f. 

Menaeum, 21 

Menology of Basil, 21 

Methodius; Symposium, 42 f. 

Montanistic allusions, 6, 51 f. 

Moses, Apocalypse of, 38, 41 


Old Latin Version of N.T.; used in 
Gaul, 97 ff. 


Palatinus, Codex (e), 98 f. 

Paradise, Visions of, 37 ff. 

Paul, Apocalypse of, 40 f. 

Peace, kiss of, 25, 93 

Perpetua, 8.; use of Greek words by, 
43; her style, 44ff.; her basilica at 
Carthage, 22, 68; compiler of her 
martyrdom, 47 ff. 


INDEX. 


Polyxena; see Xanthippe 

Proconsular palace at Carthage, 5, 66 

Punic original of martyrdom of Perpetua, 
supposed, 77 


Saturn, the African, 88 

Saturus; his style, 46 

Scillitan Martyrs, Acts of, 106 ff. ; origi- 
nal Latin found, 107; texts and Greek 
version of, 112 ff. 

Short Latin Acts of Perpetua; text of, 
100 ff.; origin of, 15 ff.; use of, 20 ff. 

Speculum, quoted, 98 

Syriac Martyrology, 23 


Ter Sanctus, 39, 81 
Tertullian ; his view of the Shepherd of 
Hermas, 36; probably compiled the 





131 


Martyrdom of Perpetua, 47if.; De 
Patientia quoted, 57 f. 

Thomas, Acts of, 43, 73 

Thuburbo; various forms of, 17; locality 
of, 26; Perpetua not from, 22 ff. 

Thuburbitan Martyrs, 25 f. 

Trees of Paradise, 38 f. 


Victor Vitensis, 22, 68 

Vienne and Lyons, Letter from, 8, 66; 
Old Latin Version traced in, 73, 97 ff. 

Visions of Perpetua and Saturus; in- 
debted to Canonical Scriptures, 26 ff. ; 
and to Shepherd of Hermas, 28 ff.; 
and to Apocalypse of Peter, 37 if.; 
their authorship, 43 ff. 


Xanthippe, unpublished Acts of, 65 





CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY C. J. CLAY, M.A. AND SONS, AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 


has 
ae 


Ba 


ue 


eee 
Seats i mec 





BX 700 


»PL2A3R6 


ND 
Rob 


am) 


St. LEG 


r 


JA, 


iad ia 
Passion ofeece 


Ore 


: 





7 


ianson 


f 
\ 


189916 











fats 
of 



















































































O 


iit 





— 


A 


sag teraor sta OSD AI AlgTO 


C 


. e 


Hi 


OFC 





























eggingfi 





