     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Sixth Book of the Select Letters of Severus, Patriarch of Antioch, in the Syriac Version of Athanasius of Nisibis -- Vol. II (Translation), Part I
      Creator(s): Severus of Antioch (c. 459-538 CE)
                  Brooks, E. W. (Editor/Translator)
     Print Basis: Text and Translation Society (London: Williams & Norgate,
                  1903). English translation volume, Part I of II.
          Rights: Public Domain
    Rights Basis: Published 1903; long out of US copyright.
Source Collection: Internet Archive (archive.org), identifier selectletterssix01seveuoft
     __________________________________________________________________

NOTE ON THIS TRANSCRIPTION: the source is a raw OCR (djvu) text layer from
a scanned physical volume, not a clean digital edition. Runs of 2+ spaces
between words (a systematic OCR-layout artifact of the scan, not a feature
of the printed text) have been collapsed to single spaces throughout; no
word, spelling, or punctuation has been altered. OCR misreads may remain
uncorrected elsewhere in the file; any passage this build quotes verbatim
has been checked by eye against this file directly, not assumed correct
from the OCR alone.

WORKS ISSUED 
BY THE TEXT AND TRANSLATION SOCIETY 


THE SIXTH BOOK 


OF THE 


SELECT LETTERS OF SEVERUS 


PATRIARCH OF ANTIOCH 


VOL. II. (TRANSLATION) PART I. 


THE SIXTH BOOK 

OF THE 

SELECT LETTERS OF SEVERUS 

PATRIARCH OF ANTIOCH 

IN THE SYRIAC VERSION OF ATHANASIUS 

OF NISIBIS 

EDITED AND TRANSLATED 
BY 

E. W. BROOKS, M.A. 


VOL. II. (TRANSLx^TION) PART I. 

PUBLISHED FOR 

THE TEXT AND TRANSLATION SOCIETY 

BY 

WILLIAMS & NORGATE 

14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C. 

AND 7 Broad Street, Oxford 

I 903 


INTRODUCTION 

Our knowledge of the early life of Severus is mainly 
drawn from the biography of him by his friend 
Zacharias the Scholastic of Gaza,^ existing in a Syriac 
version published by Dr Spanuth ^ and translated into 
French by M. Nau.^ From this we learn that he was 
a native of Sozopolis in Pisidia and was said to be 
descended from a Severus who was bishop of that city 
in 431.* Beyond this the life tells us nothing about 
his family except that he was the third son ^ ; but in 
ep. i. 49 he mentions his brother Peter, a presbyter of 
Antioch, who was dead when that letter was written.^ 
His enemies accused him of having in his youth 
followed heathen practices,' and it was in order to 
refute this charge that Zacharias wrote his life : but, 
whether there was any truth in the accusation or not, 
it must be admitted that the answer is a very lame one. 
After his father's death he was sent to Alexandria with 
his elder brothers to study Greek and Latin grammar 

1 Used by Evagrius (iii. ^^). - Gottingen, 1893. 

2 Opuscules Maronites (Rev. de I'Or. Chret. iv, v). 

■* Cf. Land Anec. Syr. i. 14 (113). '' P. 2 1 10. 

^ According to the most obvious interpretation of this passage 
Peter was his brother's apokrisiarios at Constantinople. 
"^ Cf. Mansi viii. 999. 


vi INTRODUCTION. 


and rhetoric. Thence about 486 ^ he proceeded to 
Berytus to study law with the intention of becoming 
an advocate ; but, while there, he iound time for theo- 
logical reading also, and published his first work, an 
Encomium of the Apostle Paul. It was not until after 
this that he was baptized, the ceremony taking place 
at Tripolis (circ. 488).'-^ About 490^ however, while 
on a visit to Jerusalem, he came under the influence of 
the disciples of Peter the Iberian, and became a monk 
in Peter's monastery between Gaza and Majuma.* 
After a sojourn in the wilderness of Eleutheropolis, 
where he nearly died from the severity of his ascetic 
practices, he was entertained and restored to health by 
the monks of Romanus, returning later to the lattra of 
Majuma.^ Afterwards however he founded a mon- 
astery of his own "^ and was ordained presbyter by 
Epiphanius the confessor.^ About 508 disturbances 
were caused in Palestine by a certain Nephalius, who, 
having been one of the extreme Monophysite party, ^ 


^ Kugener in Rev. de I'Or. Chr. v. 205. 

2 According to Zach. it was said not to be the custom of the Pisid- 
ians to baptize infants (p. 2 1. 11). 

3 After the death of Peter t^ie Iberian (Dec. i, 488) : see Kugener 
in Byz. Zeitschr. ix. 466. 

■* Called by the so-called Zacharias Rhetor (vii. 10) the monastery 
of Theodore, i.e. Peter's successor (vit. Pet. 134, 144; Vailhe in Rev. 
de I'Or. Chr. v. 45) ; so ' Dion.' ap. Nau Rev. de I'Or. Chr. ii. 466. 

^ P. 26 1. 4 (^ ep. i. 35). It is not clear whether this was Peter's 
monastery. *^ Cf. ep. ii. 3 (p. 248 text). 

" Hardly Epiphanius of Magydum (ep. i. i ), whose date was earlier ; 
but probably the Epiphanius of ep. ii. 3. ^ Cf. Zach. Rh. vi. 2-4. 


INTRODUCTION. VII 


had turned Chalcedonian, and, probably in conjunc- 
tion with the patriarch of Jerusalem, expelled many 
monks from their monasteries. To counteract this 
movement Severus went to Constantinople, where he 
wrote a treatise addressed to the patricians Apion and 
Paul against a charge of Eutychianism, the Philalethes 
against those who found the Chalcedonian doctrine in 
Cyril, the Answers to the questions of Eupraxius the 
chamberlain, and the Refutation of the Testament of 
Lampetius the Adelphian.^ Here he remained three 
years" until after the ordination of Timothy to the see 
of Constantinople (Aug.-Sept. 511); after which he 
returned to Majuma, and immediately set himself to 
abolish the Henotikon-compromise, whereby all men- 
tion of the Synod of Chalcedon had been avoided, and 
to procure the deposition of the patriarchs Flavian of 
Antioch and Elijah of Jerusalem. At the Synod of 
Sidon Flavian was strongly supported, and the attempt 
failed ; but, further compulsory powers having been 
obtained from the Emperor, the patriarch was deposed 
at the Synod of Antioch,^ and Severus was ordained his 
successor (Nov. 6, 512),^ being according to Zacharias 
accepted by all the bishops of the patriarchate except 
Epiphanius of Tyre,^ Flavian's brother, and Julian of 
Bostra. At this point the work of Zactiarias ends, and 


^ Cf. ep. 1. 13. For other works of Sev. see Zach. Rh. vu 10. 
2 P. 29 1. 5. 3 2ach. Rh. 1. c. ; Asseni. B. O. li. 18. 

■* Jo. Mai. p. 400; Anec. Syr. i. 14 (113); Evagr. iii. 34. 
■' Cf. ep. L 31. 


Vlll INTRODUCTION. 


from the later life by John archimandrite of Kenneshre, 
the concluding portion of which has been published in 
a French translation by M. Nau,^ but scanty informa- 
tion is to be obtained ; so that for the events of his 
patriarchate we have outside the letters little evidence 
beyond the assertions of his enemies produced at the 
synod of 536." On the death of Anastasius in July 
518 the influence of Vitalian procured from the new 
Emperor Justin an order for the expulsion of Severus, 
who on Sept. 29 fled from Antioch,^ and for the rest 
of his life lived for the most part in hiding in Egypt, 
though he continued to be recognised as patriarch 
by his own party. Here during the earlier part of 
his exile he wrote the controversial works against 
Julian the deposed bishop of Halicarnassus, who 
maintained the incorruptibility of Christ's body.^ In 
531 Justinian recalled the banished monks, and in- 
vited the bishops to a conference at Constanti- 
nople ; but the invitation which he afterwards sent to 
Severus was declined.^ In the winter of 534-5, how- 

^ Rev. de I'Or. Chr. v. 293 ff. - Mansi viii. 979 ff. 

^ Zach. Rh. viii. 2 ; Anec. Syr. I.e. ; Mich. Syr. ap. Chabot Rev. 
de rOr. Chr. iv. 446. Evagr. (iv. 3) seems to place his flight in 
519; and so Theophanes, who gives him 7 years: but the homihes 
in Brit. Mus. Add. MS. 12,159, which are arranged chronologically, 
and end with Lent 518, are decisive for the earlier date (Wright 
C.B.M. 534 ff.); cf. also the letter of Dioscorus the deacon in Migne 
P.L. Ixiii. 448. The Copts observe Sept. 29 as the day of his arrival 
in Egypt (Gutschmid Kleine Schriften, ii. 458). 

^ Add. MS. 17,200 ; Cod. Syr. Vat. 140 ; Zach. Rh. ix. 9-13. These 
works were translated into Syriac in Apr. 528 (Assem. B.O. ii. 46). 

'-' Zach. Rh. viii. 5 \ ix. 15, 16 ; Evagr. iv. 10, 11 ; Mansi viii. 817, 


INTRODUCTION. IX 


ever, the Monophysite tendencies at court naving 
probably under Theodora's influence become more 
pronounced, he consented to come ; ^ and the accession 
of Anthimus to the see of Constantinople in June 535 
seemed to make his position a strong one. But with 
the arrival of Pope Agapetus came a reaction ; and in 
Mar. 536 Anthimus was deposed, and he and Severus 
expelled from the city," while at the synod held in May 
their final condemnation was decreed." On Feb. 8, 
538 Severus died in Egypt/ 

Of the voluminous works of Severus, almost entirely 
lost in Greek, many exist in Syriac versions, of which 
not the least interesting are the letters. These letters 
were divided into three classes, those before episco- 
pacy, those during episcopacy, and those after ex- 
pulsion, containing 4, 10, and 9 books respectively; 
besides which there were also letters described as 
"outside the 23 books." ^ If we take the highest 
number in each book mentioned in the present col- 
lection, and add one for the 6th book of those after 
expulsion, of which no letters are here preserved, we 
shall find that the total cannot have been less than 
3759- Of these the version of Athanasius comprises 
123 only ;^ but, as it is described as the 6th book only 
of the Select Letters, the whole collection probably 

^ Zach. Rh. ix. 15 ; Jo. vit. Sev. p. 299 ; Evagr. iv. 11. 

- Zach. Rh. ix. 19. ^ Mansi viii. 874 ff. 

4 Ass. B.O. ii. 54; Anec. Syr. /.c. : Mich. ap. Chabot /.c 

^ iv. 7, 10. 

^ Unless there are some lost in sect. x. between B f. 144 and A f.99. 


INTRODUCTION. 


contained not less than 700, It is almost certain from 
the translator's preface that he translated the 6th book 
only, and that he therefore found the collection existing 
in Greek and did not make it for himself, as might also 
be inferred from the fact that it is called by the Greek 
name e/cXoya/. This translation was made in the year 
A.S. 980 (669) by the presbyter Athanasius of Nisibis 
at the instigation of the bishops Matthew of Berrhoea 
and Daniel of Edessa,^ and the letters contained in it 
are arranged in 1 1 sections according to subjects, while 
to each letter a note is appended stating the place 
which it occupies in the original collection. The order 
of letters in each section generally, but not always, 
follows the original order : but on what principle they 
were primarily arranged it is hard to say ; certainly 
not chronologically, for vi. 178 during episcopacy (v. 5 
Ath.) is mentioned in vi. 161 (v. 4) and v. 52 (i. 59) 
clearly preceded iv. 81 (v. 15), while v. 52 after ex- 
pulsion (i. 59) preceded iv. 81 (v. 15) and i. 53 or 55 
(i. 49) preceded i. 16 (i. 50). In some cases a double 
reference is given, which may be explained by sup- 
posing either that in the original the same letter was 
sometimes accidentally given twice, or that the order 
was not the same in all copies. 

Besides the version of Athanasius at least two other 

* Af. 102 ra. Wright (p. 564) would idcntiiy the translator with 
Athanasius B:iladaya, afterwards patriarch, who was a Greek scholar 
(Barh. H.E. i. 287) and translated the Eisagoge of Porphyry in 645 
(Ass. B.O. i. 493) ; but this Athanasius was a monk at Kenneshre 
and Beth Malkhe, not a presbyter of Nisibis. 


INTRODUCTION. XI 


Syriac versions of the letters were in existence, as 
we see in the case of v. 6 of our collection, where 
we find all three versions co-existino- ; but the other 
versions survive only in isolated letters and frai^- 
ments. Both seem to have been in much commoner 
use than the Athanasian version, and in both, so far as 
we can judge, the translation was less literal and con- 
tained fewer Hellenisms : thus we often find Athanasius 
giving a Greek word followed by a Syriac interpretation 
introduced by aukhith (or), where the other versions 
have a Syriac word only. 

The letters translated by Athanasius treat only of 
ecclesiastical matters ; but whether the dogmatic letters 
were excluded from the collection or contained in the 
other books we have no means of knowing. 

In my notes the references to the O.T. are to the 
LXX (ed. Swete) ; and the rendering of all Biblical 
and patristic quotations of which the original exists is 
made as literal as possible, in order that it may be 
used as an authority for the text. To avoid mis- 
understanding, I may explain that in the rendering of 
theological terms I have invariably translated oiWa 
by " essence," kniinia (lnz6<jTa(ri<i) by " substance," and 
TrpocrcoTToi' by " person." The practice of using " person" 
for both the two latter (distinguished by the ancient 
writers) is indefensible. Questions as to the meaning 
of rare or difficult words and phrases are reserved for 
the Vocabulary, which will be given at the end of the 
text. An index will be appended to the translation of 
Part II. E. W. BROOKS. 

April 1903. 


CONTENTS OF PART I. 


Introduction .... 
Syriac translator's Preface and Headings 


, SECTION I. 

1 To bp. Constantine 

2 To Solon bp. of Seleucia in Isauria 

3 To the same 

4 To the same 

5 To Peter bp. of Apamea 

6 To bp. Nicias 

7 To Castor bp. of Perga 

8 To duke Timostratus 

9 To Stephen bp. of Tripolis 

10 To bp. Eucharius . 

1 1 To the archimandrite of the monastery of Bassus 

12 To Cosmos Polyeuctus and Zeno the presbyters 

13 To Entrechius bp of Anazarba 

14 To Antoninus bp. of Berrhoea 

15 To the same 

16 To the same 

1 7 To Misael the chamberlain 

18 To Entrechius bp. of Anazarba 

19 To Solon bp. of Seleucia . 

20 In the name of a synod to the suffragans of Apam 

21 To the Master of the Offices 

22 To the fathers 

23 To Solon bp. of Seleucia . 

24 To Theotecnus the mxhiatros 

25 To Dionysius bp. of Tarsus 

26 To Solon bp. of Seleucia . 

27 To Musonius and Alexander vindices of .Anazarba 

28 To Philoxenus bp. of Doliche 

29 To the monks of the monastery of Isaac 

30 To the clergy of Apamea . 

31 To the bishops of Phoenice 


3 

12 
16 
23 
34 
38 
39 
41 
44 
46 

47 
52 
53 
57 
60 
61 

63 
66 

67 
70 
73 
75 
81 

83 
85 
86 

87 
89 
90 
92 


XIV^ 


CONTENTS. 


32 To John bp. of Alexandria the less ... . g8 

33 To Dionysius bp. of Tarsus . .... 100 

34 To the suffragans of Apamea . . . .101 

35 To Eustace the presbyter . . . . ... 102 

36 To Eusebius deacon of Apamea . .103 

37 To Simeon bp. of Chalcis . . . 104 
;^S To the same .... . . 106 

39 To the clergy and notables of Apamea . . . . .110 

40 To Hypatius Master of the Soldiers . . . . .113 

41 To bp. Solon . . . . . . . .116 

42 To the fathers ....... 119 

43 To the archimandrite of the monastery of Simeon . . . 1 20 

44 To Eutychian governor of Apamea . . . . .123 

45 To Conon the brigand-chaser . . . . . • '25 

46 To the clergy of Antaradus . . . . . .126 

47 To Cassian bp. of Bostra , . . . . . .129 

\ 48 To Philoxenus bp. of Hierapolis . . . . . .130 

49 To John and John presbyters and archimandrites . . .132 

50 To the same ........ 140 

51 To Phihp the presbyter ....... 145 

52 To John and John the presbyters ...... 14S 

V 53 "^^ '■^^ Syrian bishops at Alexandria . . . . .151 

54 (Heading lost) ........ 162 

55 To Theodore archimandrite of the monastery of Romanus . . 164 

56 To bp. Froclus . . . . . . . .167 

57 To bp. Didymus . . . . . . . .171 

58 To the same . . . . , . . .176 

59 To Julian archimandrite of the monastery of Bassus . . .178 

60 To Photius and Andrew archimandrites of monasteries in Caria . -179 

61 (Heading lost) ........ 191 

62 (do.) . . . . . . . . .193 

63 To Misael the deacon . . . . . . • 195 


SECTION n. 


1 To the patricians . 

2 To John and John the presbyters 
J To the orthodox at Emesa 


199 
204 
207 


The Sixth Book of the Select ?•'• 
Letters of the Holy Severus. 


He that meets with this book must know that it is 
not only the topics ^ mentioned in the sectional titles " 
that are included in the letters arranged under these, 
but that most of them also contain or set forth matter 
relating to various other subjects. However, they 
have been arranged under each of the sections"-^ in 
accordance with the larger part of the matter expressed 
in them. 


The sections- of the sixth book of the select^ or 
chosen letters, taken from the letters of the blessed 
Severus, patriarch of Antioch in Syria, on doctrines 
and the words of Scripture. 


^ K€(fidXaia. - tltXol. ^ eKXayaL 


2 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. I. 

[i.] About [bishops and clergymen and their ordina- 
tion. 

2. About his ordination before episcopacy ; and 
about the precedence of bishops and another doubtful 
point regarding them ; and about men who give them- 
selves out as bishops and ordain ; and about the proper 
ordination of bishops, 
p. 2. 3. That one ought not to hesitate on account of the 
politeia or character of priests, but only ask whether 
they are orthodox or of the right opinions. 

4. That one must not communicate indiscriminately 
or without investigation with heretics ; and how one 
ought to avoid being with them while they pray. 

5. About clergymen or laymen] who are converted 
from heresies. 

6. That one must not take account of anathemas or 
excommunications that are pronounced by heretics. 

7. About monks and nuns. 

8. About men who cut off their genital members, 
and about men who have them cut off through neces- 
sity, and about men who killed themselves in time 
of martyrdom, and that it is the custom in many 
churches for the glories and praises of the saints to 
be read. 

9. About baptisms performed in time of necessity 
by deacons or by laymen, and about men as to whom 
there is doubt [whether they have been baptized or 
not. 

10. About a man who has a wife and children 
and wishes to become a monk : and the same 


I. I. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 3 

also about women, and about the marriage of 
these. 

II. That a man who can help or assist the right 
confession while eno;aa;ed in state affairs must not 
become a monk]. 


The sixth book of the select ^ or chosen letters p- 3- 
taken from the letters of the holy Severus, patriarch of 
Antioch in Syria. 

I. First section'-^; about bishops and clergymen and 
their ordination. 


I. To Constantine the bishop. {From those be/ore 508-II. 
episcopacy, from the 2nd book the 12th letter.) 

The contents of your sanctity's former epistle to me 
are as far from applying to my vileness as the heaven 
is far from the earth, to use the words of the prophet.^ 
For you thought fit to recite to me the passage of the 
Song of Songs, I mean, " Thou art all fair, my neigh- 
bour, and there is no spot [in thee."* 

• . • ■ ■ . . ■ . -• ]■ 

I [am turned] into another man, as it is written " and 
prophesy, and that not one of all your words shall fall 

^ (.KKoyaL. - titAo?. 

^ Ps. cii. II. . ^ Ca. iv. 7. 

5 I R. X. 6. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. I. 


to the ground. For he is faithful who said to you high 
priests, " Ye shall call my name upon the sons of 
Israel, and I the Lord will hallow them."^ However, 
let these things be so. But know, father ours, that, 
after the holy Asterius the bishop and those with him 
came here, many various .... 


will cast those that are deceived into a pit of 
destruction. But all, so to speak, have the one 
object only, to bring to naught the typos or formula 
p- 4- of satisfaction '" which seemed good to the pious king, 
which he also sent to Flavian, the prelate of the city 
of Antiochus, and either altogether to remove and 
abolish it, or to cut away some of its exactitude, 
because they do not intend to drink the still water, as 
says Ezekiel, but strive to foul it with their own feet,^ 
in order that the sheep which have learned to hear 
the voice of the Good Shepherd, and to drink "the 
water of Shiloah that goeth softly,"* may not be able 
to avoid the pollution of the drink. Which John of 
Claudiupolis also tried to do when he came here. 
When he received me in the house of the glorious 
Patrick, the Master of the Soldiers,^ and conversed 
with me by order of our pious king, he said, " There 
ouofht to be introduced into the formula of satisfaction ^ 


^ Nu. vi. 27. '" irXTqpoffiOpia, 

3 Eze. xxxiv. 18. ■• Is. viii. 6, 

^ <TTpaTr]XaTrj<;, 


I. I. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 5 

this Statement, * We receive the synod at Chalcedon, 
not as a definition of faith, but as a rejection of 
Nestorius and of Eutyches.'^ Thus both those that 
are pleased with the Synod will not be angry, and 
you will receive contentment in that the doctrines 
which offend you are rejected." But I said, " This 
argument is silly, and the offspring of a drunken mind. 
Who is there among right-minded persons who will 
accept and praise us on account of this disturbance 
and confusion? If the Synod of Chalcedon intro- 
duced the doctrine of Nestorius into the churches, 
thouofh it called Nestorius 'of small intellig'ence ' "^ in 
order to entice and deceive those that are more 
simple, how can we say that it rejected the opinion p 5. 
of Nestorius? But, if the formula of satisfaction^ in 
so many words rejects the doctrines of the Synod and 
of the impious Tome of Leo, which are the life blood 
of the abomination of Nestorius, how can we honestly 
say that we accept this synod as against Nestorius ? 
. . . rather we shall be tripped up as by ..." 
" What then ? Were not those at Chalcedon rightly 
moved against Eutyches ? why, [if] you accept 
them on this point, do you think them fit ... an 
anathema?" [But] I said, "What I am about to say 
is strange, but nevertheless true. It is especially for 
this reason that we say that they are men that deserve 
anathema, because they unnecessarily extended the 

^ Cf. Zach. Rh. ix. 20 ad fin.; Evag. iii. 31. 
'" Mansi vii. 113. ^ TrXrjporfyopia. 


6 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. I . 

heresy of Eutyches. Owing to the fact that they 
wished to heal the disorder in an unintelHgent way by 
means of an opposite infection, I mean by the evil 
impiety of Nestorius, thenceforward those who were 
infected with the belief in a phantasy, seeing that they 
were inviting them to man-worship, recoiled from this 
vicious remedy, and thought themselves all the more 
pious, and carried their own corruption further. But, 
if they had been cured and healed by means of right 
doctrines, they would perhaps have abandoned their 
p. 6. infection. [If] we accept those [who] met together 
[at] Chalcedon as being adversaries [of] the heresy of 
Eutyches, and praise them on the ground that they 
spoke well up to a certain point, and do not rather 
blame them, it is time for us to accept also the 
Arian heresy, which contends against the evil 
opinion of Sabellius, and agrees up to a certain point 
with the rioht doctrines of the Church, in that it grlori- 
fies God the unbegotten Father, and in that it does 
not confound the three substances, but confines them 
within their own attributes or persons. But we do 
not extol it on this account, nor do we judge it to 
deserve a partial anathema. But, because it calls the 
Son and the Holy Spirit creatures, and degrades them 
to a servile position, on this account it is utterly re- 
pudiated by the orthodox doctors of the Church. This 
same trick we find practised by the other heresies also. 
By displaying a certain part of the sound faith as a 
decoy and mixing ^ with this the vanity of their 

^ This is the meaning needed, though I cannot sujiply the word. 


I. I. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 7 

own profane words they thus appear plausible to 
those that are more innocent and simple ; but 
we do not, on account of the sound part, hold 
back and shrink from repudiating them, but we 
anathematize them with all our power." When the 
good and excellent John had heard these things, he 
betook himself to another topic.^ He asked me p- 7- 
whether Epiphanius the bishop," who is among the 
saints, performed our ordinations fitly and in accord- 
ance with the canon. But I said, " Very well and 
most properly," and "after the pattern of the doctors 
and stablishers of the word of the orthodox faith. For 
he in his boyhood was brought up in monasteries, and 
practised a virginity modelled on the angelic and un- 
embodied life, being a citizen of Perga : a man of no 
ignoble city, as it is written,^ yes, and a man of noble 
birth also, if these things are not small to the citizens 
of Jerusalem above. Having been advanced to the 
bishopric of Magydum (this also is a city in Pamphylia) 
at the time of the Encyclical which repudiated the 
impiety that was confirmed at Chalcedon, under which 
Timothy, who was sent into exile for piety's sake, re- 
turned to Alexander's city, and received back the 
presidency of the flock of Mark the Evangelist, which 
before was unrighteously tended by wolves and torn, 
when he saw that the bishops had changed, and that 
they had overthrown the Encyclical by a contrary 


^ KeffidXaiov. - C/. Zach. Rh. V. 5. 

^ Ac. xxi. 39. 


8 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. I 

document, and had gone back to the Synod of Chal- 
cedon and its hateful doctrines, he left his throne and 

p- 8. Pamphylia, the land of his fathers, and the blessed 
man came as a fugitive to Alexander's city, and 
embraced communion with the saintly Timothy, the 
champion of the right faith, having taken joyfully upon 
him the spoiling of his goods, and knowing that he had 
in heaven a better and enduring inheritance, as the 
wise Paul says.^ But, when Timothy of holy memory 
had finished his course and kept his faith " and departed 
to God, the zealots of the orthodox faith were asfain 
persecuted in Alexander's city, and the correct word 
was perturbed by certain men's mixture. Then there- 
fore the blessed Epiphanius withdrew to Palestine, 
the stranger on the earth, who did not know any 
city of his own, or rather knew that only as his own 
in which God over all is purely worshipped. And, 
having associated with Peter of Iberia of holy memory, 
the God-clad man, who was bishop of one of the cities 
in Palestine, and with the other holy fathers and 
orthodox peoples, he was persuaded by them and 
ordained priests, not going beyond the meaning of the 
sacred canons (far be it !) The canon that forbids a 
bishop to perform an ordination in provinces^ or 
parishes which do not belong to him * comes into play 

P- 9 in cases where he forces himself upon other men's 
countries in a disorderly fashion and without an invita- 


1 He. X. 34. ■' 2 Ti. iv, 7. 

3 eVapxtas. ■* Mansi ii. 1313, 1317. 


I. I. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


tion from anyone, not when he is persuaded to ordain 
by the bishop of the country or city and by the 
orthodox clergymen, especially in time of persecu- 
tion. We may find such instances also if we study 
church histories. In the times of the Arians, when 
the servants of piety were persecuted and suffered 
every kind of evil, Eusebius the bishop of Samosata 
(this is one of the cities of Mesopotamia) went about 
the cities and deserts and villages, and travelled to 
countries outside the boundaries, wearing a soldier's 
dress and having his head covered by a hood, and 
applied his sacred hand and confirmed priests for places 
that were in need ; who also put on a crown of mar- 
tyrdom, having his head crushed by a stone by 
the heterodox, and migrated in saintly fashion to 
Jesus who longed for him, and was admitted to 
the heavenly mansions. These things are clearly 
stated by Theodoret in his church history.^ The 
great light of the Cappadocians also, or rather of 
the whole world, Basil the bishop, the pillar of the 
church, the ' sure foundation ' "- (for these words of 
the apostle fit him more than any man, as fine raiment 
a bride), was raised to the throne of the bishopric, 
receiving ordination to the episcopacy, by bishops 
outside the boundaries. This Gregforv the Theolog-ian p- i°- 
says in the funeral discourse on Basil himself, writing 
thus : ' He is raised to the high throne of the bishopric, 
not without toil nor without envy and contention on 

1 Theod. H.E. v. 4. ''-2 Ti. ii. 19. 


10 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. I. 

the part of the prelates of the country, and of the worst 
men of the city who ranged themselves with these ; 
however, the Holy Spirit was bound to conquer : yes, 
and it does conquer, gaining an easy victory. For 
from outside the boundaries it stirs up men to anoint, 
men distinguished and zealous in the matter of piety.' ^ 
But, if Basil, the teacher of orthodoxy and rule and law 
of all church discipline, was anointed and received 
ordination (for this is the anointing of a high-priest) 
from those outside the boundaries, because the people 
of the country or province^ were jealous of him, on 
account of the Arian heresy or for other human reasons, 
which is a very small thing, how can we say that the 
ordinations that were performed among us by a man 
outside the boundaries, when the transoression of 
Chalcedon and the Nestorian heresy bare rule and 
prevailed, are not to be approved ? and we have such 
great and wonderful instances of holy men and such 
as these, whose zeal is resembled by ours. But what 
shall we for our part say of the ordinations that are 
now performed in the churches ? What canon re- 
p- "• specting these is not trampled upon ? Are not high- 
priesthoods now everywhere for sale, as we see in the 
case of civil governorship of cities (the other things I 
pass over, lest by falling into evil speaking or back- 
biting and saying things suited to other men I be 
thought to be choosing for myself matters that do not 
concern me) ? " While I was saying these things, the 

^ Or. xliii. 37. - i-n-apx^a. 


I. I. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 11 

gentle John covered his face. But since perhaps, even 
after he has returned to you, he will again circulate the 
same suggestions (for this is the habit of those who 
cause confusion), I have thought it right to make 
known to your sanctity the details of our honest and 
lawful discussion of this matter in this royal city. As 
to the state of our affairs, I think the religious presbyter 
Peter has once already given you information by letter 
upon each several point. Still it is a matter for your 
saintly prayers that the Lord, as is said in the Psalms, 
after we have "passed through fire and water" may 
" bring us out into a place of refreshment." ^ But you 
as watchful shepherds and strict disciples of the chief 
shepherd Jesus, who brought us up with Him from 
among the dead by the blood of the everlasting 
covenant, "stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, 
and be strong. Let all your things be done with " ^ 
orthodoxy or the right opinions. For you have 
" chosen the good part, which shall not be taken away 
from " ^ you. And we believe that the whole lump also 
will coalesce with your holy first fruit ^ and be kneaded : 
for through your prayers we have in all our troubles 
gained experience of the help of God, and the comfort of 
hopes of success has not departed from us. The end. 

Letters like this, of the same tenour, were written 
to the patricians also, and to Q^cumenius. 


1 Ps. Ixv. 12. - I Co. xvi. 13. 

3 Lu. X. 42. ■* Ro. xi. 16. 


12 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 2. 


508-11. 2. Of the sa77te to Solon, bishop and 7netropolitan. 
i^Froni those before episcopacy, frojn the ^th book 
the lO^th, \o6th letter.) 

If anyone who knows how to discern spiritually the 
dispensations of the Lord, who does all things with 
wisdom, will recall to mind your struggles on be- 
half of the orthodox faith, — And after other things. 
Henceforth clothe yourself in the immaterial dress of 
the priesthood, and stand firm. Instead of the ephod 
take upon your shoulders the Lord's cross ; and in- 
stead of the tunic woven of fine linen and blue stuff put 
on the many-coloured tunic of virtues ; and strengthen 
yourself by the struggles of the martyrs which extended 
p* 13- to blood. But assuredly the honourable in virginity 
and first of female martyrs, and skilled maker of these 
things, I mean the holy Thecla, will clothe you in such 
raiment to do honour to her vote concerning you. But 
the crown of the orthodox faith, and purity and good 
character, and sincerity and vehemence of preaching, 
by which others also will be stirred up to the same 
zeal, will be to you the mitre and the crown of gold 
and the fair-sounding bells. And you are girt with 
a girdle and a breastpiece, a solitary and unwedded 
walk in life. Wherefore also Christ shall lie upon 
your breast, the Word of God, who took flesh for us, 
who was typified beforehand by the robe and know- 
ledge and truth.^ When therefore things are thus 

' Ex. xxviii. 4-35 ; Le. viii. 7-9. 


I. 2. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 13 

with you, who will dare to find fault with the innova- 
tion in the matter of your institution, when so many 
bishops with one accord canonically performed the 
ordination ? That a patriarch or a metropolitan or the 
synod of the province ^ should according to custom 
ordain such and such a man is not a matter of the 
strictness of the canons, but rather of church disci- 
pline. But this discipline we see to have been often 
neglected in times of persecution. Take the holy Basil. 
Because the bishops of the province ^ were adversely 
disposed towards him, partly from envy, partly because 
they were attached to the madness of Arius, Gregory p. 14. 
the Theologian says that he was ordained by bishops 
outside the boundaries, writing thus in the funeral dis- 
course on him : [Here follows the citation given 
above, p. 9]. However, Flavian may be caught by his 
own wings. If he himself, and that when accused of 
heresy, formerly ordained someone in Germanicupolis, 
and snatched away an ordination that belonged to the 
metropolitan, let him not be annoyed when he has 
been treated in the same way, when on our side we 
have an advocate in defence of a similar act in the 
orthodox faith ; and what can a man think could be a 
better advocate than this ? This has the approval of 
the holy Gregory the Theologian also when he writes 
in this manner in the first of the conciliatory discourses, 
I mean that on the union of the monks, when certain 
men, perhaps like these, were thought to have intro- 


rapxi 


14 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 2. 

duced an innovation contrary to the law of the Church : 
" For for our part we received the heads also who were 
given to the severed part with joy, inasmuch as they 
introduced an innovation on behalf of piety and to 
help the right teaching which was in distress, and we 
did not turn away our faces as from enemies, but 
welcomed them as our brothers, who for a short time 
were at discord respecting the paternal inheritance, in 
a brotherly but not a wicked manner. And we did not 
praise them on account of the enmity : but we received 
them on account of the zeal. For separation for piety's 
p- 15- sake is better than vicious concord. And for this 
reason we made the loss our gain, silently removing by 
love the supposition that there was against us : and to 
this extent we changed the order of things, that the 
ofift should not follow the election, but the election the 
gift ; and we made use of other men's hands in this 
matter, having been a little anticipated by the Spirit."^ 
From the citation it is possible to discern clearly that 
the innovation which was thought to have been intro- 
duced at that time was one similar to the present 
position, and that, while the election and the right of 
ordaining belonged to one set of men, others ordained, 
especially from his expression, "and we made use of 
other men's hands in this matter " ; and above again, 
"who for a short time were at discord respecting the 
paternal inheritance." But he shows that those who 
had the right to elect and ordain, one among whom in 

^ Or. vi. II. 


I. 2. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 15 

particular was the holy Gregory himself, concurred in 
the election with those who on account of zeal for the 
orthodox faith had once made an innovation, by uniting 
with those who separated and made the innovation, and 
accepting what had been done by them, in that they 
said, "and for this reason we made the loss our gain, 
silently removing by love the supposition that there 
was acrainst us ; and to this extent we changed the 
order of things, that the grift should not follow the 
election, but the election the gift." 

If Gregory the Theologian, and that being orthodox, r ^^■ 
or rather a guide and teacher of orthodoxy, bore with 
and endured those who seceded from him out of super- 
fluous zeal, and accepted the things done by them by 
way of innovation, let Flavian, who is infected with 
heresy, either change his evil belief under teaching, 
and rejoice with us in the things done by us ; or if he 
remains such as he is let him justly suffer annoyance, 
and put up with it, enwrapped as he is in the bonds of 
impiety. But. since there was also contained in your 
letter the question on what conditions it is right to 
adopt a union with those of the same opinions, it is • 
necessary to say this much. It is right to unite with 
those of the same opinions, when they are of the same 
opinions in everything. Putting aside the complete | 
union of the holy churches, since that needs a lawful \ 
concession on certain points, the man who privately 
wishes to be united with you must in everything seek 
the same ends ; as Constantine also of God-lovinof 
memory proclaimed to the people before the church ; 


16 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 3. 

the mention of the Henotikon only being passed over 
as superfluous : for, if it does not touch the stumbHng- 
blocks that sprang up at Chalcedon and separated the 
churches, what is the use of mentioning it ? To the 
pious king this was necessary for the general union of 
the churches, since he was desirous of showing that the 
p- 17- king who preceded him also had before him the object 
of bringing into union those who separated on account 
of the synod at Chalcedon, and that he is not now the 
first to introduce this question into the churches, as if 
making an innovation. We for our part therefore 
have written these things out of our poverty, because 
you bade us do this also, giving us an example of a 
modest or humble disposition. But you will of your- 
self add things greater and better than these, inasmuch 
as you have already received from the Spirit together 
with the pastorate ability also to feed the flock with 
understandinof. The end. 


513-7. 3. Of the same to the same Solon, bishop and metro- 
politan of Selettcia in Isauria. {Brom those 
during episcopacy, from the Ind book the 2Ath 
letter. ) 

The letter of your religiousness was enough to bring 

even those who are not easily roused to wrath into a 

state of anger and indignation. But for our part, 

because we are accustomed to endure such things 

p. 18. philosophically, especially when they are done and 


I. 3. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 17 

said by honoured and beloved men like you, we have 
thought it right in this instance also not to strive with 
contentious words, but rather, as far as possible, in 
consonance with the actual truth to write such things 
as are in accord with the judgments of God, and to 
show that we are free from all cause of blame on your 
part, Callistus was not dragged before us by anyone 
upon any new charges being made against him by you. 
Then he would have had ground for complaint, inas- 
much as discipline would, as you say, have been vio- 
lated, and a judgment and cause ^ that belonged to the 
holy throne of the metropolitan would have been forcibly 
removed before examination or pardon by being called 
up, as one may say, to the exaltation and height of the 
patriarchal and apostolic throne. But, if the matters 
upon which the party of Hilarian and Musonius made 
charoes aoainst Callistus were examined and investi- 
gated while your holiness was in this great city, how 
comes it that the transaction does not lie beyond 
the reach of your objections ? Nay, how can you 
avoid praising us if you again recall to your memory 
how I turned benevolent ears to such faults, and to the 
bitter attacks of the accusers, and that with much p. 19. 
wise moderation we tempered the vehemence of those 
men, and the gravity of the accusations in which he 
was involved ; and that after this we further in some 
sort sent a request, which otherwise would not have 
beseemed us, to each of the bishops, asking them, 


o^ccris. 


18 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 3. 

inasmuch as he had repented, to vote unanimously for 
the forgiveness which was to be granted him ; and, 
upon our showing such solicitude, he received letters 
from each of the bishops, and we received these with 
joy, and immediately the things written were read, and 
the decree of pardon followed ? But, as for the matter 
which is now thought by Hilarian to be connected with 
the same subject,^ how will it be suited for the hearing 
of your love of God, and that when the sin was directed 
against me, I mean that of the forged letter ? For I 
do not know if anyone else among men, or an angel 
from heaven, will come and disprove its spuriousness, 
seeing that its prejudice is so manifest, and that 
Hilarian's handwriting also, when compared with his 
other signatures, utters, so to speak, a voice and pro- 
claims the fiction. Therefore look into these things 
with carefulness and sincere God-l6ving thought, and 
p. 20. consider whether you are not making a preposterous 
request, viz., that the patriarch should receive judgment 
from your love of God in a case of insults or sins that 
were directed against him, and that in the words sung 
by everyone you may turn things upside down ; and 
whether we ourselves have not now the right to use 
your words, " I am insulted and contemned." I forbear 
to mention that, even after the conviction from the 
letter, Paul, the God-loving bishop of the city of the 
Olbians, came here, and bore witness and said that 
Hilarian said in the presence of his love of God that 

^ V7r6d€(n<s. 


I. 3. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 19 

with Musonius' assent he wrote that the diaconate 
ought to be restored to Callistus, but that he should 
not in addition be archdeacon also, and hold the first 
place.^ But what is the modest defence to these 
things, which is given even by your sanctity (for this 
is the wonderful thing)? "Callistus is not subject to 
reproof for saying of himself that he does not com- 
municate with us in the matter of the mention of Peter 
and Palladius, who are by a violation of strict 
accuracy named in the sacred tablets, and in the 
matter of communion with the God-loving bishop of 
the city of the Hierapolitans, Philoxenus, who names 
a man who signed the things unlawfully done at 
Chalcedon." May the all-holy soul of Constantine 
hear these words, against whom that wicked man p. 21. 
armed himself, both by writing to those on the other 
side and by creeping into the archive-house, and arm- 
ing and inciting the governor^ of the province^ to do 
everything that could bow down his venerable old age 
and subvert the orthodox faith ! For so much did he 
infuriate him, I mean the governor of Isauria at that 
time, that death alone put a stop to his fury against 
piety. May Solon also, who succeeded to Constan- 
tine's see, hear these words ! and let him hold Callistus 
as a teacher of zeal for strict accuracy, because after 
intolerable impieties he has of his own accord come 
forth as an unlawful champion on behalf of the laws of 
the church, one who sprang suddenly from the ground 

1 C/. p. 31. ^ rjy/xwv. 3 i-n-apxia. 


20 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 3. 

like the giants fabled in legends. However let 
Callistus stand upon this peak, there is no objection, 
and let Solon go up with him. Only let them stay in 
this citadel, and not immediately come down and say, 
"All the cities of Isauria have also introduced into the 
sacred tablets the names of those who unlawfully signed 
at Chalcedon " ; for it is time for me also to say what 
the well-disposed robber, who was crucified with our 
Lord and Saviour Christ, said to the blasphemous 
robber, " Dost not even thou fear God, seeing thou art 
in the same judgment ? " ^ These things we for our 
part say out of an abundant choice. But anyone who 
makes a careful investigation will find that your love 
of God has not maintained the order of things ^ which 
you took over from Constantine the metropolitan who 
is among the saints, but that your feathers have gradu- 
ally tallen off after the manner of a bird, while our 
meanness has carried out a gradual progress, and has 
in no way fallen short of the beginning previously 
made. Indeed every one of those who were ordained 
by us, whether he incurred dangers or was free from 
danger, removed the names under suspicion. For 
neither is the statement made by your religiousness 
true, I mean that the God-loving Mammian bishop of 
the city of the Damascenes mentions the name of one 
who signed. Immediately upon his setting foot in the 
city and sacrificing the first sacrifice and at the same 
time with it he offered to God the legal omission of his 

^ Lu. xxiii. 40. ^ Karao-Tacrt?. 


I. 3. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 21 


name. But the omission of the mention of such men 
as Peter and Palladius we for our part have for the 
present not promised to any man. The things that 
must be yielded to junctions or general unions of God's 
holy churches are both regulated and defined, and we p- 23. 
never stretch ourselves to things outside the bounds of 
moderation, " being vainly puffed up," ^ as the apostle 
says, and wandering outside the royal road. If we had 
in the beginning yielded this difficulty in these other 
names to you who did this, but had stopped at this one 
only, that of those who signed as you say several 
times, how could 1 on my own authority have laid 
either upon myself or upon those who have in no way 
attained to this strictness " heavy burdens and grievous 
to be borne," ^ according to the Gospel saying, which 
injure the right teaching of the faith and upset every- 
thing owing to the stress and difficulty of the present 
time ? The things done in the case of Callistus are 
therefore as stated above. But your love of God 
ought also to reflect upon the accusations that Musonius 
and Hilarian brought in the case of the devout Eustace, 
and how we for our part dealt with the affair in a 
proper way and in a seemly fashion ; and to see with 
your eyes how honourable is the place that you hold 
before us, though you show an appearance of for- 
getting. Indeed I know clearly that in the matters in 
which it is my duty to trouble my mind I have not 
relaxed at all. But, if any man seeks to be burdened 

^ Col. ii. 18. - Mt. xxiii. 4. 


22 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 3. 

by God's laws, "we have no such custom, neither the 
p- 24. churches of God."^ But may the Lord be witness 
for me of my words and of the feehngs of my heart, 
that I am still even now praying that Callistus may 
be found upon manifest proofs to be innocent of the 
charges made against him, as the previous proceed- 
ings also and the various measures taken by me in his 
case showed ! But, if he shall neglect the rieht road 
of defence and take refuge in an accuracy of names 
that does not exist, and in the fact that he does not 
communicate with us, it is time for me to say to him 
appropriately the words of Jeremiah, " ' If thou whiten 
thyself with natron and take thee much soap, thy sins 
have scarred thee before me' saith the Lord."^ But 
neither will the religious Hilarian escape from the strict 
execution of the canons, if he be proved to be lying. 
A certain term of days has been fixed for him, and this 
has been set down in writing ; and, if he fail to appear 
and make no defence to the accusation against him, 
Callistus will be released from the interdict, and tne 
position of a man under a charge will rightly pass to 
him, as disturbing the discipline of the Church. A}id 
after other things. But you must believe that, after I 
had given the letter to the devout Stephen, something 
that had been omitted came into my mind, I mean, to 
tell you the time within which the religious bishop 
Hilarian is to come, or else the things stated in the 
letter about Callistus and about him will be carried 

^ I Co. xi. 16. 2 Ter. ii. 22. 


I. 4. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 23 


out. The time is reckoned from to-day, and extends P- 25- 
to the end of the month of September. The end. 

4. Of the same to the same So/on the bishop. [Frojn 516-17. 
those during episcopacy, fi'om the 2nd book the 
\2nd, $oth lettc}'.) 

That there are limits even to long-suffering the 
sacred scripture clearly teaches us, in that it speaks 
thus in the person of God over all, " All the day I 
have spread out my hands unto a gainsaying and diso- 
bedient people" :^ and again : "Thus saith the Lord, 
' Have I become a wilderness to them of the house of 
Israel, or a desert land } Because my people said, 
" We will not be brought into subjection, and we will 
come no more unto thee."' "" What therefore is one 
to say about Musonius. who was known to us for im- 
pudence and rustic denseness, and for love of money 
which is greater than all evil things, which Paul who 
had Christ speaking in him said is "the root of all 
evil ? " ^ Being excited by these same passions, he did 
not notice that he was blinded by beams and searching 
for other men's motes through love of fault-finding and 
not in order to guard the salvation of the brethren ; 
insomuch as to upset the whole province * as far as his 
power extends, disturbing both bishops and laity, and 
on his own authority adding burdens to burdens, and p. 26. 


1 Is. Ixv. 2 ; Ro. X. 21. - Jer. ii. 31. 

^ I Ti. vi. 10. * iTTapYia, 


24 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 4. 

not allowing them to arrive at excellence by gradual 
advance, but by his arrogance to cause those who were 
standing rightly to go over to the adversaries : inso- 
much that yet another prophecy is adapted for quoting 
against him which says, "My sheep fed upon the 
trampling of your feet, and drank the water that was 
fouled by your feet ; and ye thrust them with your 
sides and with your shoulders, and ye pushed them 
with your horns ; everyone that was sick ye oppressed, 
till ye had driven them out, and my sheep were scat- 
tered upon every crossway " ; ^ and again, " That which 
was weak ye did not strengthen, and that which was 
sick ye did not heal, and that which was broken ye 
did not bind up, and that which was in evil plight ye 
did not comfort, and that which was wandering ye did 
not bring again, and that which was lost ye did not 
seek, and that which was sound ye subjected by 
force." ^ Of all these things he has been guilty, 
and as far as in him lies he has made havoc of the 
province.^ To the orthodox he is burdensome and 
hostile, and is always kicking his neighbours and push- 
ing them with his horns and gnashing his teeth, like 
unbroken asses or bulls or wild boars which feed in 
bestial fashion ; but against the adversaries he has 
never dared to speak so much as a word, but sits inside 
his house and lives in fear ; for such is the boldness 
which in face of those against whom it is right to be 
p. 27 bold shrinks and draws back, but in committing illegal 


^ Eze. xxxiv. 19, 21. ~ Ibid. 4. 


3 


fTrap)^La, 


I. 4. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 25 


deeds is precipitous and easily moved to action, and 
turns everything upside down. Finally, saying that 
he had become a man according to the saying of the 
prophet,^ because he loved strange men and went after 
them, he went away and found those who could satisfy 
his avarice and fill his hand. And he did not even 
think it wrong to exact interest : but, when the God- 
loving bishops were assembled here, he piteously 
alleged poverty and want, and openly confessed that 
for this reason he followed the avaricious practice of 
taking interest. And, though we gave him many 
admonitions, he did not even promise to withhold his 
hand from the unconsecrated means of gain for the 
future, and that though we ourselves gave him twelve 
gold pieces and promised to pay him that sum every 
year, and to relieve the needs of the church that had 
been entrusted to him ; for this he used, so to speak, 
to bewail every day, going so far as to speak to one of 
our religious presbyters, whose name is Hesychius, in 
so many words thus, with the rusticity that is natural 
to him, " By God! what do you care, you who receive 
the stipend" of the clergy of Antioch, while I possess 
nothing in my city, not so much as six denarii ? " 
When I wrote to you before also, I quoted in the letter 
his abominable, unholy words, full of sacrilege, which p. 28. 
he dared to write in an epistle to our religious pres- 
byter Longinus ; and they also are word for word as 
follows:^ — "But you remember that I said to you, 

^ Job xxxiii. 25 (?). - Sidpia, ^ Cf. p. 80. 


26 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 4. 

* He Quofht to have sent somethinor to our church as 
treasures.^ By this means not only do the men them- 
selves become more enthusiastic, but the other cities 
also which are in error, as if they were jealous of us, 
would have come over and entered into accord with 
us. In this way Flavian also acted to the bishop of 
Germanicupolis, when he gave both robes and trea- 
sures^ to the unholy Bisula, and he drew the inhabi- 
tants of his country to him.' And your holiness also 
reported these words to the same holy patriarch, and 
you told me that you told him and he did not help you 
at all." What are we to say of a man who from such 
passions left his flock and would not submit to be 
poor with Christ, who, while as God He was rich, be- 
came poor of His own accord for our sake? This I 
say, because the money-lover called moderate means 
poverty, and because, now that he has reached this 
incurable depth of wickedness, it is absolutely necessary 
to strip him of the priestly functions, and to subject him 
to the punishment prescribed by the holy canons.^ For 
p. 29. the seventeenth canon runs thus : — " Since many, 
while enrolled in the canon, by pursuing after cove- 
tousness and base ofains have forg-otten the divine text 
that says, ' He hath not put out his money upon 
interest,' and exact hekatostai or one per cent, when 
they lend, the holy synod has decided, that, if after 
this ordinance anyone be found receiving interest, 
contrivinof the matter bv commerce or otherwise, and 

^ Ketfxtjkta. - Cf, i. 23. 


I. 4. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 27 


exacting hemioliai or half the whole, or contriving' 
anything else for the sake of filthy lucre, his deposi- 
tion from the clergy shall follow, and that he shall be 
an alien to the canon." ^ The hundred and seventh 
law also, laying down the same principles, says plainly 
as follows : — " Priests must not lend and receive in- 
terest, and what are called Jiemioliaiy^ 

But as to Paul, who I would had never become 
bishop of the city of the Olbians, who because of a 
provocation that deserves to be treated with contempt 
left his flock, and was often admonished by me and 
calmed his savaofeness, and said that he would be calm 
and remain at peace and stay in his church, and "re- 
turned again to his vomit," ^ it is necessary for us to use 
the prophetic words and say, "We healed Babylon, 
and she was not healed. Let us leave her." * Having 
a dispute with the religious Hilarian, bishop of 
Diocaesarea, about a certain monastery,^ an unhallowed 
and unseemly dispute, but still a dispute, he closed his 
ears to the apostolic statutes, and would not give 
them any admission, the statutes that say, " Behold ! 
already ye are utterly in fault that ye go to law with 
one another ; why do ye not rather take wrong ? why 
do ye not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded ? 
but ye wrong and defraud and that your brethren ; or 
know ye not that unrighteous persons shall not inherit 
the kingdom of God ? " *^ ; and often, when he argued 
in a childish and rustic manner about this, I persuaded 

1 Mansi ii. 676. - Ibid. 563. '^ Pr. xxvi. ir. 

4 Jer. xxviii. 9. ^ Cf. pp. 69, 86. '^ i Co. vi. 7-9. 


28 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 4. 

him and restored him to a proper state of mind. For 
he used always to swear and say that he had great 
faith in me, and that he revered my labours and 
struggles on behalf of the orthodox faith (I am even 
compelled to become a fool ^ by quoting words in my 
own praise in order to show his disposition). And he 
would depart from our presence, as if he had been de- 
livered from thoughts that wallow on the earth. But, 
being bound up in earthly things and infected with 
the perversity of strife, he would again abandon him- 
p. 31- self to the same contentiousness. And, being wholly 
swayed by anger, and swelling with contentious strifes, 
he would at one time go up to the royal city, and at 
another hasten to other countries. And at last, out of 
love of base gains, he went over to the schism of 
Musonius, the same Musonius who in his letter to the 
religious presbyter Longinus, which I mentioned a 
short time aero, with reofard to the same Paul made, 
sentence for sentence and word for word, such state- 
ments as these : " But I will make yet another small 
addition to the letter. In everything I blame myself. 
I caused him to be made bishop of Olba, because I 
thought that there was some good in him, since he 
displayed an appearance of undergoing a struggle for 
the faith. And it turned out contrary to my expecta- 
tions. For he had a mad and wicked strife about a 
place which was subject to pay tribute to the lord 
Hilarian the bishop, while he wished to make this 

^ 2 Co. xii. II. 


1. 4- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 29 

subject to himself; and the afore-mentioned saintly- 
bishop Hilarian bore with him as long as possible, but, 
not finding- in him any advance towards settling the 
affair/ at last appropriated the place to himself by setting 
up an altar there. For it was a monastery. But Paul p. 32- 
went out of his mind and became like a demon and 
wroucrht every kind of disorder, reviling" me also. He 
says he will come there to you. If this happens, 
write to me and I will come with the lord Hilarian 
also, and expose all his conduct. God forgive me and 
be merciful to me ! he is not worthy to set foot even 
on the doorway of the church owing to the deeds done 
by him. I tremble and am afraid to repeat in the 
letter the facts regarding him, lest I pollute your ears 
which are benevolent and God-loving. May the holy 
God himself grant your holiness to me ! For you are 
always our refreshment and consolation, whenever we 
remember your name." What mercy therefore can 
one admit in the case of men who are so foolish, and 
have unreasonably abandoned their flock on account 
of base and unhallowed passions, while the sacred 
canons do not give them any forgiveness, but the 
eighty-first canon plainly says : "If any presbyter or 
deacon or generally anyone of the sacred order should 
leave his own parish and pass to another, and after- 
wards, completely removing, try to live in another 
parish for a long time, he shall not minister any more ; 
and especially if when his own bishop calls him and 

^ KaTaorao-t?. 


30 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 4. 

admonishes him to return to his own parish he should 
P- 33- not obey ; and, if he should continue in the same dis- 
orderly conduct, his complete deposition from the 
ministry shall follow, so that he shall not again have a 
chance of returning to his place ; but, if when his 
deposition takes place for this reason, another bishop 
should receive him, he also shall receive punishment 
from a general synod, as breaking the church laws." ^ 
And moreover the purport of the eighty-seventh 
canon also is the same, and it says thus: "The 
bishops in each of the provinces must know that 
the bishop who stands at their head in the metro- 
polis is himself entrusted with the care of the whole 
province, because those who have business meet in the 
metropolis from every place ; wherefore it has seemed 
o-ood that he shall also be the first in honour, and the 
other bishops shall do nothing outside the ordinary 
course without him, in accordance with the canon that 
has prevailed from the beginning from the time of the 
fathers, but only those things which belong to each 
man's province" and to the districts under this; for 
each of the bishops has authority to administer his own 
parish, in proportion to the devoutness that has fallen 
to the lot of each, and to undertake the care of all the 
district that is under his city, in so far as to ordain 
presbyters and deacons, and to administer each matter 
p- 34- with judgment or examination, but not to do anything 
outside the course, or even try to do so, without the 


1 Mansi ii. 1309. - eVapx'a (Gk. irapoLKLa). 


I. 4. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 31 

bishop of the metropolis. Neither shall he again do 
this without the consent of the other bishops."^ It 
is a long task to quote the things that are laid down 
in various places by the holy canons. However it is 
manifest from the citations made that, since Musonius 
and Paul have offended against the intention of all 
church discipline by leaving their country, they have 
made themselves aliens to the high-priestly office, since 
they have run counter to Him who said, "The good 
shepherd layeth down his life for his sheep : but he ■ 
that is an hireling and is not the shepherd, and whose 
own the sheep are not, when he hath seen the wolf 
coming, leaveth the sheep and fleeth, and the wolt 
seizeth and scattereth them : but the hireling fleeth 
because he is an hireling, and careth not for the 
sheep."" I had nearly omitted yet another fact which 
also affords a manifest proof of the madness and of the 
foolish impulses of Musonius. When he was making 
a charge against the devout archdeacon Callistus on 
the ground that he had bought the priestly order and 
status, thereby satisfying his wrathful inclination, and 
not actuated in any way by religious motives, he wrote 
to us to the effect that such a man as that ought to 
retire from the archidiaconate, but minister in the 
order of deacons.^ And he heard me quote, and with p 35- 
great justice, the passage of holy scripture that says, 
" May thine own mouth convict thee and not I ! ","* and 
that also which was spoken by the divine Daniel to the 

^ Mansi ii. 1311. - John x. 11-13. ^ Cf. p. 19. "* Job xv. 6. 


32 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 4. 

presumptuous elders, on one occasion, " Rightly hast 
thou also lied against thine head," and on another, " O 
thou that hast grown old in evil days, now have thy sins 
come near which thou usedst to commit aforetime, in 
judging unjust judgments, and in condemning the inno- 
cent, and in acquitting the guilty, when the Lord saith, 
' The innocent and righteous thou shalt not slay,' " ^ 
" For, if, as you say, he bought for money the grace 
that may not be bousfht, such a man ouoht to be re- 
moved not only from the archidiaconate, but also from 
the diaconate itself." What then is his ignorant and 
very rustic defence to this? " Callistus, while arch- 
deacon, puts a stumbling-block in the others' way by 
carrying the holy gospel on his breast." " What does 
he " say then, madman, to the ignorant person who is 
near him ? Do you think that the cup of salvation of 
the divine blood has less virtue than the book of the 
holy gospels, and that the onlookers will not strike 
upon a greater stumbling-block, when a man who has 
bouofht the ministry carries this?" It seems to me 
that I am doing a superfluous thing in insisting on 
speaking words without eloquence to men who have 
contracted this unholy infection. These words your 
p. 36. sanctity ought to speak to those who have remained 
sound, and to call to you the saintly bishops of your 
province,^ who confess the orthodox faith, and hold the 
same communion with us, but strip those men of the 
priesthood, inasmuch as they did not spare the rational 

1 Su. 59, 52, 53. ■^ A 'What shall I.' ' i-n-apxta. 


I. 4. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 33 


sheep, but reckoned the salvation of these secondary 
to their own passions, and left these as in a night in 
which is no brightness, and tried to submerge them so 
deeply in the turbid drink that they should not even 
have power to rise. However we believe that they 
will find such efforts vain. For by the mandate of 
the divine Spirit, and the lawful vote of the citizens 
through the mediation of your sancity, bishops and high- 
priest will be ordained for the cities who will feed their 
flocks with understanding. For he that speaks through 
Ezekiel says, " Behold ! I will seek out my sheep, and 
will visit them. As the shepherd visiteth his flock 
on a day of storm and darkness when his sheep are 
scattered, so will I seek my sheep, and I will deliver 
them from every place wherein they have been scattered 
on the day of storm and darkness."^ Therefore visit 
these sheep with the help of God, and do not show 
negligence or give any occasion for delay, lest you 
bring yourself under the condemnation of these men, 
and draw upon your head the sentence hanging over 
them. For we may hear yet another sacred utterance p 37- 
of the prophet which says, " Cursed is he that shall do 
the works of the Lord negligently, and cursed is he 
that shall keep back his sword from blood." ^ As there 
is a time for mercy, so also there is a time for cuttino- 
off: for we hear the same Spirit saying in Koheleth, 
" There is a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that 
which is planted : a time to kill, and a time to heal : a 


^ Eze. xxxiv. ii, 12. - Jer. xxxi. 10. 

3 


34 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 5. 

time to break down and a time to build," ^ and the 
other passages through which we understand how that 
it is with judgment that we must handle the divine 
words and fulfil the ministry of these. The end. 


514-8. 5. Of the same to Peter, bishop of Apamea. i^From 
those during episcopacy, from the ^rd book the 
^th letter.) 

When the letters of your love of God came before 
me, not that only which was written to me, but that 
also which was written to the religious presbyter 
Thomas, I thought it right not to judge words which 
were put forward, as you yourself also say, under a 
feeling of wrath and anger, but only to declare my 
mind as if God himself were listening, and to say to 
Him like Jeremiah, " The things which came forth 
from my lips are before Thy face." " In the first 
p. 3^- place you bring a charge against us, which is not 
known to the canons, nor to the church laws or 
precepts. For what law of the God-inspired scrip- 
ture, or precept of the holy fathers, encloses and con- 
fines the laity in cities and in countries, and prevents 
these from going to receive ordination from anyone 
willing to orive it ? And how is it that this new 
charge, which has hitherto escaped the notice of many, 
has found such a strict prosecutor in you alone ? It 

^ Ec. iii. 2, 3. - Jer. xvii. 16. 


I. 5. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 35 


is time for the God-loving bishop JuHan of the city 
of the Emesenes also to make the same accusation 
against us in the case of the devout deacon Irenaeus, 
because he registers his fathers' house at Emesa. The 
saintly Dionysius also, who has reached extreme old 
aoe, and is crowned with honourable white hairs, who 
is venerable for the length of his life, will perhaps 
more justly put forth a complaint against us, in the 
case of the religious deacon Anatolius. For in fact 
he too was previously thought to be a citizen of the 
city of the Tarsians. And I am sure that the pur- 
pose which we had as to the magnificent count 
Qicumenius is also not unknown to you. Have I 
therefore up to this day been interfering with all these 
shepherds of metropolitan sees and causing them 
annoyance, and been infected with such greed, and 
been coveting other men's property without it being 
known ? or is it rather, as the truth is, because I have 
given no handle for a lawful charge against me, nor 
caused annoyance to anyone soever ? As to the devout p. 39. 
Leontius, it was not out of need as you think that 
we raised him to the honour of the presbyters' seat, 
but because we wished to honour the man. And this 
is not the first time (I speak with God himself as 
witness), but long before this was in my mind, even 
before your love of God was raised to the high-priest- 
hood. We had in fact made the acquaintance of 
the man and he was known to us by letters, even 
while we were practising the philosophic life in Pales- 
tine. However, I did not even know that the said 


36 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 5. 

Leontius himself is amono- those that are in such 
high esteem with you. Neither had you ever be- 
stowed upon him such laudatory expressions as you 
now do in your letter, nor had we ever learned that 
the stability of the holy church of the Apamenes was 
shaken by him. However, if the man is of such 
a character, and is among your friends and coun- 
sellors as you say, even one letter from your love of 
God is enouofh to win him over : and if he desires 
to live in the city of the Apamenes we will in no way 
prevent him, nor will we detain his devoutness, even 
thouoh it was thougrht that we needed him for some- 
thing. But that we should commit the unholy and 
uncanonical action of driving him out against his will, 
p. 40. and turn the honour into a shame, neither you nor 
any other intelligent man like you will judge to be 
right. If you wished to raise the man to the priest- 
hood as you say, the time past would have suited you 
equally well for this purpose. I consider that the 
grace of ordination receives no difference in similitude 
from the fishing-net, which is thrown into the sea of 
the world or into worldly matter by the Spirit itself: 
and that it is one, though divided among the nets 
of many fishers ; among whom are Peter and James 
and John and Andrew, and all who fed the churches 
after them. All did not catch the same persons, but 
one caught one, and another another : but the grace 
of the fisher was one, because the faith also is one, and 
the church under the whole heaven of those who 
hold the same things is one. That therefore which 


I. 5. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 37 


was done in the case of the devout Leontius is the 
action of the Holy Spirit, not of us. For it " bloweth 
where it Hsteth,"^ as is said by our God and Saviour. 
If therefore you also catch one of the Antiochenes 
in your net, we shall find no fault at all with your 
fishing, but we shall praise the Holy Spirit which 
distributes to each man individually its own grace, and 
does everything in an ineffable manner and as it lists. 
Indeed in this frame of mind we pray that John also, 
the eloquent scholastic, the son of Matronian of 
illustrious memory, and the eloquent and Christ-loving p- 4i- 
scholastic Sergius may be enrolled in the order of 
those who minister to the Lord, and that they may 
adorn the church and be adorned by it and praise 
Christ. This I remember to have told your love of 
God also many times. And it was and is in my mind 
to raise the eloquent scholastics Peter and Maximin 
also to the priestly order ; and I do not know through 
what reasons, known as they are to the wisdom that 
passes understanding, I have not yet been able to 
carry out what I intended. But for this also I am 
waiting for sanction from above, and divine inspiration. 
However I shall not dispute whether they are to be 
drawn in by my hand or yours : but so far am I from 
being jealous of you in respect of the fishing, that I 
will even help you and catch hold of the net with you 
above. Every matter whatever that is not contrary 
to the canons surely urges us to give help and to act 

1 John iii. 8. 


38 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 6. 

in unison with one another. How is it anything but 
shameful that, while those who hunt birds reckon the 
air common property, and fishers, as I have said, the 
sea, we should dispute about things that lie not in our 
power but in God's? However, not to use many 
words and interfere with the moderate length of the 
letter (I think that even what has been written has 
gone beyond a moderate length), if the devout Leon- 
tius acquiesce in your wish as you say, we will consent, 
and will not retain him ao-ainst his will : and this as 
p. 42. a concession to you, and in order to show that, in 
thing's such as these, it is not our endeavour to sub- 
serve to the best of our power human purposes, but 
to walk according to the divine laws only. 


513-8. 


6. Of the same to N'icias the bishop. {^From those dur- 
ing episcopacy, fToni the yd book the lyist /etter.) 

A wicked and unlawful action, one that conflicts with 
the laws of the catholic and apostolic church, has come 
to our ears. We hear that some ot the inhabitants of 
the hamlet of Minidus and Uaris have presumed to sail 
westwards, and to receive an unhallowed ordination 
from those who hold the opinions of Nestorius and cut 
our one Lord and God Jesus Christ into a duality of 
natures after the ineffable union, an ordination which is 
invalid not in one way only but in many, and is reckoned 
as if it had never taken place : since, even if those 
who laid the presumptuous hand upon these men had 


I. 7. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 39 

been orthodox, they ought not to have ordained in 
another parish or rather in one outside their boundary, 
in violation of discipline ; and that while we by the grace p 43. 
of God are not charged with any heresy. This the 
holy canons plainly declare both in intention and in 
words. Therefore let your love of God make the pur- 
port of the sacred canons known to all in the neigh- 
bourhood of their parish, and proclaim them stripped 
of all the honour and rank of the priesthood and dia- 
conate, and prohibit those who are in communion with 
us or rather with the ri^ht faith from associating- with 
these men, that they may not communicate in the 
impiety, and call down upon themselves the wrath 
from God. 


7. Of the same to Castor, bishop of Perga. {^Frovi 513-8. 
those during episcopacy, from the yd book the 
2^2nd letter.) 

The order of devout subdeacons in your see has 
asked a certain petition of us, which does not pass 
beyond the holy canons, but is contained within the 
fathers' landmarks as the sacred scripture says. 
For your sanctity well knows that there is a legal 
commandment in Moses, or rather a commandment 
of Christ who spoke through him, " Thou shalt not 
remove the landmarks that are from of old, which 
thy fathers set up." ^ What this is it is necessary for 

^ De. xix. 14. 


40 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. T 

US to say clearly. Those of the said order of sub- 
p 44- deacons who presented the petition to us say that they 
are greatly contemned and insulted by the readers and 
psaltai or singers of the holy church that is under you, 
inasmuch as they are trying to seize their place by 
violence, and seek to grasp for themselves the first rank, 
contrary to every consideration of justice and the law 
that prevails in the holy churches. Everywhere under 
the sun the order of subdeacons ranks before that of 
readers : both when named in the sacred tablets, and 
in the reception of the divine body and blood of 
Christ : and no one will anywhere see a reader men- 
tioned before a subdeacon by the sacred voice of those 
that proclaim. Therefore your love of God also must 
preserve the same order, and not be so negligent as to 
place discipline second to the covetousness of indi- 
viduals. You, who are a teacher and expounder of the 
divine words, are not unaware that even in the hosts 
that are in heaven there are certain ranks and degrees 
which are ranked before one another, those which are 
hio-h as well as those which are low, those which 
ascend as well as those which descend. For Paul who 
was caught up to the third heaven shows this, when he 
writes to the Colossians and says, " Whether they be 
thrones or dominions, whether they be principalities or 
powers,"^ and by such names shows that there is some 
order which bestows fair adornment " even upon the 
heavenly and invisible spirits, and thence descends to 

^ Col. i. t6. " Misunderstanding of erKoo-^ua. 


I. 8. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 41 


the church also, which was founded by God the Word p- 45- 
who became incarnate and made the thing-s that are seen 
and the things that are not seen, but differs in no way 
in its simiHtude from heaven, by reason of the great 
mystery of rehgion that is every day administered in 
it Wherefore also the same wise Paul in his epistle 
to the Ephesians writes thus about it : " And he himself 
gave : some apostles : and some prophets : and some 
preachers : and some pastors, and teachers :" ^ and in 
another place, "For God" (he says) "set first in his 
church apostles : next prophets : next teachers ; " " and 
all that follow. By all these things we are taught to 
honour order, and to shun disorder and confusion : 
which principle we urge your sanctity also to observe 
in this present matter^ also, which gave occasion for 
this letter. 


8. Of the same to Tifnostratiis the duke} i^Froui those 513-8. 
during episcopacy, from the ^rd book the 2^6th 
258M letter.) 

To me it appears something to be prayed for and 
desirable to communicate with your greatness by 
letter : and to return the greeting that is owed to you 
as if it were some necessary debt, and not make this p. 46- 
the accidental result of causes about which I am even 

1 Eph. iv. II. ■ I Co. xii. 28. ' Ke^aXatov. 

* Cf. Zach. Rh. ix. i (Eng. transl., p. 222 note 2). 


42 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 8. 


ashamed to write. Thoucrh I was orlad to see vour 
magnificence's recent episde, it was in sorrow that I 
ceased the reading of it. For I found the cause or 
subject ^ of the letter to be grievous when tested by the 
divine purpose, and difficuh and impossible and ''after 
the flesh" - to speak in the language of scripture, and one 
that is sensually judged.^ Whereas the divine apostle, 
or rather Christ who speaks in him, limits and restricts 
the gift of ordination under a certain threat, and says, 
" Lay thine hand suddenly on no man. neither be par- 
taker of other men's sins ; keep thyself in purity," * by 
many the thing is considered as one of the ordinary 
trades, that of a smith let us say or a carpenter, or as 
some office that brings with it the gift of sustenance, 
and an occasion of dapane or expense and a relief for 
need ; as if it were not permissible for us to acquire 
the means of life from any other source than this. 
And the good men do not know that a man must pass 
through all the degrees of the church, and obtain some 
kind of previous training for priestly functions, and thus 
be admitted to ordination as presbyter or as deacon : 
and this because the thing is a matter of difficulty and 
rarely to be undertaken in accordance with the pre- 
viously cited statute which says, " Lay a hand suddenly 
P- 47- on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins," 
and yet further enacts, " Keep thyself in purity" ; and 
each of the additions declares the awfulness of the 
statute, and shows that the hand should in some way 

1 vTToQf.cri'i. - 2 Co. i. 17 (?). ^ I Co. ii. 14. ^ I Ti. v. 22, 23. 


I. 8. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 43 

be drawn to the head of those who are ordained under 
great necessity and unwilHngly. In order to explain 
the first reason for which ordination is a formidable 
matter, these few words are enough for us. But I will 
add also a second reason, which is concerned with 
material considerations. This is that our holy church 
is very poor and needy, and that it is so much dis- 
tressed and laden by the weight of interest, that it is 
hardly able even to hold up its head, but debts upon 
debts are added to its account, and interest upon 
interest is piled up against it. Of this all who live in 
the great city of Antiochus are witnesses : and I think 
there are not many even among those beyond its 
bounds who have not heard of the fact. And never- 
theless certain persons in the royal city, and others in 
its neighbourhood, being worried by certain persons. 
do not cease every day so to speak writing to our 
meanness and asking for ordinations ; and they think 
that this is not a matter to excite ano-er. And so 
foolish did this desire make some men, that they even 
made a show of desiring the dress of the priesthood p- 48. 
only, and not seeking further to receive sustenance 
also : and, having once obtained their object, when 
the time of distribution came, they so to speak held 
out their hands before all the others : so that not 
only were those who made a mockery of divine things 
laughed at for the guile and treachery, but we also 
who were fraudulently deceived. These things I 
have been compelled to write to your magnificence, be- 
cause I suffer in myself, and because I know that my 


44 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 9. 

letter is addressed to a Christian, and to one who is cap- 
able of sympathizing with me and is perhaps also able to 
hold out a hand to me who am wearied and stupefied 
like a man who is being strangled by creditors, and 
am compelled to find sustenance for need without 
sufficient incomes and revenues, considering the im- 
moderate extent of a demand that is pious indeed, but 
still difficult to satisfy on account of its frequency. 
The end. 


513-8. 9. Of the same to Stephen, bishop of Tripolis. [From 
those during episcopacy, from the Sth book the 
2'j6th, 277M letter.) 

Sinful and vile man though we are, nothing pleases 
us so much as to try to do everything that we wish to 
p- 49- do with reason. Wherefore also we accept and praise 
your love of God for having been in doubt with regard 
to one of the paragraphs ^ that were written by us : 
regfardinof which we must bv all means make a canonical 
answer ; for it is written, '' The lips of a priest shall 
keep knowledge, and they shall ask for law from his 
mouth." -^ What is the question which you ask because 
you were in doubt } Whether the devout presbyter 
Stephen ought to be reckoned among the holy clergy 
of the holy church in Tripolis, when he does not bring 
with him a dimissory letter from him who ordained him. 

^ Ki(f)uXaiov. ' Mai ii. 7. 


I. 9. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 45 

Now in the first place we hear that the man was or- 
dained by force, and that he recoiled from or objected 
to an ordination outside the bounds, because he cannot 
Hve in a strange city which is not his own. And in 
the second place, even if this which we have stated is 
not the fact, we ought to know that those who do not 
hold to the orthodox faith, and therefore to the pure 
communion of our apostolic throne, have no share in 
strict canonical form, and we ought not to seek a di- ( 
missory letter from these, as if it were something I 
necessary and required by law, or any other canonical j 
requisite, when men flee from association with these, '■ 1 
and come over to the sound teachino^. This we mav 
learn easily and without trouble from the epistle of 
the holy Cyril (every utterance of whom one would 
say is a law of the church) to Nestorius, in which he 
asserted himself to be in communion with all who had P- 50. 
been separated by him, and had received from him 
either a ban of excommunication or a decree of depriva- 
tion, in these w^ords : " But we are all in communion 
with all who have been separated by your devoutness 
and deprived on account of the faith, laymen and 
clergymen." ^ Do therefore the things which have been 
decided by us to be right without any doubt or hesita- 
tion, and know clearly that, if we had not taken much 
account of the saintly memory of Severus the presbyter 
whose is the lot of the saints, we should not perhaps 
have written to you any such thing. For your love of 

^ P.G. Ixxvii. 108. 


46 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. lO. 

God must be assured that it is our earnest endeavour 
and desire not to write anything at all to the God- 
loving bishops under the apostolic throne about ordina- 
tion, or about the enrollino- of individuals in the order 
of the clergy, unless perhaps some just cause some- 
where arise, as we see to be the case in the present 
instance also to which we are now referring. As to 
the venerable cross remaining fixed before the house 
of Theodore the illustrious ofovernor and vindex after 
the former fashion, let your sanctity make it your 
earnest concern that it do so. It is the duty of bishops 
like you to cut short and to restrain any unregulated 
p- 51. movements of the mob, if they should indeed occur, 
and to set themselves to maintain all grood order in the 
cities, and to keep watch over the peaceful manners 
and customs of those who are fed by them. The e7id. 

513-8. 10. Of the same to Eiicharius the bishop. {From those 

cxuring episcopacy, from hook the i^ind, 

1437'^/ /etter.) 

The transactions in the Christ-loving, believing city 
of the Paltians concerning Firminus have come to my 
notice, and I have agreed to them. Otherwise you 
would not have written, as may with most probability 
be inferred. It is however impossible to pass sentence 
upon a guilty man before he has had an opportunity 
of defence, having his accusers also face to face as is 
written.^ Therefore, as form requires, our judgment 

1 Ac. XXV. 16. 


I. II. SELECT LETTERS OF TIIK HOLY SEVERUS. 47 


is that the man who has sinned be sent here, and the 
actual men who are able to convict him, and to confirm 
the transactions regarding him, so that in this way we 
may cause him to be subjected to canonical sentences. 
For it is written, as your love of God who teach others p. 52. 
also knows, " The innocent and righteous thou shalt 
not slay, and thou shalt not acquit the wicked." ^ The 
end. 


I r. Of the same to the archimandrite of the monaste7y 514-8. 
of Bassus. [From those during episcopacy, from 
the 2,1'd book the 345/// letter.) 

The letter of your love of God which has just been 
brought to me I have taken into my hands, and re- 
ceived as yours. For I rejoice and exult when I read 
your name even on the mere outside address, and I am 
brought to a more lively memory of your holy monas- 
tery, and draw away my thoughts from the worry of 
affairs, and in this way am refreshed and comforted. 
But, when the things written met my eye, I was 
astonished, and wondered how it could have come into 
your mind to make a profitless and impossible request. 
The devout Cosmas, who has just died, I instituted 
bishop of the city of the Apamenes, because I trusted 
to the report of others concerning him and their par- 
tiality on his behalf. For I confess to your holiness 

^ Ex. xxiii. 7. 


48 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. II. 


that I never had any confidence in him. Accordingly 
during all the time previous to my coming to this city 
p- 53- of Antiochus it can in no case be shown that I ad- 
dressed a letter to him ; but it was the religious pres- 
byter Theodore who used to write to him. But for 
what reason I would not consent to write to him it is 
not proper to the present time to say. However, as 
I said, I instituted him bishop, thus adding yet another 
to my sins. For what blasphemous utterances he 
vomited forth, and what darts he hurled against heaven 
God who heard knows. In plain language, not to 
make a long story, after many roundabout methods 
and entreaties on my part, and tears unsuited to the 
Holy Spirit, after alleging one reason and another, 
and at last bringing in his bodily infirmity also, he re- 
signed the bishopric. Thenceforward the whole position 
was an insoluble difficulty to us, and full of doubt. For 
it was not only on account of the mistake made in his 
case and the words blasphemously put forward by him 
that there was cause for weeping, but also owing to 
the question in what way the affairs of the Apamenes 
would have to be administered : for in such a state of 
confusion all counsel was helpless. The God-loving 
bishops who in accordance with the statutes of the 
church were residing at that time in the city of the 
Antiochenes, being present, exhorted me to receive 
him as wishing to resign. And, since it was im- 
possible for one church to be united to two men at 
the same time, he drew up petitions of resignation, 
saying of himself that he was no bishop and no clergy- 


I. II. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 49 


man, nor did he hold any other degree in the ministry. 
And, after this had taken place, the God-loving bishop 
Peter was thereupon instituted. How then is it possible 
to undo, as you ask, a thing that was carried out with so 
much caution and without anger? x'\ssuredly, if the trans- 
action which renders Cosmas not a bishop is not main- 
tained, it results that the God-loving Peter was uncan- 
onically instituted, and was given to a church that had 
already received a bishop. Accordingly it is plain that 
the resignation of the often-mentioned Cosmas tends 
to establish the ordination of the God-loving bishop 
Peter. But I for my part am wondering who advised 
your sanctity to ask this. Does anyone intend to 
clothe the dead man in that of which in accordance 
with the ordinances of the Holy Spirit that cannot be 
rejected he voluntarily stripped himself? or does any- 
one wish to mention him as a bishop ? What therefore 
the wisdom of such a request is I am unable to under- 
stand. And what a time was it for a man's resignation 
to be recalled after his decease ! Again, as to the fact 
that I went out to the devout Cosmas after he had 
fallen ill, I wish the sequence of events not to be 
unknown to your sanctity. Some of the zealous 
brethren came up to me and beafoed me to cro to him, p- 55- 
on the orround that he himself was askino- for this. 
But I said, " This cannot be. With a man who is not 
in communion with the holy church, I do not consider 
that I myself have any communion." And, though those 
who made the entreaty persevered, I would not consent : 
and I was so firm that for three whole days they urged 

4 


50 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. II. 


the point, and I did not yield. But at last one of those 
who were with us, the religious deacon father Elijah, 
began to say that perhaps he wished to repent, and to 
receive the oblation from my sinful hands. When this 
was said, I considered that I should bring myself 
under the judgment of God, if I did not on this con- 
sideration consent to the request itself: and in this 
hope I went to visit the afore-mentioned man. How- 
ever, knowing as I did his unyielding character, I 
said to those who were with me : " Believe me when 
I say that I am going out against my will and without 
any confidence." ^ And, when I had gone, I made a 
prayer in the expectation that he would repent : but 
to crive him a orreetino- or to ask a orreetino- from him I 
would not consent, far be it ! For with what reason 
could I have given a greeting of peace to a man who 
refused the mystical peace before the holy altars and 
communion with us ? Woe is me if I give a bodily 
greeting to any man when my soul does not agree to 
the orreetinor. When therefore we had sat down and 
p. 56. none of the things that were expected was said by 
him, but, though he could not articulate, he kept 
urging and inviting us to enter upon a long conversa- 
tion, while 1 for my part considered it a sin for us to 
enter upon a contentious and profitless conversation 
while the man was on the point of giving up the ghost, 
I rose, and prayed to God in private to forgive me the 
inconsiderate visit. To a man who was so disposed I 

' TrXrjf}0(f>npia. 


I. II. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 51 


ought not to have gone out at all. Even when he 
was dead and many thought I should go there, I did 
not go ; considering that " everything that is not of faith 
is sin,''^ according to the words of the Apostle. For I 
for my part consider a man who separated himself with- 
out reason from our orthodox communion an enemy 
not a brother, even if he is deceived by the devil, 
who "is transformed into an angel of light,"- by con- 
siderations that are rather upon the right side. For 1 
hear the Lord say, "He that is not with me is against 
me: and he that gathereth not with me scattereth." ' 
Indeed by the prayers of the saints and of your holi- 
ness, when church histories and the labours of the holy 
fathers from the coming of the great God and our 
Saviour Jesus Christ down to this time come before me, - 

I find that this present condition * of the holy churches 
in the East and in Egypt is purer than the condition ^ p- 57- 
in former times, when the facts are examined side by 
side. They therefore that trouble the simple " shall 
themselves bear the judgment whosoever"^ they are, 
and shall themselves " give account in the day of judg- 
ment," ^ when " he shall come who knoweth the 
hidden things of darkness and revealeth the counsels 
of the hearts."^ As for me, may I have no part with 
such men, either in this world or in that which is to 
come ! For, shunning as I do harshness of speech, I 
do not wish to declare in detail what is the judgment 

^ Ro. xiv. 23. - 2 Cor. xi. 14. ^ Mt. xii. 30. 

^ /caraorao-ts. ° Karaarttcrfts. ^ Ga. V. lo. 

'^ Mt. xii. 36. ^ I Co. iv. 5. 


52 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 12. 

of those who turn aside. Wherefore also I am urgent 
in entreating" every one of those who have been in- 
v^olved in the error not to continue in the plausible 
strangulation of this righteousness, and hold aloof from 
the life-giving communion of the holy mysteries. And 
so forth. The end. 


514-8. I 2. Of the same to Cosnias and Polyeuctus and Zeno 
the presbyters. i^Froni those during episcopacy, 
Jroni the 2)'>'d book the 354/'// letter }j 

Even in the case of thino-s that are acknowledged 
and manifest we are not justified either by the form of 
p- 58. human laws or by the ordinances of the Holy Spirit in 
judging on the statement of one side. Wherefore 
neither did we consent to agree to the things that were 
written by your devoutness ; not because we do not 
believe you, but to preserve the appearance that befits 
those who have been entrusted with the task of judging 
such matters. The right and proper course would 
have been for your love of God to come as far as here : 
and then we would have summoned the other side also to 
come to us, and the truth would have been determined. 
Or, if they remained away and did not come when 
summoned, then the provisions laid down in the laws 
regarding those who remain away would have been 
plain and would have followed upon the act. For 
our own desire is not to leave the matter unheeded 
and unsettled. If the saintly Isidore, bishop of 


I. 13. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 53 


the city of the men of Chalcis, had been present, we 
would have yielded to him the duty of giving judg- 
ment concerning places and persons in his jurisdiction. 
But, as he is absent, it is therefore absolutely necessary 
that we should ourselves, as I have said, lay down a 
just conclusion of the questions that have been stirred. 
The end. 


p- 59- 

13. Of the same to Entrechiiis, bishop of Anazarba. 513-8. 

{F'roni those during episcopacy, from the ^7'd book 
the 39///', 398/// letter.) 

I do not know whether I should lay the blame of 
the events that are happening upon my sins, or upon 
the operation of an evil demon. Though there is 
nothinfj else that I have had so much at heart or for 
which I have prayed so much as rhat every Christian 
should conduct himself blamelessly, but especially those 
who are high-priests, giving no cause for reproach or 
blame against themselves, but being " in everything 
a pattern of good works, in gravity and in holiness," 
as the A^postle says, " in order that he that is of the 
contrary part may be ashamed, having no evil thing to 
say of us, "^ I see that not once only but twice also 1 
am worried about the same matters. Indeed, though 
some of the devout clergymen of the holy church of 
Flavias had presented to us certain accusations upon 

. ■ 1 Tit. ii. 7, 8. 


54 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 1 3. 

certain subjects ^ against their God-loving bishop, and 
we managed the affair ourselves, and brought things 
that else would have been troublesome to a peaceful 
p. 60. typos or conclusion and so settled them, now again old 
men bowed down with age have risen up to make 
more serious charges, men who, if one may so say, 
struggle against life itself, and live in utter poverty and 
need : if one were to call them a pitiable sight, the 
expression would not be amiss. The statements made 
by them are many and various. Still for my part, 
again following the same practice, I wished to stop 
their accusation if it were possible : but, as they went 
on saying the same things, I proposed to commit the 
hearing of the case ^ to your holiness. But, since they 
objected, and said that their life would be no life for 
them, if the religious Procopius their bishop did not come 
here, I have adopted a middle course (I do not think 
that others either will think the coming to us an easy 
thing) and resolved to send the religious Theodosius 
a presbyter of our apostolic see that he may examine 
the facts in conjunction with your love of God, 
and a decision consonant to the canons may be given 
by you, and a conclusion reached upon each of the 
subjects^ with the greatest possible accuracy. But at 
the same time we have resolved to say this much, that 
the said religious bishop Procopius should not, after 
the first warninp-, have received a oift at ordinations 
p. 61. on the pretext of making a profit for the church, as he 


I. 13- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 55 

used to say, and again been detected in the same 
practices, as those who make the accusation against 
him say : nor should he have named Lampetius ' at the 
divine sacrifice, a man who was infected with the 
heresy of Adelphius, and for this reason was con- 
demned at Commanus in Armenia, as the minutes' of 
the records^ of that synod also show. Indeed, to pass 
over old matters, it is easy for your love of God to 
learn what canonical discussion the abominable flock 
of the Adelphians received in Second Cappadocia, 
seeing that the saintly Soteric bishop of the city of the 
men of Caesarea and the holy bishops who sat with 
him, from Cappadocia and from Pontus and from 
Galatia, then put forth a decision worthy of the priest- 
hood against it. Of this same heresy the outward 
token* is greed and immodesty and a mad desire of 
vain glory, owing to which they pride themselves in 
attracting admiration and receivino- in secret the evil 
spirit : and, what is most important, the fact that, in- 
fected as they are with extreme godlessness, and wear- 
ing as they do a deceitful mask of hypocrisy in all 
things, they put forward this deception also, that their 
heresy is not a heresy : for they count up all the p- 62. 
heretics in order and anathematize them, but Adelphius 
they honour by silence. The celebrated freedom from 
passions of which they boast they do not display at 
all : and concerning- matters on which charges are 
made against them they give no satisfaction,* but from 

^ Cf. vit. Sev. p. 28. 1. 24. " Trpafts. ^ VTrofj.vrjiJ.aTa. ■* TrXrjpocfiopLa. 


56 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 1 3. 

matters on which they are not accused they gather the 
reputation of not being godless. It lies therefore with 
your love of God in conjunction with the religious 
Theodosius the presbyter of our apostolic see to see 
that the whole matter is as I have said carefully ex- 
amined, and to make known the result of the examina- 
tion to us also, in order that on all sides the appear- 
ance of the church may be preserved blameless. And 
another thing seems to me to be urgently demanded 
by piety, I mean that these unhappy men be not 
vexed by a long and useless session, who from neces- 
sity, as I believe, have made the accusation ; and that 
they should not support themselves at their own expense, 
but that they should receive double the necessary daily 
sustenance from the holy church of which they are 
members. Another matter too vou must set rig-ht 
without dispute before the trial itself, a thing which 
appeared to me absolutely incredible and still even now 
appears so : I mean that the said men themselves 
should be enrolled in the sacred number of the clergy, 
their names having been expunged, as they say, for this 
reason and no other, because they were able to have 
recourse to the apostolic throne on account of the things 
which they suffered and the wounds that have been 
p. 63. inflicted on them. That this, if it is true, surpassing 
as it does all presumptuous audacity, needs canonical 
punishment. I leave to your love of God to reflect. 
The end. 


I. 14. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 57 


14, Of the same to Antoninus, bishop of Berrhoea. 514-8. 
i^From those during episcopacy, from the \th book 
the 6^th letter.) 

We were Sfla-d to see even the illustrious tribune 
Antiochus inasmuch as he came from you. and we 
encouraoed him to converse constantlv with us, 
and to ask for everything that is in our power, and is 
for the spiritual assistance of your love of God. And 
we praised him to the God-loving" bishop Thomas, and, 
although we are sinful and vile, we repaid him by 
prayers. We have come to believe that the man who 
made the happy mistake in the address of the letters 
did not fall into the error without some divine provi- 
dence. For this showed clearly that the two of us are 
wrapped up in one another, being joined together by 
the love that is in Christ, and that we have all things 
common according to the commandment,^ and have 
nothino- of- our own. Know however that the letter 
which properly belonged to you but was addressed to 
us we have not yet received. As to the ordination at 
Chalcis (I call the truth to bear witness to my words) 
no letter has come to us, or any information or indica- p- ^4- 
tion. But, if you have in a philosophic manner been 
brought to a state of exasperation on account of the 
things that have happened among you, there is no cause 
for wonder : since this also is proper to the orderliness 
of your habits and to your discretion, which allots all 

^ Ac. iv. 32 (?). 


58 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. I4. 


thing-s to the times suited for them. But, since we 
know that your holiness delights in words of admoni- 
tion, and that you are eager to amass all things that 
conduce to the salvation of the soul and the acquisi- 
tion of divine wisdom (for it is written, " The ear that 
heareth the reproof of life shall dwell among the 
wise,"^ and, "He that keepeth reproof loveth his 
soul " ^), we say with boldness the things that seem to 
us to be riofht. You also were not iornorant that those 
who managed Simeon whose soul is at rest (for he did 
not rule himself but was ruled by others) performed no 
sacred or ecclesiastical action except for money or 
under the influence of passion. For, if one may so 
speak, they were not known for virtue to any one of 
all the men who live in the East. To men such as 
•these therefore you should never have lent your unde- 
filed and sacred right hand, when they were making a 
division and presenting men for the sacred order of 
priests, especially when the ordination, performed as 
p. 65. it was just before death, contained in itself a great 
fraud. For how was it possible that a man who in time 
of health never did anything sound in such matters 
should in time of disease be in any but a diseased 
condition for examining the question of propriety ? 
For that he was awake when he gave you permission 
neither do I dispute : I consider your testimony more 
trustworthy than all oaths and every ground of con- 
fidence. Still, since you thirst to hear things that 


' Pr. XV. 31 (Hex.). " Id. xvi. 


0- 


I. 14. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 59 


profit, there is a further point which I will not omit, 
that it would have been a thing in accord and very 
consonant with the devoutness of the rest of your life 
to tremble and hesitate to undertake ordinations that 
belong to others, and by actual deeds to show that it 
is with order and in all fear and only from actual 
necessity that you minister and serve even in those 
that belong to yourself. As to the question whether 
the ordination performed on the said persons ought 
to hold ofood or not, we believe that, after we have 
learned the whole character of the action and of the 
persons, we shall give a decision that agrees with the 
judgments of God, and shall urge that this hold 
oood : not because we do not think the fruit of 
your blameless hand perfect (this is beyond doubt), 
but because we are examining the question whether 
those who received the grace are worthy or not. In 
any case we think your love of God will be contented, 
since you do not even desire to be contented with 
thinofs other than those with which God is contented. 
If our wretched discourses be copied out, we will send P- 66. 
them to you. For we have ordered them to be copied 
out, though we have not in plain fact even a man to 
copy. Before this present letter was closed, the God- 
loving Isidore bishop of the men of Chalcis arrived 
in our city : and this has been added to the things 
written, because we honour the truth before all 
things. And now it will be our endeavour to learn 
from him also what his disposition is with regard to 
the same aforesaid ordination. The end. 


60 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 1 5- 

513-8. 15. Of the same to the same Antonimis, bishop of 
Berrhcea. i^Frovt those during episcopacy , from 
the ^th book the "jifid letter}j 

That the presumptuous deeds of the impious Jews 
are beyond all forgiveness, and such as to stir and 
excite any soul to just wrath, even one that is not 
easily roused, if only it has been initiated in the 
doctrines of piety, is plain and manifest. But that 
those who like you are lovers of God and at the same 
time intelligent persons ought to handle such things in 
a wise way you have already shown in your epistles, 
p. 67. the epistles to us and to the glorious patrician and 
lieutenant of the general of the East excellent in all 
good qualities, your uncle. ^ Hence also we met to- 
gether, and discussed the whole matter in conjunction, 
and endeavoured as far as possible to remove before- 
hand and prevent the evils that were about to spring 
up, and we set down what as the outcome of our 
deliberations appeared to us to be expedient and made 
this known to your sanctity. The indication given by 
their excellencies and by us who discussed the matter 
in common with them is therefore complete : but it 
will be a matter for your consideration to arrano-e the 
action to be taken on a proper footing. No punish- 
ment is severe enough for the arrogance of the Jews : 
but still men who stand at the head of the teachinof of 


1 ^etos. There is nothing in the words to show whether this refers to 
the lieutenant or to the general ; but, as the Mag. Mil. was probably 
Hypatius (i. 40), the uncle of Antoninus would be the lieutenant. 
Cf. p. 125. 


I. l6. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 61 

piety ou^ht not to look at what they ought to suffer, 
but at what we ouoht to refrain from doino-. This I 
say, not in order that we may take no account of the 
divine laws, but that, while singing- with David, " I 
have hated them that hate thee. Lord, and against 
thine enemies have I been wroth," ^ we may also have 
in our mind at the same time the commandment of 
Moses that says, " Fathers shall not die for children, 
neither shall children die for fathers : every man shall 
die in his own sin,"^ and not ^ as is said by one of the 
wise men without, "The thing that so-and-so is so-and- 
so is not." The end. 

].. 68. 

1 6. Of the same to the same Antoninus, bishop of 513-8. 
Berrhcva. {^Froni those during episcopacy, from 
the A^th book the \o\st letter.) 

As for the accusation in the matter of the silence 
after the feast of salvation, which you attack as if it 
had been a violation of justice, I shall be acquitted by 
the experience of fact. For indeed before the charge 
itself was made at all I had already sent a letter to 
your sanctity by John the eloquent scholastic. Never- 
theless you must know that the greeting which is given 
at the festival of the saving Resurrection should always 
begin by a letter from you, as is the established rule 
with regard to the other God-loving bishops also. 
How is it then that, when you had not yet cast the 

^ Ps. cxxxviii. 2 1. - De. xxiv. i6. 

^ This clause is perliaps corrupt : the negative seems superfluous. 


62 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS, I. l6. 


seed, you were thinking- about the things that spring 
from that ? With a clever jest at our poverty or our 
need you said that the devout Mark came to us in 
order to give presents, not in order to receive anything, 
and therefore we thanked your sacred soul in this 
matter also, and readily showed towards him too all 
the duties of love without expense, making the inter- 
course with him to consist of a cheerful face, a serene 
p. 69. aspect, and gentle speech, and repaying the presents 
brought by him with torches and spices. Also on the 
subject^ of the estates that are near the hamlet called 
Beth Remsha but of right belong to your holy church, 
we are exerting all our ability, and will cause measures 
to be taken that will accord with justice and also satisfy 
you. As to the Jews, as soon as I received your 
letter and found a convenient time, I thouo-ht orood to 
prescribe a course to you in a few words. You must 
apply the distinction made by the apostolic laws of 
the wise Paul, who in speaking of matters relating to 
us cries, " Avenge not yourselves, my beloved, but 
give place unto wrath,"' and " 'Mine is vengeance and I 
will repay,' saith the Lord," -^ but in speaking of pre- 
sumptuous deeds against God says, " If a man despise 
Moses' law, he dieth without mercy at the mouth of 
two or three witnesses ; of how much sorer punish- 
ment think ye that he will be worthy who hath 
trampled on the Son of God, and hath counted the 
blood of the covenant whereby he was sanctified a 

1 vTTo^co-ts - Ro. xii. 19. 


I. 17. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 63 

common thing", and hath done des])itc unto the Spirit 
of grace ? " ^ All who took part in the sin should, in 
my opinion, be subjected to a penalty, in order that 
even in future time the action taken may be a lawful 
example to those who dare to do the same things. 
Knowing therefore that this is our mind on this matter, p. 70. 
carry out what ought to be done with the help of God, 
even though hereafter we appear to write something 
that goes farther in the way of concession or is more 
ambiguous, avoiding however the appearance of con- 
tradicting ourselves. This I say on account of certain 
men who show, as they think, philosophy and clemency 
in the case of presumptuous deeds done against Christ. 
But I bring my words back like some ship to the 
prelude"" or beginning" of the letter, and again pray on 
behalf of your love of God with a disposition that is at 
the same time fervent and humble, one that exacts 
from us the debts of love and stirs our coldness to 
spiritual affection. For who is there, even though he 
be a man of no feeling, who would not be put to 
shame by such modest words as are written by you ? 
The end. 

1 7. Of the same to Misael the cJiauiberlain. [Frcwi 513-8. 
those dmnng episcopacy, from the ^th book the 
10377Z' letter.) 

For my part, when I was raised to this bishopric, 
unworthily indeed, but still by the judgment or per- 

^ He. X. 28, 29. " Trpoot'/xtoi'. 


64 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 17. 

mission of God, I intended to manage my affairs in 
p. 71, a spiritual manner, and I had regard to the command- 
ments of the gospel and the apostolic statutes and 
commands. And in the matter of ordinations I 
thought of nothing but the awful text, the cause of 
great fear, that says, " Lay a hand suddenly on no 
man ; neither be partaker of other men's sins ; keep 
thyself in purity : " ^ and as to interest or the avaricious 
system of loans it was my desire not to know even 
the very name of them. For I listened to the singing 
prophet, who at one time says, "He giveth not his 
money upon interest," - and at another time again cries, 
" Interest and guile have not departed from her 
streets,"^ things which, if one may so say, are known 
even to those who are not versed in the sacred writings. 
But, when I had had experience of the distressful state 
of affairs, and had seen in what a pitiable and wretched 
condition the fortunes of our holy church were, and 
that a great load of debts and of interest was hanging 
over it and threatening to overwhelm it, I forgot the 
spiritual laws : and it now seems to me a great thing 
to find men to lend ; and meanwhile I make use of 
the term ' interest ' as if it were some lawful name. 
But, as to ordinations, I no longer stand in awe of the 
strictness of the divine laws, nor will I in future allege 
this in excuse to those who beg or seek to ask for 
these : but, when I see the poverty on all sides, and 
that every year we are obliged to have some kind of 

1 I Ti. V. 22, 23. ^ Ps. xiv. 5. 3 /^. liv. 12. 


I. 17. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 65 

collection in order to distribute among the devout 
clergymen whom we have the money for their support, p. 72. 
I am afraid of the cecononii or stewards on account of 
the scantiness of our resources, and I publish the need 
up and down : though I should have alleged the strict- 
ness of the spiritual commandments. For those who 
worry me about this are very many : and each of them 
looks at his own request only, and does not know how 
many there are who desire to obtain the same things. 
And, as soon as one of them has been disappointed of 
his request or desire, he immediately becomes an 
enemy : there is no middle position. And hence 
springs implacable war : so that I should now, if it 
were possible, revolt even against this vain life itself. 
For all these men do not allow us to choose the good, 
and to carry out with circumspection the things that 
we wish, and content those who like you often give 
such commands in a pious spirit. Hence I have been 
compelled to cause annoyance to the glorious sacellar 
Eleutherius also, who has often thought fit to write to 
me about a certain person, sometimes personally, 
sometimes through those who manage my apokriseis. 
For I see that these presumptuous dogs seek a thing 
of this kind as if it were some quarry : so that, if they 
found a means of beginning, they would bark at me : 
while they do not consider the need that encompasses 
us, nor do they wait for the help of God, who Himself p- iz- 
alone is able to heal our church that is groaning under 
many wounds, and to change need into abundance. 
For it is He who says by the prophet, " Behold ! it is 

5 


66 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 1 8. 

I who bring it healing and cure and I will cure it."^ 
Seeing that you know these things, you who are able 
to share our distress and are in character a lover of 
God, I beg you to offer a defence on our behalf based 
upon the facts themselves to those who are concerning 
themselves about anything of this kind. Especially 
satisfy the aforesaid glorious sacellar the lord Eleu- 
therius, and inform his excellency that what is being 
done is not due to haughtiness, but to necessity, and 
to distress. Out of shame I have never dared to 
communicate with him by letter on this subject : but 
through your mediation I have now made my defence 
to him. Nevertheless I will to the best of my power 
use any convenient opportunity, and will perform as 
far as possible what he has commanded. The ejtd. 


513-8. 1 8. Of the same to Entrechms the bishop. [From 
those du7^ing episcopacy, frovi the ^th book the 
1237"^/ letter?) 

The devout clergymen of the holy church in the 
city of Rhosus and the other inhabitants of it - have 
p. 74. presented a petition to us in which they beg that 
that man may be instituted their bishop by grace 
from above and the ministration of your sanctity, in 
whose favour they shall themselves according to the 
legal custom make a pscphisnia. These were the 

1 Jer. xl. 6. " So B. Correct the text. 


I. 19. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 67 

contents of their petition : but their vote applied to 
one man : and they received from us a notice that 
they were to include three men well-known for virtue 
in the vote, and so present the psephisma to you, and 
hold your judgment in this matter final. This is in 
other ways pleasing to God, and is also the proper 
course. In fact we argued with them and said that 
on no other terms but these would your piety, whose 
endeavour it is in everything to follow after blameless- 
ness as it is written,^ be ready to comply. Wherefore 
also we immediately determined to draw up this letter 
of reminder to you. The end. 


19. Of tJie same to Solon, bishop of Scleucia in Isau7'ia. 514-7. 
[From those during episcopacy, from the ^th book 
the i^gth letter.) 

The constant evil thino-s that are bein^' done in 
close succession and in various ways in Isauria counsel 
us to silence. But still, when we turn over in our p. 75. 
mind the judgments of God, we are again distressed, 
and cannot keep within us the cause of the distress, 
and we are brought round to the necessity of speaking. 
We have been in the same state as Jeremiah, who 
said, " I said, ' I will not name the name of the Lord 
nor speak in his name ' " ; and afterwards he was 
confounded and broke through the restraint that was 

^ I Ti. iii. 2, vi. 11 (?). 


68 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. I9. 

upon his mind, and he changed his mind and said, 
" And it became in my heart as fire burning and 
blazing and flaming in my bones, and I am dissolved 
on all sides and cannot endure."^ What indeed am 
I to do ? Last year I compelled the God-loving 
bishop Paul of Olba to return to the flock which it 
has fallen to his lot to feed ; and now again I see him 
being disturbed in the same way by certain men who 
are not rightly disposed, and in old age and bodily 
weakness visiting now one country now another 
and wanderinof about : and, althouo-h the man 
acquiesces in our counsel, he carries out none of the 
things that we determined to be right. Now the 
things that we so determined are these, points 
which upon their coming a short time ago the party 
of the God-loving bishop Epiphanius and Symbatius 
also promised in common to observe with all their 
might and to their best endeavour, I mean that each 
should remove from the sacred tablets the names of 
p- 76. those who signed the impious deeds of Chalcedon, but, 
as to the others, should remain silent and wait for a 
fitting season for progress to excellence. For there is 
no objection to ascent, as Gregory the Theologian 
also somewhere says.^ But, as the old man, I mean 
the God-loving bishop Paul whom I mentioned before, 
is of a more than ordinarily simple disposition, I do 
not know how it is that you have been frightening 
him like a child with the signatures of documents, and 

1 Jer. XX. 9. '' Or. xix. 7 (?). 


I. 19. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 69 


have thus thrown him again into perturbation, when 
you should have treated each man according- to his 
own condition and character, seeing that satisfactory 
professions have been made in common, and there is 
no doubt about them. So long therefore as the man 
remains of the same mind, receive him readily and 
honour him, on account of his venerable old age. 
Again as to the dispute that he had with the God- 
loving bishop Hilarian about a monastery,^ when we 
heard of it, we should perhaps have given a proper 
solution and decision, had it not been that he flew to the 
royal city, as we have heard, separating himself from 
communion with you, on account of the presumptuous 
and illegral deed of Callistus. For he charges him 
with interpolating or forging or garbling the letter 
that was sent by him'^ (I do not know what expression p- 77- 
to use on account of the many methods of committing g\i 
the crime). For, on comparing the signature of the \ 
letter that was produced with the other signatures of ' 
the aforesaid God-loving bishop Hilarian that are 
preserved here in synodal documents, we found them 
to be as far removed and as different from one 
another as sheep differ in appearance from elephants. 
And, to say nothing of the strictness of the canons, 
it is manifest to everyone that the laws of the Romans 
also, which contain excellent enactments upon these 
matters, fix beheading as the punishment ; ^ and this is 
an offence against public law. We wish therefore that 

1 Cf. p. 27. -^ Cf. p. 18. 3 cj. IX. xxii. 22 (?). 


70 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 20. 

the man who has acted so impiously in this affair 
should for the present abstain from all sacred minis- 
tration : and, as soon as he comes back, we will 
submit the matter to examination ; since even in 
thinors that are thouorht to be acknowledored we like 
examination : and then we will pronounce for the facts 
of which the truth is established, placing before every- 
thing the just judgments of the balance-scales of God, 
p- 78. and trembling lest by sparing others we make our- 
selves liable to these. For we are not io-norant what 
punishments Eli the priest received because, when his 
sons outraged the divine sacrifice, he only reproved 
them as a father and did not as an instructor and a 
ruler punish them according to the law. We have 
heard that the clergymen in the same monastery, while 
under inhibition from the God-loving bishop Paul, made 
light of his inhibition, and took part in the ministration 
with the God-loving bishop Hilarian. Therefore we 
have determined it to be right that they also hold 
aloof for the present from the sacred ministration, until 
he comes and a thorough investigation of the matter 
is held. The end. 

514-8. 20. A letter of siuiiuions in the name of a synod to the 
bishops 2mder the metropolis of Apamea. if^rom 
those dtiring episcopacy , f'om the >\th book the 
\Sjth letter.) 

Having been summoned by the grace of God and 
by the behest of our pious king, we assembled before 


I. 20. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 71 


the evangelical throne of the great Christ-loving' city of 
Antiochus for the purpose of carrying into act what- 
ever seemed good to his ^ serenity's God-loving p. 79- 
sovereignty : and one among those who assembled 
with us was Peter the saintly bishop of the illustrious 
metropolis of the Apamenes ; and, being moved by an 
affectionate disposition," we were induced to ask his 
love of God how it was that not one of you was with 
him, as was in fact the case with the other bishops of 
the resplendent metropolitan cities. But he said that 
he wondered whether it was in iofnorance of what had 
happened that we were putting such a question. He 
was sighing, but still he related how you separated 
yourselves from the common communion of us all (for 
it was not from his),^ and that he left no method of 
invitino- you to concord untried. And, havino- included 
a few of the things that were done as he said in a 
petition, he presented it to the saintly patriarch of the 
God-loving bishops of the East, asking his beatitude 
to take canonical steps against the offences committed 
against him by you, or rather against the common union 
of the holy churches. For we were in fact all met 
together in accordance with fair adornment ^ and 
ecclesiastical order. And, when we had heard the 
petition, the serious character of the things that have 
been done called for a decision suited to the circum- 
stances to be put forth : for the above-mentioned 


1 Syr. "their." '' SidOeo-t^. 

^ Cf. Evag. iii. 34. * Misunderstanding of ewKoo-pa. 


72 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 20. 


God-loving bishop of the metropolis of the Apamenes 
80. made certain of the charges themselves almost stand 
before every man's eyes without needing testimony 
from without. But we, considering that we are 
ministers of peace, and that, as we are one body, it 
is our duty to travel along every path that does not 
tend towards schism, but summons those who have 
fallen away to sin to repent, believed it to be right 
that we should summon you canonically, and should 
urge you to make a defence for the sins that have 
been committed, and should give time for repentance, 
and to say farewell to thoughts that lead to division, 
and with fitness to cry out to you also the words of 
the prophet which say, " Stand upon the ways and see 
and ask for the paths of the Lord that have been from 
everlasting, and see which is the good way and walk 
therein, and ye shall find holiness for your souls." ^ 
For a man to sin is human. But after he has once 
sinned not to listen to the admonition of friends, who 
summon him to them in a manner befitting priests, 
gives occasion for the apostolic distinction that says, 
" Behold therefore the mildness and severity of God, 
on them which fell severity, but on thee the mildness 
of God, if thou continue in mildness : and if not then 
shalt thou also be cut off" " For it is in fact not 
obscure, especially to those to whose lot it has fallen 
to feed churches, that the authority of the holy canons 
cannot remain a dead letter in such things, seeing that 

' Jer. vi. 16. ' Ro. xi. 22. 


I. 21. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 73 


"the catholic and apostolic church requires blameless- 
ness." ^ The end. 

p. 8i. 

2 I . Of the same to the Master of the Offices. {^From 514-8. 
those diuHng episcopacy, from the /\th book the 
189M letter.) 

The illustrious Rufinus, the well-tried servant of 
your high eminence, when he brought to our meanness 
your revered and pious letter, which summoned us to 
the city of the men of Heraclea, was unable to receive 
our mean answer, because he was detained by a 
disease of the eyes ; which answer was a short time 
ago brought to your glory by the resplendent Leontius, 
who is also one of your slaves. But, now that he is 
about to go up to the royal city, in payment of my 
debt I greet your highness. And I report and 
announce to you that the God-loving bishops residing 
in this city thought it a right thing to warn those who 
were bishops in Second Syria, of Epiphania I mean 
and of Arethusa and of Rhaphania, by a letter of 
summons, and summon them to them, in order that 
they might be detached from the disorderliness of 
those who are heads of the monasteries in those parts, 
and have unreasonably broken away from communion 
with us, and that they might either convince the 
others or be willing to yield to what is right. And 
some of those who rejoice in schisms and divisions, p. 82. 

^ Mansi ii. 672. 


74 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 21. 

and have often conspired and plotted against my mean 
self also, and do not escape the knowledge of anyone, 
though they themselves desire to do so, persuaded 
them not only to pay no attention to their summonses, 
but even to compose an insulting and unlawful 
document against the holy synod of God -loving 
bishops, a document that contains blasphemous ex- 
pressions against God and against the dress of the 
priesthood. These things the afore-mentioned saintly 
bishops discussed with the sacred and venerable book 
of the gospels laid before them, as well as the other 
sins committed by them at different times, and they 
found them to be madly excited (?) against the holy 
canons and church discipline and against our pious 
kine, as the transactions in their case in fact show ; 
and they laid them under sentence of deprivation : 
knowing clearly that, if such offences were to be left 
without reproof, the ordinances of the Spirit would be 
trampled upon, and any man who is a hearer would 
rise in opposition to those to whose lot it has fallen to 
be heads of churches : and, as in the case censured by 
the divine Paul, disorder would prevail, and the foot 
would say, " Because I am not the hand I am not of 
the body," and the ear, " Because I am not the eye I 
am not of the body,"^ and each of the limbs would 
renounce its proper place. For there is a canon 
which says thus ; " Bishops who are summoned to a 
synod should not treat the summons with contempt, 

^ I Co. xii. 15, 16. 


I. 22. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 75 


but should go and teach or be taught for the purpose 
of reforming the church and the rest. But, if they 
treat it with contempt, such a man will be bringing 
an accusation against himself, unless perhaps he stay 
away on account of illness." ^ But these gentle persons 
under consideration not only set this statute at naught, 
but also insulted with unlawful expressions the God- 
loving bishops who are assembled in the great city of 
Antiochus which after God is yours. They thought 
fit to call them " no bishops at all," and in unmeasured 
arrogance they uttered yet other fatuous words which 
I shrink even from taking upon my tongue. It rests 
therefore with your excellency not by negligence to 
allow us to be trampled upon by such men, and be 
calumniated by men who are seeking their own 
interests, but to report the truth to the pious Christ- 
loving ears of our pious king, and extend to us sinners, 
who pray for your salvation, the just help that you 
extend to all who suffer wrong. The end. 

p. 84. 
22. Of the same to the fathers. [From those during 516-7. 
episcopacy, from the i\th book the 2^ist letter.) 

Since all the holy fathers, if we may so say, have 
written us many various letters, we considered it 
necessary to write in a common epistle to you what 
we have to say concerning the common state, ^ and to 
stir you all up to one harmonious petition and earnest 


1 Mansi ii. 571. - KaTaorao-t?. 


76 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 22. 


prayer. But the matters which ought to be conveyed 
in writing to your sanctities in particular are these. 
You did not do well or worthily of yourselves in not 
sending the devout deacon Stephen. The proof that 
he was confined to bed, by which you tried to prove 
his infirmity, we as a mean and sinful man will 
perhaps accept : but I have no means of saying 
whether Christ has also accepted it. For he is in 
fact even now still the same who ordered the man who 
was paralyzed and had for the greater part of his life 
been confined to bed to take up his bed and walk. 
However we will say with Paul, "All forsook me." 
And we will readily add, " May it not be laid to their 
charge." ^ But it is a matter for your prayers that the 
other thing also which he says may be granted us, 
"The Lord stood by me and strengthened me." For 
to say the words which follow these is too great a 
thing for me, I mean, "In order that by me the 
preaching might be completed and all the peoples 
might hear."^ But, since we have in fact come to 
P- 85- mention that matter, we will say a few words about 
it also ; since, when writing a common epistle to 
all of you, we forgot it owing to the multitude of 
subjects of discussion. Musonius, the uninstructed 
and presumptuous man, who takes no account of the 
judgments of God, after disturbing and upsetting 
Isauria has orone as we have learned to Alexandria. 
For, being infected with two very serious diseases, 

^ 2 Ti. iv. i6, 17. 


I 22. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 77 

with avarice I mean and with pride, he wished to be 
a legislator for the men of the whole province/ And 
he despised like a carnal man the smallness of his 
city (for to spiritual men the privile^^es of the priest- 
hood are matters that cannot be balanced, and are not 
weighed by the size of the cities, but judged by the 
dignity of the sacred office), and, making the God- 
loving Solon bishop of his metropolis, a man unversed 
in affairs and otherwise peacefully disposed, his ally, 
he caused constant disturbances, requiring from each 
of the bishops Jioniologiai or professions in writing 
concerning principles approved by him. He even \ 
went so far as to draw up a minute ' in which it is 
stated that all the names of those who ministered in f 
any capacity whatever, presbyters and deacons and _^ 
monks and laymen, ought to be expunged from the 
sacred tablets : so that everyone thereupon shrank 
from this burdensome and endless statute, and thence- 
forward they talked to one another and said, " We are p- 86. 
progressing by degrees ; we shall also be required to 
be re-baptized and re-ordained as it is said." And all 
in the province,^ being goaded by this idea as by some 
sting, rose against their bishops, and they upset things 
that had been rightly done before : insomuch as to 
name all who had been left out, and associate in 
communion with those who hold the opposite opinions : 
and, to put it plainly, to go over to the opposite party, 
and drive the bishops out of their own churches. 


78 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 22. 


While these things were going on, the gallant Musonius 
was sitting inside his house ; for, though he is bishop 
of another citv, he registers his fathers' house at 
Olba ; and he resides for the most part either there or 
in the metropolis of the men of Seleucia ; and he only 
creates disturbances and in tyrannical fashion lays 
down heavy and unendurable laws. This man we 
have now already for three years borne with all 
meekness, though we often whispered of his madness, 
and many times we reconciled him when he was 
lightly breaking away and turning backwards. Where- 
fore also, when the bishops were assembled here, the 
same Musonius accused some of them of behaving in 
p. 87. an undiscriminating or unlawful manner. And, when 
these also turned round upon him and accused him in 
their turn of lending his money on interest contrary to 
the canons, he was convicted, and was silenced. And, 
whereas he ought to have repented of this, with great 
shamelessness he proclaimed the sin a virtue, saying 
that his church possessed nothing, and lamenting 
about poverty and need : in consequence of which 
we ourselves assigned to him from here a sum of 
twelve darics a year.^ Having received this he went 
away, after communicating with us and making a 
promise to the bishop of his metropolis to go up also 
to the cities of Isauria that had gone astray, and to 
undertake labour for a good end. And, when he 
reached the province," he again lay hid (?) in his usual 

^ C/. p. 25. '■ i-n-apxia. 


I. 22. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 79 

haunts, and did not stir his foot anywhere, and never 
once opened his presumptuous mouth that has no door 
as the proverb says,^ and is learned only in arousing 
uncanonical contentions. Thinking" this an occasion 
that provided him with a means of amassing base 
gains, he composed a letter to the devout presbyter 
Longinus who is with us, fishing for yet another sum 
of gold, and a contribution of sacred property. And, 
failino- in this, he turned to men in Alexandria who 
are infected with an uncanonical disease like his and a 
madness of no ordinary kind : who themselves re- 
ceived him as a priest, like Micah whose story is p. 
recorded in the Tribes, ""^ him I mean of the hill-country 
of Ephraim : who, having made a molten image out of 
his mother's silver and set this up as a god, found a 
young man, a Levite, and, filling his hand, took this 
man as a priest, saying to him, "Abide with me and 
be unto me a father and a priest, and I will give thee 
ten pieces of silver by the day, and a pair of garments, 
and the necessaries of thy life."^ Whence also we 
believe that both Musonius and those who shall 
receive him or have received him will suffer the 
same end as those who oppose the judgments of the 
Holy Spirit and pervert the right ways of the Lord. 
But, to establish what has been said, we have thought 
good to quote also out of his fatuity some words taken 

1 Pr. xxvi. 28. 

- The Syriac name for Judges, from a confusion of shafte and 
shabte. ^ Judg. xvii. 10. 


80 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 22. 

from his actual letter that he wrote to the religious 
presbyter Longinus, words which prove the passions 
that lurk in him. They are as follows:^ "But you 
remember that I said to you, ' The patriarch ought to 
have sent something to our church as treasures." By 
this means the men themselves also become more 
enthusiastic. In this way Flavian also acted to the 
bishop of Germanicupolis, when he gave both robes 
and treasures'- to the unholy Bisula, and he drew the 
inhabitants of his countrv to 'him.'" And aeain : 
" For, although we do not ourselves know it, we 
ought to take an example from the adversaries, how 
p- 89- they show all energy and watchfulness in making 
presents to those who are in opposition to them and 
endeavouring to bring them over to them by a gift. 
For you are not unaware that nothing persuades 
unlearned persons'' so efTectually as a present and a 
gift." You see how, involved as he is in the passion 
of avarice, he puts forward the specious name of the 
church and the simpleness of unlearned persons,^ 
decorating the passion with mild words as with colours. 
I have also many other letters of his that he wrote to 
me, from which it is clearly apparent how I sought to 
change his haughtiness by mildness, and after many 
toils and labours did no good. And at last, becoming 
weary, I handed him over to the judgments of God, 
because he wrought such disturbance, and gave to 
those who were standinor in the right wav turbid 
upheaval to drink. The end. 

' Cf~ p. 26. - KeifirjXia. ^ iSiwraL. 


I. 23. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 81 


23. Of the same to Solon, bishop of Seleucia in Ismuna. 516-7. 
i^Froni those during episcopacy, f'om the ^th book 
the lyoth letter.) 


Your sanctity has acted rightly and has shown a 
disposition consonant to the divine canons in thinking 
it right to ask me about Musonius and Paul. But, p. go- 
seeing that they have left their own flock, and played 
the part of hirelings and not of shepherds, whatever 
else can one say except that it is necessary that these 
men should be stripped of all priestly authority, and 
that they should be cut off from the number of the 
shepherds ? We know that our Saviour also says 
these words in the Gospel : "He that is an hireling 
and is not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, 
when he hath seen the wolf coming, leaveth the sheep 
and fleeth. And the wolf catcheth the sheep, and 
scattereth them. But the hireling fleeth because he is 
an hireling, and careth not for the sheep." ^ You 
therefore, in order that you may not be found liable to 
the very same punishments, are bound quickly to 
appoint shepherds for the rational sheep : for those 
that are at Meloe immediately and without delay, since, 
as I said, Musonius took to flight like a hirelino-, and 
made this excuse for his absence as you write (and 
we have heard others also who know state the same), 
though the canons do not allow a man to absent him- 

^ John X. 12, 13. 


82 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 23. 

self from his flock on his own authority and without 
the consent of patriarchs or metropolitans : but for 
those at Olba after the winter season has passed, since 
it was for another reason that Paul set out for the 

p- 91- royal city, and it has not yet been made manifest to 
what city or country he went when he returned thence. 
But it is known to everyone that, when the deprivation 
of men who have utterly neglected their own cities is 
lawfully effected and in accordance with the precepts 
of the holy canons, others are appointed in the places 
of those who have been deprived. But, if you resolve 
to ask our pious king about this, I mean whether the 
God-loving bishops in Isauria ought to assemble and 
discuss the matter, and to compose a clear epistle and 
to report to his hearing that the men who have de- 
parted have tied to those who are eager to support their 
schism,^ you will be doing very rightly, and, as far as 
one can guess, not contrary to the intention of his"^ God- 
loving sovereignty. In my judgment this is a necessary 
and very advantageous step, and one which may show 
his - piety that we avoid the rocks on all sides, and 
keep to the royal road and to the unity of the holy 
churches. While writing these things we weep and 
groan, and do not rejoice at our brothers' fall, and we 
consider how, while Musonius was extending his eye- 
brows upwards and puffing out his cheeks, and de- 
voting- his attention onlv to iudgino- others, we were 

p. 92. unaware of the fact that he was feeding his belly, and 

^ Cf. p. 79. ^ Syr. 'their.' 


I. 24. SELECT LETTERS OE THE HOLY SEVERUS. 83 

that he was inflamed with the passion of avarice. We 
have also letters of his which lay bare his passions that 
are so shameful/ As to the question I have thought 
it best to refer to the magnificent Qilcumenius, since I 
have great confidence in your perfection, and because 
you love the man just as we do. Moreover by re- 
ferring the matter to a man who has already discussed 
this with us we shall escape the necessity ,of using 
many words ; for we have no leisure, and we are not 
even able to take recreation owing to the multitude of 
subjects of concern. The cud. 


24. Of the same to Theotecmis the archiatros or chief 514-8. 
■physician. {^F^^oiii those during episcopacy, from 
the Afth book the 2g2)^'d letter.) 

The thino-s that have been indicated or announced 
to us from the royal city are many and various. But 
the sum of them is this. The bishops who assembled 
there have separated without coming to an agreement, 
since the majority of them or, if one may so say, all p- 93- 
except the Romans, were found to be orthodox, but 
were obliged to associate themselves with the state of 
affairs ^ prevailing in the royal city, the saintly bishops 
Eleusinius and Proclus having for the time run away. 
Some said that the object of their endeavours was 
not to accept the impious synod that assembled at 

^ Cf. pp. 25, 80. " KaTacrracri?. 


84 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 24. 

Chalcedon in respect of the definition of faith but " in 
respect of the rejection of Eutyches and of his doc- 
trines."^ But that this endeavour or trick is the action 
of heretics your Christ-loving eloquence also is not 
unaware. But there is yet another thing which it is 
right that you should know : that is that our pious 
kin^ and the o-lorious Master of the Offices wrote to 
my meanness by Leontius the illustrious magistrian ^ 
who is called Tapitoleon to ask that the deprivation of 
those no-bishops and wicked men in Second Syria 
might be annulled. And I wrote in answer to this, 
" Since this is your pleasure, if they lawfully repent, 
the intention of the canons receives them, provided 
all the bishops who deposed them assemble together 
and canonically receive them." It is enough to say 
p- 94 this much as in a letter and in a few words. For I 
forbear to say that a certain defence of the definition of 
the men who assembled at Chalcedon was also con- 
tained in the pious letter : against which again we 
further argued without any harsh speech, advancing 
the words of truth in opposition to the plausible 
pretexts there put together. Regarding the name of 
Nestorius, which has been included among the com- 
memorations of the martyrs in the metropolis of the 
Tarsians, and has rightly scandalized you, we have 
written to the God-loving bishop Dionysius such 
things as are fitting and proper, and our words have 
no doubt come to the knowledge of your God-loving 

' Cf. p. 5- ^ Cf. p. 73- 


1. 25- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 85 


intelligence. The present of a shoe woven of wool I 
have received, and as a sinner I have prayed that a 
reward for it may be given you from above, you who 
do well in mingling spiritual healing with material. 
For the gift is material : but the fact of the affectionate 
thought is spiritual, and therefore a thing that contains 
in it comfort for soul and body. The end. 


P-95- 

25. Of the same to Dionysins, bishop of Tarsus. 513-8. 
iyFroni those during episcopacy, from the \th book 
the 2,^\st letter.^ 


It has come to our ears that a presbyter in the village 
called Pessinus (?) has contracted a human affliction ; and 
that, being harassed by the possession of a demon, he 
is wanderinor about and beingr driven to and fro throuoh 
the land. And we have thought it right to warn your 
holiness to behave in a sympathetic and fatherly 
manner towards the man, but not to sfo on to allow the 
bloodless sacrifice also to be performed by his hands, 
seeing that the canons do not even allow communion 
in the divine mysteries to those that are possessed,^ 
still less do they allow such to have any communion in 
priestly functions. For it may be that through this 
those who approach to receive also will hereby find 
occasion for some stumbling, and will approach the 


* Mansi i. 45. 


86 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 26. 

divine mysteries with doubt and hesitating thoughts. 
But we must be " without offence " towards every man 
in accordance with the apostolic statute/ The end. 

p. 96. 

515-7. 26. Of the same to Solon, bishop of Seleticia in Isauria. 

[From those during episcopacy, from the \th book 

the ^'^Zth letter.) 

Paul the bishop of Olba, as may be inferred from his 
so long and protracted absence, has done the work of 
a hireling and not of a shepherd, one who, when he 
sees the wolf coming, as the sacred book of the gospels 
says, " leaveth the sheep and fleeth : and the wolf 
catcheth and scattereth them ; and he careth not for 
the sheep because he is an hireling and not the 
shepherd,"- Henceforth therefore we also ought no 
longer to wait for a man of such unstable character as 
his (it is right for us to speak in this gentle language), 
but to settle the thinos that lie before us on a Q-ood 
basis, and in accordance with the purpose of the laws 
of the Spirit. The same Paul charged the God -loving 
Hilarian bishop of Diocaesarea with having performed 
an ordination, contrary to the holy canons, in a 
monastery which is not in his jurisdiction ; and we 
thought it right to prohibit those who were ordained 
from exercising the sacred ministry until the details of 
the case" should be examined ;"* for the matter was not 
p. 97 clear but in fact much involved and in need of ex- 


^ I Co. X. 32. - John X. 12, 13. ^ vTTo^ccrts. * Cf. p. 70. 


I. 27. SELECT LETTERS OK THE HOLY SEVERUS. 87 

amination and a correct decision. But now we have 
determined it to be right to release the said men from 
the inhibition and to allow them to exercise the 
ministry, since it is not possible to wait any longer 
for a man who has been absent so unreasonably and 
in a manner unknown to the church ordinances. 
Therefore your sanctity also, in accordance with the 
conclusion at which we have arrived, must now allow 
the men to perform priestly functions, reserving the 
examination into the doubt as to the monastery, and 
as to the ordination itself and those to whom the 
jurisdiction over this belongs for a future season, if 
the time should invite us to this. The end. 


27. Of the same to MiiSiVtUis and A /exajtder wmdiccs 513-6. 
of Anazarba. [From those during episcopacy, 
^roiu the ^th book the j^th letter.) 

It would have been best if you had both come to us 
and also gladdened our eyes by the bodily sight of 
you, and by this sight comforted me more. But, since 
you have public ^ business on your hands, and are 
thereby prevented from so doing, I support the sorrow 
thus caused by feeding on the spiritual sight only, and 
so lighten the loss. Wherefore also, as a token of p- 98. 
undivided affection towards you, I have composed this 
one letter to both of you : in which I make known to 

^ StJfJiOCTLUyi'. 


88 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 27. 

you that the whole synod of the God-loving bishops of 
the East is united in the right doctrines and anathema- 
tizes all the heresies : amono- which are included those 
who divide our one Lord and God Jesus Christ after 
the union into a duality of natures, and the vain con- 
course of those who assembled at Chalcedon, the 
stronghold of this evil heresy, and the impious Tome 
of Leo (if one called him a cleaver of peace, the ex- 
pression would be a fitting one). These things having 
thus passed in order (to speak with the permission of 
God), we have now drawn up a synodal letter addressed 
to the God-loving archbishop of the city of the 
Alexandrines John, inviting him to unanimity and 
pure communion. And we will write epistles in the 
same way to the others also, keeping everywhere to 
■ the royal road, and not turning aside to the right or 
to the left,'^ guided as we are by the great love of Him 
who is the guide and leader along this road. Con- 
cerning the faith and communion with the others, as 
far as it was possible to give information in a letter, 
p. 99- let this much suffice. If we ever meet together, you 
will know everything in greater detail and with greater 
clearness from actual experience. As to Martyrius 
the poet, whom you made the occasion " of the letter, 
I wish you to know that he is a trouble to me, and a 
nuisance. Indeed in the case of the others also who 
follow the same profession, and were enrolled in the 
holy clergy of the church that is with us, I have 


1 Nu. XX. 17. - Marg. ' skin ' ; B, ' whom you sent with the letter.' 


I. 28. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVEKUS. 89 

debarred them from practising- sucii poetry : and I am 
talvino;" much trouble to sever this theatrical pursuit 
from ecclesiastical gravity and modesty, a pursuit that 
is the mother of laxity, and is also capable of causing 
youthful souls to relax and casting them into the mire 
of fornication, and carrying them away to bestial 
passions. But because of his repentance I rejoice 
with him, and because of the fact that he is a lover of 
the orthodox faith : especially since you who are 
careful scrutinizers bear witness in his favour. Let 
him therefore stay where he is, and not desire to 
return to this city. It is not possible for him to do so 
in my judgment : not from anger against him (far be 
it !), but because of the evil pursuit and the desire of 
avoiding the aforesaid injury. The end. 


p. 100. 
28. Of the same to Philoxenus, bishop of Do lie he. 513.8. 
{^Froni those during episcopacy^ from the ^th book 
the 66th letter.) 

After your love of God had departed hence, and had 
left this great Christ-loving city, in the venerated days 
of the holy fast, many of the prominent men came up 
to my meanness, and presented to me a petition and a 
unanimous entreaty on behalf of the devout Romulus, 
asking that he might be allowed to conduct prayers 
without fear of punishment so long as he resides here. 
These were the actual words that they said, wishing to 
dispose me more to the side of mercy. But I said. 


90 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 29. 


"On no account will I permit this, until his bishop" 
(meaning your love of God) "shall free him from his 
inhibition. For we must in all things observe the 
rules and ordinances of the church." I beg you there- 
fore to do me this favour, and pronounce to me by 
letter the words of forgiveness, in order that I also 
may thus lawfully give him permission, and may fulfil 
the will of those who asked ; who are every day, if I 
may so say, worrying me, and entreating me to assent 
to this easy and humane request. The position in 
which we stand I have described in writino- to the 
saintly metropolitan the lord Philoxenus ; and he will 
p. loi. no doubt inform you of it, and will stir you up to offer 
prayers concerning the general state of things.^ 
The end. 

513-8. 29. Of the same to the devout monks of the blessed lo7'd 
Isaac. [From those during episcopacy^ from the 
^th book the gjth letter.) 

The trial concerning the affair of the magnificent 
Antipater has by your prayers passed away : and in 
accordance with the mercv o-ranted us from above we 
have been delivered from this : the mao^istrates havinof 
given this one order only, that the said Antipater shall 
not be permitted to remove anything from the room in 
which he put his baggage, since you are ready to give 
satisfaction - on this point also. But now I am writing 

1 KaTacrrams. '-' TrXrjpocfiopta. 


I. 29. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 91 


to your love of God about a matter which is for the 
common benefit, and tends to the advancement of the 
right faith and the preservation and extension of the 
holy churches of God in the East. The men of the 
camp ^ of Anasartha- by x\\^\r psepkisniata proposed 
various persons in order that a bishop might be or- 
dained for them ; and I for my part determined that 
we would ordain the religious father Stephen, who is 
adorned with character and with faith, and, if one may 
so say, with all excellencies of virtues, bishop for the p. 102. 
aforesaid camp ^ : not because we wish to honour the 
man, for I know that he shrinks from this, having more 
regard for his own profit ; but, just as I paid no atten- 
tion to this but complied with the judgments of God, in 
the same way I beg your holinesses also and him not to 
resist the grace of the Spirit which calls him. For the 
whole force of Christianity tends to this, that we should 
not have regard and respect to our own interests but 
to those of others. ?^Ioreover, it is also utterly un- 
reasonable that, while we are displaying such contests 
on behalf of the orthodox faith, we should entrust the 
presidency of the holy churches to reprobate persons, 
men too who (which I pray may not happen), when 
tribulation or persecution has come, as the holy Gospel 
says,'^ are converted to impiety. Do your diligence 
therefore to obey this letter, and to send him whether 
he wishes or not: and be assuredlv convinced of this. 


^ KOLO-Tpa. - Cf. Mansi vi. 1090; Wright, C.B.M. 756b. 

^ Mt. xiii. 21. 


92 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 30. 


that, if another man, who is reprobate, be instituted 
owing to his delay, you will be responsible for the loss. 
Do not pass him over and wish to send me someone 
else from your holy cloister in his stead : for I will not 
consent even to look at anyone else. I have chosen 
the religious father Stephen as being one of those men- 
p- 103. tioned in the psephisma by those who came from the 
aforesaid camp ^ : and for us to introduce someone else 
not included in the psephisma is impossible. I add 
also that neither have I myself confidence ' in anyone 
else. This much we have written out of love. But, 
althouoh we are a sinner, we have received, as vou also 
with one accord confess, authority from Christ, who is 
God over all, to bind and loose : wherefore I wish you 
to know that, if you do not obey the words written 
above, you will be placed under a ban of excommuni- 
cation ; especially the devout Stephen himself, if he 
dare to resist this proposal. My reason for adding this 
after the completion of the letter is to show that it is 
from necessity that I come to adopt a decisive course 
of action. The end. 

513-7. 30. Of the same to the clergy of the metropolis of 
Apamea. [From those during episcopacy, from 
the ^th book the 135//^ letter.) 

Your love of God, marked out as you are by the 
orders of the holy clergy of the church, and addressing a 

' KilfTToa. - 7rAr;po<^opt'a. 


I. ^O. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 93 


bishop, and upon a spiritual subject/ ought not to have p. 104. 
cited the rhetor of Greece in the preludes ■' or begin- 
nings of your admirable letter. In due time Elijah the 
Tishbite, urged by the same zeal, will now say to you 
also, " Is it because there is not a prophet in Israel that 
ye go to inquire of the fiy-Baal, the abomination of the 
gods of Ekron?"^ Fitly also will the book of Pro- 
verbs reprove you which says, " Drink waters out of 
thy vessels and out of the spring of thy wells." ^ You 
did not make search in order to draw from the divine 
scripture a saying that would prove the swiftness and 
weakness of human life. For the prophet David says, 
" Our days pass away like a shadow." " And the divine 
Job, while playing the philosopher during the grievous 
trial caused by his suffering, said, " For we are of 
yesterday, and we know not":'' and again, " My life 
was swifter than a runner." ' We are not unaware that 
the wise Paul also often quoted the words of poets in 
speaking to certain persons. But the character of the 
hearers, who had not been instructed out of the God- 
inspired words, in itself made the use of testimony from 
these seemly in his case. The divine scripture should 
therefore have been enough for you, and you should 
not have started by making the beginning spurious 
and false. We therefore (for we must now return 
to that which is more useful and more urgent) have p. 105. 
been orieved at the decease of Isaac of relioious 

o o 

^ vTToOca-is. " TrpooL/Jiia. ^ 4 R. i. 3. ** Pr. v. 15. 

^ Ps. cxliii. 4. *"' Job viii. 9. " Id. ix. 25. 


94 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 30. 

memory, your bishop ; and we have been distressed 
because he left the present life before he had main- 
tained a contest on behalf of the doctrines of orthodoxy, 
which he proclaimed in writing and otherwise in this 
great Christ-loving city. However we submit to God, 
the orderer of such deep judgments. But the duty 
that remains for us is this ; not to be negligent and 
leave your holy church without a shepherd during the 
days that are so venerated of the saving Passion and of 
the Resurrection of Christ. Make haste therefore and 
draw up quickly a psephisnia in favour of three men 
of favourable repute and well known for virtue and, as 
it is written, "powerful men and religious, men that 
are just and hate pride." ^ But the powerful man is 
defined by the divine law as the man who through his 
life and conduct has power over the passions of the 
iiesh, and possesses accurate and well-tried faith, which 
is o-reater than everythinp- and is the foundation of our 
salvation. For the man who is to stand at the head oi 
rational souls must have power in him. and is " able to 
comfort by sound teaching and to refute the gain- 
savers,""- as the Apostle, who had Christ speaking in 
him, handed down to us. This besides pleasing God 
will also gladden our pious king, seeing that he is 
p. 106. much concerned for the apostolic faith, and has been 
brought up in such doctrines from his boyhood : who 
also in some sort did not praise our meanness for having 
delayed until to-day to institute shepherds for the cities 

1 Ex. xviii. 21. - Tit. i. 9. 


I. 30. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 95 

that are in need, who shall feed them with under- 
standing. Do not therefore look to worldly authori- \ 
ties, or under the influence of fleshly considerations put / 
forth your vote in favour of certain men who live in a 
worldly atmosphere and need much purification, and 
ought not to be entrusted with the purification of the 
people and to offer the bloodless and rational sacrifice 
on behalf of the faults of whole congregations and as an 
expiation : for I hear that certain men among you dare 
to do such things, thinking to make a mockery of things 
that are divine and not subjects for mockery. Let no 
one think that I shall acquiesce in a vote in favour of 
such men, no not if I be very mad. It does not suit 
me because of the inconsiderate action of certain per- 
sons to "partake in other men's sins," as it is written,^ 
or for no purpose to be sent to the eternal fire. When 
therefore you have duly drawn up a psephisiua in 
accordance with our counsels, or rather according as 
the sacred ordinances and laws provide, let there come 
according to custom devout men, men modest in their 
conduct and earnest in character, such as are fitted 
to approach the apostolic throne and receive its judg- 
ment. 

We learn that, while Isaac of saintly memory was 
breathing his last, certain persons, wishing to hide 
their own faults, by an evil action dared to remove 
from his office the man who was entrusted with the pio7- 
stewardship of the church property, and to put forward 

^ I Ti. V. 22. 


96 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 3 1. 

Others in his place, having unlawfully and contrary to 
custom taken the keys from him.. Accordingly we 
have determined that the man who administered the 
stewardship before shall hold the same charge, and 
those who have now been introduced shall be turned 
out and remain somewhere at a distance, and that they 
shall not participate at all, lest by depriving him for a 
short time of his stewardship we seem to be giving him 
also some just reason for not giving an account for the 
whole of his administration in time past. The end. 


316-8. 31. Of the same a hypomnestikon to the bishops of 
Phcenice. [From those during episcopacy, from the 
^th book the 236M, 2 37//^ letter.) 

How great account I take of the judgments of God 
I cannot explain in words. But, to speak after the 
manner of Paul, I call God to witness ^ that I pass the 
nights without sleep, and never cease being worn away 
by the cares of the days. And I tremble lest I ad- 
minister the business of the apostolic see negligently, 
and have to bear the punishments that my negligence 
p. 108. deserves, and be sent to the torments that are for ever 
and do not pass away. When I consider the divine 
words, spoken beforehand through the prophets, I am 
frightened and quake, and I think I hear God saying, 
" Therefore, shepherds, hear the word of the Lord ; 

1 Ro. i. 9 ; I Th. ii. 5, 10. 


I. 31- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 97 


thus saith the Lord of lords ; ' Behold ! I am against 
the shepherds and will require my sheep at their hands, 
and I will cause them to cease from feeding" my sheep : 
and the shepherds shall not feed them any more, and I 
will deliver my sheep from their mouth and they shall 
not again serve them for food.' " ^ Thinking upon these 
words and such as these, and hearing God saying over 
and over again 'my sheep,' I mingle many tears 
with my thoughts, when I remember the religious 
Epiphanius," who stealthily established himself in the 
Christ-loving metropolis of the Tyrians and stirred up 
many commotions there, when he should have betaken 
himself to this apostolic see and chosen things pleasing 
in the eyes of peace and done them, and so come back 
to the said city in brotherly and fatherly concord and 
agreement. Since therefore this duty has been neg- 
lected by him, and, desiring still even now to correct what 
has been wrongfully done, we have summoned him to 
us, we wish you to know that he is not allowed to per- 
form any ordination until he has come to us and done 
everything required by law, and so yourselves to make p. 109. 
2i psephisnia, as prescribed in the divine canons ; and 
then after that one of those who have been duly selected 
will be chosen, who is able to rule the bishopric blame- 
lessly and in accordance with the judgment of God. 
This also I was desirous of brino-ino- to the knowledge 
of your holinesses, and I charged the religious Thomas 
and Basil deacons of the apostolic see to have in their 

' Eze. xxxiv. 7, 10. 

- Cf. vit. Sev. p. 30, I. 31 ; Evag. iii. 33 ; Mansi viii. 1074 ff. 

7 


98 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 32. 

hands this order in writing, and read it to each of you ; 
that you are not to make 2. pscphisiua in company with 
the said rehgious Epiphanius for the nomination of 
any bishop, unless all things have first been carried 
out " with decency and with order," as Paul commands 
us ^ who consecrated the Gospel among the nations as 
he wrote. '^ We have concluded it to be a superfluous 
task to address each of the God-loving bishops, seeing 
that the urgency of the matter will not brook delay. 
Let no one among you therefore dare to transgress 
against this our warning in writing in any way what- 
ever, knowing that he will incur an accusation of 
presumption and arrogance, and will be laid under 
bans of excommunication. This is in fact the reason 
why we resolved to send the God-loving Thomas and 
p-iio. Basil deacons of the apostolic see, because it is our 
intention and prayer that all things may be carried out 
and performed in order. The end. 


513-8. 32. Of the same to John, bishop of Alexandida the less. 
{F^rom those during episcopacy, from the 6th book 
the \^\th letter.) 

The devout subdeacons of your church have made a 
complaint to the apostolic see, alleging that an old 
custom prevails in the holy church of the Alexandrines, 
which allows their order freedom from the oblie^ition 


'ft.' 


^ I Co. xiv. 40. 2 Qa ji 2. 


I. 32. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 99 


of servirv^- what are called ' weeks ' i in your venerated 
bishop's house.- And we considered the statement in 
no way surprising- if it is absolutely true, since in other 
holy churches also an exactly similar provision exists 
upon this point. .Such matters are generally regulated 
in accordance with the customs of the holy churches, 
and the same model does not prevail in all of them. 
Seeing then that they both allege the custom in 
defence, and procure the things required to satisfy their 
necessities by worldly occupations owing to not receiv- 
ing sustenance, your love of God should acquiesce p. nr. 
in all these thinofs, and not disturb that which is the 
custom by any innovation, unless perhaps some relief 
be given them as a counterpoise to the loss ^ that falls 
upon them. That a man ought not to serve at his 
own charges Paul also who had Christ speaking in 
him enacted : and to this he further added a saying 
that resembles it, I mean that a man who devotes 
himself to the altar should be supported by the altar ; ^ 
and hence he gives the same decision in parallel cases 
also, and teaches that a man who is engaged in any 
work should also receive the means of life out of the 
very same business in which he is engaged. Therefore 
let the injunction also that has been laid upon them be 
removed, and the cells of their poverty opened, and 
the harsh acts that have been done obliterated by 
means of mildness in all things. The cud. 

^ Cf. Mich. Cerul. Ep. 5, 5 (" e/38o/xa/DiW n-ui'Tcov {iTToStaKOvwv "), 
and Ducange, s.v. €/38o/xa8aptos. 

2 €7ri(TK07r€rov. '' fv^/xta. ^ I Co. ix. 7, 13. 


100 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 33. 


613-8. S^. Of the same to Dionysins, bishop of Tarsus. 
i^Froni those dtiring episcopacy, f-oni the 6th book 
the 1 86/// /ettei'.) 

Time has, it seems, brought a new thing, I mean a 
p. 112. mihtary force demanding as if it were part of its pay- 
that ordination be conferred by high-priests upon 
certain persons ; for such is the unreasonable treatment 
which the God-loving bishop of Pompeiupolis has 
informed the apostolic see that he has received ; and 
he says that soldiers with their swords held above his 
head almost threatened to take his head off, unless he 
laid his hand on the head of such-and-such a man. 
This illeoal act therefore must bv all means be 
annulled, and be considered as if it had never been 
done. For it is known to everyone that, where there 
is fear and a threat of death, and anything- akin to 
these, and any of the passions that are created by the 
devil, there the descent of the Holy Spirit is assuredly 
prevented. I forbear to mention that as a result of 
this a very bad precedent will also be laid upon the 
churches, and we shall be required henceforth to 
perform solemn functions after the manner of tyrants, 
unless what has been wrongfully done remains void, as 
is in fact demanded by law. The end. 


I. 34. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 101 


p. 113. 

34. Of the same a letter of siujiiuons to the bishops 514-8. 
tinder Apainea. i^Froni those during episcopacy, 
from the Jth book the iiyth letter?) 

Though we are weak and in deeds fail to keep to the 
way of the fathers, in that we are incHned to sloth and 
neoflioence, vet still as reoards the orthodox faith, in 
accordance with the apostolic command, we prove our- 
selves to see if we are in the faith, and examine our- 
selves to see if Christ is in us : ^ and we know^ that in 
this we are not reprobate through grace from above. 
Whereas it is written in the holy canons of the fathers 
that the God-loving bishops in each administrative 
district ought to assemble together twice a year to 
deal with uro-ent matters that occur,- in due season we 
summon your love of God and urge you to come at 
once to us, and betake yourselves to the apostolic 
throne with the other saintly bishops, respecting 
matters that will assist and further the union of God's 
holy churches ; which is a matter of concern and of 
earnest endeavour both to God himself and to our 
pious Christ-loving king. This we have made known p- "4' 
to you all both individually and generally, and for this 
very same reason we have sent you so-and-so the 
devout reader of our apostolic see. The end. 

' 2 Co. xiii. 5. - ' Mansi ii. 669. 


102 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 35. 


513-8. 35. Of the same to E^tstace the pj-esbyte^'. [From those 
during episcopacy, from the jtli book the 140//7. 
142;/^^ letter.) 

When I had read the letter of your iove of God, I 
was desirous of carrying out what you ask and beg- 
ging Jesus, who is God, to bestow the ordination of a 
deacon upon the devout brother John through my 
sinful and unworthy hand. But I was greatly opposed 
in this and my readiness hindered by the strictness of 
the canons, which do not on any other condition allow 
a man who has been afflicted with the yoke of slavery 
to enter the sacred clergy unless he has received manu- 
mission and removed from him the bond of slavery.^ 
' This principle was in fact observed by Peter who is 
among the saints, the bishop from Iberia, a man who 
in all things acted in accordance with the judgments 
of God. When father Timothy, an inmate of what is 
called the convent of Majuma, had been approved for 
admission to the presbyterate, he wotdd not on any other 
condition allow him to receive ordination, unless those 
p. 115. who were thought to be his masters had first bestowed 
freedom upon him : and then the God-loving presbyter 
father Theodore went with him and had the legal 
forms of manumission carried out in the church called 
that of Anthedon. For the monastery that is being built 
by your religiousness, and by help from God is on the 

' Mansi i. 45. 


I. 36. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 103 

point of being finished, we have sent you a very small 
present : which please receive contentedly : since the holy 
church here, having been laden with many debts by him 
who was ejected, does not allow me to show muni- 
ficence or liberality even in urgent matters. Our 
common Christ-lovino- brother the lord Genesius we 
received with joy, and we offered him all that was in 
our power, seeing he is a man who deserves any trouble 
or effort. The end. 


36. Of the same to Eusebius the deacon at Apaniea. 513-7. 
{From those during episcopacy, from the jth book the 
2\Sth letter.) 

Those who bring you this letter came to us with the 
information that Libanius the devout presbyter, who is 
enrolled in the holy clergy at Apamea, wishes to exact 
interest from them as arising from a loan of his, 
contrary to the intention of the sacred canons. They 
say that they often entreated him to extend to them a 
hand of sympathy, and to be content with the amount p- "6. 
of the principal ^ only, and they gained nothing. Be so 
ofood therefore as to remind this man throuofh the 
religious ceconoini, or stewards, and the devout arch- 
deacon, or chief of the deacons, of the divine laws 
which say, " Thou shalt not exact interest from thy 
brother,""" and "He giveth not his money upon 


^ K€<f>d\aun; - i)e xxiii. 19 {J) ; Ex. xxii. 25 (?). 


104 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVEKUS. 1. 17 . 

interest," ^ and " Interest and guile departed not from 
her Streets," " and things like these. Following- in the 
tracks of these texts, the God-clad instructors ^ of the 
church also forbade interest and usury to those who 
act as priests to God, fixing a fitting punishment and 
penalty for such unjust acquisition/ Put him therefore, 
the aforesaid devout presbyter Libanius, in memory of 
these things, and persuade him to do what beseems him 
and not to do despite either to his own spiritual office, 
or to God's laws. But let him yield to the kinship and 
consanguinity of nature, lest he call down upon himself 
the severity of the canons. For it is better for him to 
follow the divine counsel not of necessity but of his 
own will. The end. 


p. 117. 

513-7. ^^7. Of the same to Simeon, bishop of Chalcis. i^From 

those during episcopacy , from the yth book the 

238M, 2 ^oth letter.) 

The devout monk so-and-so came to us, sadly 
lamenting and saying that he had been separated by 
your love of God and forbidden to live in the monas- 
tery of the holy lord 'Akiba, where he had also been 
educated from the beginning and practised philosophic 
modes of life. What moved you to this was, he said, 
because it was he who told us that the man who is 
chorepiscot)MS and also ^eriodeutes of the village of 

1 Ps. xiv. 5. - Ps. liv. 12. ^ Marzafte = iJiva-raL. ■*,Mansi ii. 676. 


I. 37. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 105 


Thelhadin, who had previously been tried by us at a 
time when the saintly bishops were here, and them- 
selves also joined us in the examination, had treated 
the canonical inhibition with contempt and presumed 
to take part in the sacred ministry. When I learned 
this, I judged it right to send and tell your love of God 
that, as God is witness, 1 did not even know the very 
name of this monk, nor was I acquainted with his 
personal appearance, until I learned it ^ just now, when 
he made the complaint to me ; nor was it he who dis- 
closed a fact that was hidden : for it was already being 
whispered by everyone. Whence those of the house 
of the God-loving bishop Maron also had learned it 
before this came to the knowledge of my vileness, and 
they were distressed in themselves, and did not reveal p- "8* 
it or tell it out : but they concealed the distress and 
kept it to themselves, as the truth is witness. It is 
therefore the duty of your love of God to release the 
man from his inhibition, seeing that it is without cause, 
and he gave no handle for blame against him. For 
the choi'cpiscopits or periodeutes, whom we just now 
mentioned, whether it is openly or secretly that he 
presumes to transgress the law by treating with con- 
tempt the inhibition from us, in the same way and 
without any difference rouses the wrath of God. For, 
though a man escape men's eyes, he cannot escape the 
eye that sees everything. Let such a man hear also 
from the singing prophet, "He that planted the ears, 


^ Masc, i.e. the name. 


106 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 2^. 

doth He not hear? or He that created the eyes, doth 
He not perceive ? " ^ Let this therefore be a matter for 
inquiry, and for your consideration : for our part, bound 
as we are by respect for your venerable age, we com- 
mit everything to you : for I know that, as you have 
undergone a contest on behalf of the orthodox faith, 
and have shown great concern on behalf of accuracy in 
this respect, so you will show similar concern m the 
case of the canons. But for the present please release 
trom his inhibition the devout monk whom we have 
manv times mentioned, who brings vou this letter ; 
since, to say the truth, he has not committed any of 
p- 119- the sins with which you have charged him. As to 
the matters ' that were the cause of the devout deacon 
Stephen coming to you, do your diligence to handle 
them as befits you and is reasonable, in order that 
none of the troubles which have been stirred up may 
remain without healino- and without cure. This will 
bring you no small praise both in the sight ot God 
and in the sight of men. T/ie end. 

513-7. ^8. Of the same to the same Simeon, bishop of Chalcis. 
(^From those during episcopacy, from the Jth hook 
the 26yth, 269/// letter.) 

For my part I had no need of words and of assurance 
bv letter as regards the various matters that have 
happened and been transacted with the tranquillity of 

' P.^. xciii. 9. '" Ke<^dXa'.a. 


I. 38. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 107 

your love of God, since the facts, if one may so 
say, utter a voice and plainly cry this out. But, 
because there is a time to speak, as there is also 
a time to keep silence, according to the saying" of the 
wise Koholeth,^ I now wish to repeat again as in a 
summary - the events that occurred before, and to say 
like the prophet, " I have kept silence, lest I should 
keep silence also for ever ; I have refrained myself 
like a travailing woman." ^ Your holiness probably, I 
think, remembers that all through the summer the 
men from the villao-e called Thelhadin were uroino- us, p- "o. 
and that, though their request was refused by us once 
and twice (I do not hesitate to say even three times 
and many times), so that a chance might be given you 
of settlino- their affair bv some wise method and God- 
pleasing plan, we effected nothing at all, but we were 
more pressingly and more violently urged by them, 
and we were now being abused even by the citizens 
themselves who saw that they were continually com- 
plaining to us and did not receive any answer ; 
and thenceforward we had also to submit to murmurs 
of no ordinary kind. Whence also we exhorted the 
devout presbyter Ignatius, who happened to be here, 
to appease the men by some means and invite them to 
a peaceful frame of mind. At last, not to make a long 
story, we were compelled to resort to such an extreme 
measure as bringing the periodeutes himself here and 
having the details of the case * examined before the 

^ Ec. iii. 7. '"' K€(fid\aLov. ^ Is. xlii. 14. ^ V7r6$€(ri<;. 


108 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 38. 

saintly bishops. How repulsive to the ears the 
counts ^ of the accusations that were examined were 
I forbear to state, seeing that the gravity of these is 
known to those who examined them with us, and 
closed their ears when they were being examined and 
proved. But this I know clearly, that in the middle 
of the examination into these things the same 
periodeutes wanted to run away ; and in the hearing 
p. 121. of everyone and while he was standing up I said to 
him in clear and distinct tones, directing the words 
towards him, "If you dare to depart, you old man, 
before the investigation is ended, you will be ex- 
communicate, and under deprivation." Upon hearing 
this he promised not to run away. And the next day, 
when his presence was required, though he was sitting 
in what is called the psepheion, and had been seen by 
certain men, he would not come : but he formed the 
plan of running away, and departed while in full health, 
thus offending against the reverence due to the apostolic 
see, and against the synod of saintly bishops. The 
saintly bishops Sergius and Marion, who are much 
devoted to your love of God, are trustworthy witnesses 
of these things. These things therefore having thus 
passed in order and been transacted, it is now your 
part, not mine, to say what punishment the man 
deserves who presumed to take part in priestly 
functions and down to yesterday to write letters as 
a chorepiscot>us and to administer the affairs of the 

' K€(f)dX.aLa. 


I. ^S. SELI-:CT LETTERS oF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 109 

district, When a man dares even to lie and swear, 
and to retain a thing in ignorance, and that after he 
has personally received the prohibition, what chance 
of forgiveness or indulgence can he have ? Who is 
there even among men of very peaceful disposition 
whom he is not treating as a fool and rousing to an 
anger that is just and well-pleasing to God ? For for 
a man to be jealous for the divine laws when they are p- 122. 
transgressed is to offer a sacrifice to God, just as the 
opposite course, I mean to be silent on such occasions, 
is to rouse the wrath of Him who laid down such laws. 
And yet we for the sake of your holiness' tranquillity 
remained silent, as we ought not to have done under 
such circumstances : and, when at an earlier time 
those who came from the monastery of the holy lord 
'Akiba were asking us about the same said cho7'episcopus 
or periodeutes, we kept silence out of respect to you, 
because we were ashamed to expose the abominable 
character of the affair, of which even men of no 
distinction were not unaware. Quite recently again, 
when the religious presbyter father Cosmas came to 
us about this same matter, and said that his conscience 
and that of the others was wounded, and that they 
ought not to communicate with a man who had 
trampled upon the strictness of the canons, and had 
reckoned the ban of excommunication as nothing, we 
were compelled to tell them the whole affair, and to 
place the facts proved by examination before their 
eyes and read them to them, fearing as we did the 
prophetic curse which lays under a miserable con- 


110 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 39. 

demnation those who call bitter sweet or darkness 
light.i After this again the letter of your love of God 
came, and we gathered together in our mind all the 
details of the same affair, and we summoned the said 
p. 123. God-loving presbyter Cosmas to us, and we had some 
conversation with him concerning peace and concord ; 
after which we thought it right for the sake of your 
holiness' tranquillity to relieve the above-mentioned 
presbyter from his punishment, and allow him com- 
munion : but only on condition of his remaining quiet 
and not approaching the office of cli07^episcopus or 
pei^iodeiites in any way, because, to speak in the words 
of scripture and in fitting language, some had been 
caused to stumble through him."' But, while I was in 
the middle of writing these things, the company of the 
men of Thelhadin aofain assailed me, buzzinor about 
my ears like bees : and they were again dismissed by 
us with insult and with many contumelies heaped upon 
them. It is therefore the dutv of vour sanctitv to 
appoint such a chorepiscopus and peinodeutes for them 
that God may be praised, and all occasion be cut off 
from those that wish to find occasion. The end. 

513-7. 39. Of the same to the clei-gy and notables of Apamea. 
i^Froni those during episcopacy, from the Jth book 
the 289//^ letter.) 

The name and fact of concord is pleasing even in 
God's sight, for He himself said in the Gospel, " If 

^ Is. V. 20. - Mt. xiii 57. 


1. 39- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. Ill 

two of you shall agree on earth touching any matter 
whatsoever they shall ask, it shall be clone for them 
by my Father which is in heaven " ; ^ and in the statute p- 124. 
of piety also concerning the nomination of bishops it 
is ordained that a deliberate vote upon this must by 
all means be put forward by the common consent of 
the religious clergymen and of the eloquent and 
illustrious notables ; a principle which our pious Christ- 
lovine kinor also ratified." Wherefore we uree you 
again, as we have also already done,^ and that many 
times, to come to a united election of him to whom 
the bishopric of the illustrious metropolis of the 
Apamenes is to be entrusted. When you were 
divided, we, who were not under the influence of 
passion, were obliged ourselves to choose by a judg- 
ment that did not respect persons and to nominate for 
you the devout presbyter Cosmas, a man who was 
reputed to be fitted for this, according to the prevailing- 
opinion ot many respecting him. But, considering 
also the greatness of the thing, he would not consent. 
And therefore I have determined again to urge you, 
as I have said, to a united vote, since those whom 
some of you chose by name did not seem to us to be 
fit men : and to send this letter to vou the religious 
clergymen, and to the eloquent and magnificent 
ktetores and to the men of repute at the same time, in 
order that I may be the first to give you an example 
of concord by not writing to you separatelv. but as to p. 125. 

1 Mt. xviii. 19. 2 Qj I i^. J 7 ^P)^ 3 i 30^ 


112 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 39. 

one church which is the body of the one and only 
and undivided Christ. You will agree, I know well, 
if, free from all prejudice and cavilling- and favour, 
and from other such influences, you will put in your 
psephisnia three men who are in the first place sound 
in the orthodox faith and show this by holding firmly 
to communion with us, and secondly are in character 
free from avarice, and will not approach the high- 
priesthood with unwashen feet, as it is said, but men 
who have been trained, if only to a moderate degree, 
in exercises of virtue, and able to rule, and who 
besides humility possess also a practised intelligence, 
in order that they may rather rule those that are under 
their authority, and not themselves be ruled by them, 
but also be men practised in divine doctrines. For he 
who stands at the head must also be a man " apt to 
teach," and one who in character and speech shows 
himself "a pattern of good works," as the Apostle 
says.^ For we have in fact no other reason for 
using strict language about such things except to 
avoid straying from what is right, and becoming liable 
to endless torment. For it is manifest that, although 
p. 126. we are sinners, yet still in the nomination of bishops 
we in no point fall short of the principles about which 
many concern themselves. The end. 

^ I Ti. iii. 2 ; Tit. ii. 7. 


I. 40. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 113 


40. Of the same to Hypatms the Master of the 515-'8. 
Soldiers.^ [Fro/n those during episcopacy, from 
the jth book the 458///, 465//? letter.) 

Your excellency's exalted letters I for my part 
receive with all affection and pleasure. Though you 
are so exalted and have so much olorv, to which the 
Lord brought you, you encourage even humble men 
like me to inform you of things that are the truth, since 
you place nothing before this. Wherefore I also will 
truthfully inform your highness of the reason for which 
I have now composed this mean letter. It was not 
the devout presbyter Julian only who was accused by 
the holy church of the Tarsians of detaining property 
that belonged of right to it, but many others also with 
him ; and in connexion with such accusations those 
who made the charge and those who were under the 
charge often wished to have recourse to the apostolic 
throne of the city that belongs to the Antiochenes and 
to you. And, since it is my habit not to cause trouble 
to anyone, but as far as possible to remove the com- 
plications arising from affairs, and not to inflict the p. 127, 
burden of heavy expense upon men who are compelled 
to take so long a journey, and at such grievous cost 
to discuss the points on which they are in doubt, 
I determined that all the saintly bishops of First 
Cilicia should sit in conjunction with the eloquent 

(TTpaTqX(Lry)<;. 


114 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. _ I. 40. 

scholastics whom I certauily knew to be of good 
reputation, and who are well reported of both now 
and from their former life in Berytus, and discuss the 
details of the case of each of the persons who are 
said to be devouring church property. I also pro- 
vided that two religious presbyters of the apostolic see^ 
men versed in affairs and of minute experience in such 
matters, should be associated with them in the hearing 
of the said questions, with the book of the revered 
and holy gospels also laid in the midst. And after 
every point had been discussed in due order, and each 
of them had accepted the judgments given (how could 
they do otherwise ?), the devout Julian only, being- 
afflicted with covetousness, dared to treat the verdict ^ 
of the bishops with contempt contrary to the canons 
and the intention of the rightly-enacted laws, and 
to drao- the hearinor before a civil court, in so much 
as to incur indignation and the punishment prescribed 
by the canons. And upon his brother the God- 
128. loving Syrian, bishop of the city of Augusta, using 
many entreaties and promising to induce him to keep 
/ quiet his punishment was remitted, since I am in fact 
naturally inclined to the milder course. Indeed he 
I tried by the use of deception to make the illustrious 
Heliodorus your curator also an accomplice in his plot 
by giving him false information : and upon your high- 
ness obtaining previous information of his proceedings 
all his plan was shattered. And now again, as if 

^ d7ro(^a(ris. 


I. 40. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 115 


dealing with a new matter he has set himself to entreat 
your highness, and to seem to be making a moderate 
request, that he may plead his cause before civil 
magistrates, after the examination and decision of 
the apostolic see and of the whole synod, the reversal 
of a decision of which is not permitted him by any 
authority, either by the holy canons or by the civil 
laws. Therefore by his words which are moderate 
and have a supplicatory appearance he is trying by 
means of his tricks to suppress things which have 
passed in order and been brought to a conclusion in 
this way. And his thoughts are, as one of the pro- 
phets said, "a pondering of iniquity, and his sin is 
hid." ^ For how did he expect to get anything of this 
kind from you who are very just, seeing that everyone 
who has made havoc of the property of the church 
would have imitated his example, and reversed judg- 
ments rightly given, and transferred ecclesiastical 
causes- to a magisterial tribunal, and that after judg- p. 129. 
ment had been given and they had received an ending 
consonant to the laws and to the intention of the 
divine canons ? Therefore I beg and entreat your ex- 
cellency not to give him an opportunity of appealing to 
your friendship, and arming himself against the ordi- 
nances of the holy church, and destroying all discipline, 
of which you both are and ever will be a guardian and 
a protector, so long as you are preserved through 
your whole life. T/ie end. 

^ Ho. xiii. 12. ^ vTroO€(T€L<;. 


116 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 4I. 


513-8. 41. Of the same to Solon the bishop. {Fro7)i those 
during episcopacy^ from the jth book the ^ist, ^2nd 
letter.) 

It is written somewhere in the legal writings that 
the divine Moses, after appointing judges over Israel, 
allowed them to judge unimportant causes (I must 
quote the actual expression of the God - inspired 
utterances) : ^ but a hard matter they were to report to 
him, and from him to receive the solution that God 
"the knower of secrets " (this also I take from another 
scripture) - should reveal and signify to him. You 
also therefore as a giver and teacher of divine laws 
have followed this rule and reported to the apostolic 
see {not to my mean self who scarcely see even what 
p- 130- is before my feet owing to the denseness of my under- 
standing) a matter which seemed to be hard. There- 
fore your love of God must know that Maximus the 
presbyter, who has fallen into the snare of fornication, 
although he has shown fervent repentance, and for a 
period of five years has given himself up to such 
labours, cannot be restored and take his place in the 
sacred office : and it is a simple thing for us to obtain 
a solution of this question without trouble from the 
holy canons themselves. For indeed the God-loving 
bishops who met together at Neocaii-sarea made these 
distinct pronouncements in the ninth canon : " If a 

^ Ex. xviii. 26. -' Su. 42. 


I. 41. SELECT LETTERS OK THE HOLY SEVEKUS. 117 

presbyter be promoted after having previously sinned 
with his body, and confess that he sinned before 
ordination, he shall not offer : but he shall retain the 
rest of his functions on account of his zeal in other 
respects." ' If then a man who before ordination has 
sinned with his body, i.e. has committed fornication 
(for this the Apostle also said, " Every sin is without 
the body, but he that committeth fornication sinneth 
against his own body " ""), is not permitted to offer, but 
to retain the rest of his functions on account of his 
zeal in other respects, how can it be doubted that he 
who has committed this same sin after ordination 
cannot ofter the divine sacrifice, or consecrate the 
water of regeneration, or perform any such function ? p- ^v- 
Let no man say, " What then is the advantage of 
repentance to a man who has committed fornication, 
if he is not after labours of continence to be restored 
to the sacred service ? " Repentance brings about 
forofiveness and bestows communion in the bloodless 
sacrifice for the sake of purification and preservation 
upon those who wash away the sin by tears and the 
other tbrms of bodily mortification : but the service of 
the priesthood is the reward of a blameless character. 
The ninth canon of the three hundred and eio-hteen 
holy fathers also says thus, as you also know, "If men 
have without examination been promoted to be pres- 
byters, and ^ being examined have confessed the sins 
committed by them, and after they have confessed 

1 Mansi ii. 542. - i Co. vi. 18. ^ Gk. y]. 


118 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 4I. 

some men being moved in a manner contrary to the 
canon have laid a hand upon them, such men the 
canon does not accept : for the cathoUc church requires 
blamelessness." ^ I forbear to say that you have 
adopted a very mild policy and one of exceeding 
leniency in the matter of Maximus, because the canon 
did not say anything plainly about a man who commits 
fornication after ordination. You have openly per- 
mitted him (this was stated in your letter) to perform 
evening and morning prayers, and to sit on every 
p. 132. occasion with the presbyters, a thing forbidden in 
the case of a man who has sinned before ordination 
and afterwards confessed ; for this is clearly written 
down in the ninth canon of those who met together 
at Neoc^esarea, which we mentioned a short time ago, 
which says that he should retain the rest of his 
functions on account of his zeal in other respects, 
but should not again go so far as to offer the rational 
sacrifice, and do things like this and of equal honour. 
Therefore, since you have the nature of what ought 
to be done from the canonical utterances themselves, 
do not allow anyone to take refuge in the unknown, 
and in the pretence of searching into the spirit of 
the holy canons. One seeks for the spirit in cases 
where nothing is defined in actual words and phrases. 2 
The end. 

1 Mansi ii. 672. ^ At'tet?. 


1. 42. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 119 


42. Of the same to the fathers. i^J-^rom those diti'-ijig 513-7. 
episcopacy, f'oni the ^th book the 6^th letter. ) 

Of the circumstances in which we are placed I 
notified your holinesses before when I sent the letter 
through the holy monastery at Aphthoria.^ If you 
have received this letter, please let me know this by a 
missive of your own. 

And after other things. But Philip, the devout 
monk from Isauria, who was ordained deacon by me, 
deceived by avaricious thoughts, in truth yielded to p. 133- 
some deceivers and conceived the idea of dioorino- and 
bringing up treasure. And he incurred blame from me 
on this account, and was expelled from the chapel of 
the forty holy martyrs, and was ordered to visit him- 
self with labours of repentance. If therefore he is 
living in the holy monastery of father Romanus of 
holy memory, you are acting rightly in allowing him to 
communicate in the oblation, but excludino- him from 
the deacons' ministry, until he shows fruits of re- 
pentance for a certain period of time. As to him who I 
holds the prelacy of the city of the men of Jerusalem," \ 
no news has reached us personally as to his reconcilia- \ 
tion. But that the man is utterly unstable and weak, \ 
seeing that from the very beginning he has lived such 
a confused and inconstant life, and has thus been 
raised to the position that he now holds, all who know 


^ Near Caisarea in Palestine (vit. Pet. lb. p. 120). - Cy[ p. 129. 


120 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. K 43. 

him are well aware, and I have no need of words on 
this point. I was glad to see the God-loving presbyter 
father Apaphon, as I said before, and I thought the 
man's coming a great blessing, and you may be sure 
that 1 would have bought this at a high price ; and I 
have incurred a debt of thanks to Christ our Saviour 
and God in that I received this pleasure for nothing 
through your saintly prayers. The sum of gold that 
was spent by him upon the well, I mean the sum of 
p. 134- fifty darics, we paid to him out of a certain God-loving 
loan. For, believe me, we have not a niiiia : and this 
is the only way in which we are relieved in poverty : 
while in our other pursuits we distress God and do 
nothing at all that is pleasing to Him. The end. 


613-8. 43. Of the same to the archimandrite of the iJionastery 
of the holy lord Simeon. i^From those during 
episcopacy, from the ^th book the 134//^ letter.) 

Whereas Nonnus even before entering the holy 
Simeon's flock was often summoned to answer the 
charges and accusations that were being brought 
against him and did not obey, but, even when placed 
under an injunction by the God-loving ekklesiekdikoi, 
trampled upon this with similar impudence, like a man 
who had grown accustomed to treat holy things with' 
contempt, and after repairing to me by night once 
only and in secret, as if doing things worthy of night 
and darkness, thought that he had thus done enough 


I. 43. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 121 


to give satisfaction (?), and at last after receiving an 
explicit letter through your religiousness continued in 
the same shameless state, I for my part endured, and 
was not roused to just indignation : but after appoint- p- 135- 
ing him a limit ^ of ten days I allowed him to have this 
doubled. And he behaved exactly as one who had 
not been summoned, alleging only pretexts founded 
upon sins, and answered through your religiousness 
that he asked that clergymen should not be present at 
his trial, because they are clergymen who have been 
injured by him, and from whom he used to receive the 
unhallowed and profane gains. For he did the same 
as those who have stolen or committed adultery, or 
perpetrated a murder, and say that those who have 
been outraged and injured by theft and those who 
have thus suffered by adultery and those who have 
suffered by murder ought not to be present at their 
trial. No wonder if, being guilty of such evil deeds, 
he belches forth such words. What will they say who 
" hate judgment and pervert all right things, and build 
Zion with blood and Jerusalem with iniquity,"'^ as one 
of the prophets somewhere said ? For how can one 
help saying that the hands are full of blood which have 
sold the gifts of the Holy Spirit, which he had no right 
to give to some men, or to take away from those who 
possess them ? For this is the wonderful point about 
his sacrilege, that he used to hide himself as in some 
lurking place, I mean in hypocrisy, while hearing at 

1 Trpo^etr/xia. ^ Mi. iii. 9, 10. 


122 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 43. 


p- 136. every ordination the anathemas and terrific curses that 
I pronounced against such unlawful gains, and to stop 
his ears "like the deaf asp that stoppeth her ears, 
which will not hearken to the voice of the charmer," ^ 
as the singing prophet says. However, that I may 
not by using many words protract the letter unnecess- 
arily, this is the second and third summons that I am 
addressino- to him through your love of God, or, rather 
to Speak more truly, a summons that has the force of 
the tenth and twentieth (for one may justly reckon 
them as equal in number to the days that have passed) ; 
since I wish even if late yet some time or other to 
induce him to make a defence, with the saintly bishops 
present according to the intention of the holy canons, 
and ready to conduct his trial, with the holy Gospels 
laid in the midst, and the terrific threat pronounced by 
them hanging over those who turn aside justice.- But, 
if even after this letter he shall dare to delay, then 
after this the same divine statutes of church discipline 
shall pronounce judgment and the fitting verdict^ upon 
him. For we for our part in no way wished the 
circumstances of his case to remain unknown to the 
glorious notables also in Antiochus' city : but we even 
brought these as far as was possible to their knowledge ; 
and we would have ur^ed them and some of the 

P- ^37- learned rhetors to be judges of the cause,^ had it not 
been that we were hindered by reflecting upon the 
order of the holv canons, which command that ecclesi- 


' Ps. Ivii. 5, 6. ' Lu. xiii. 27 (?). ^ d7ro</>ao-i?. ■• vir60ea-i<i. 


1. 44- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 123 

astical cases shall be tried and decided by saintly 
bishops/ and subject to penalties those who pass over 
these and turn to civil courts.^ And it was for this 
same reason that we sent the religious Eusebius the 
deacon also ; for we cannot consent, after the lapse of 
so many days, to keep the saintly bishops here, when 
they ought to return to their own flock. The end. 


44. Of the same to Eutychian^ governor of Apamea. 514-8. 
{Fro)n those ditring episcopacy, from the %th book 
the igoth letter.) 

When I compare the reports that have recently 
come to my hearing with the words spoken by your 
magnificence when I was leaving the royal city and 
had reached this city of Antiochus, I still even now 
consider these untrustworthy and shrink from setting 
them down in so many words in this letter. I learn 
that, when one of those who have been deprived and p- 138. 
stripped of the high-priestly office was celebrating (as 
he thinks) the unhallowed memory of martyrs and the 
initiatory festival and dedication of a certain house, 
you also went there and took part in a least that thus 
contends against God. In order that you may not 
think that it is from a quarrelsome disposition that we 
have been led to use such hard words, or rather in 
order that you may know that what I have written 


^ Cf. Mansi vii. 361. ^ Si/cao-r-j^pta. 


124 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 44. 

falls short of the real abomination, I will immediately 
quote to you the actual canon and law of the Spirit, 
and you will know clearly that for a man who is in 
servitude to the pious king- and is the ruler of a people 
to do anything of the kind without consideration is not 
a thinor free from dang-er. The canon or law that has 
been mentioned is as follows : — " If any bishop, after 
he has been deprived by a synod, or a presbyter or 
deacon by his bishop, shall presume to perform any 
part of the ministry, be he a bishop according to the 
previously existing custom, or a presbyter or deacon, 
no hope of restoration even in another synod shall 
thenceforward be permitted him, nor shall he be 
permitted an opportunity of defence : but those also 
who communicate with him shall all be expelled from 
p- 139- the church, and especially if they have presumed to 
communicate with the aforesaid persons after they 
have learned the verdict that has been put forth 
against them." ^ Do you think even after reading 
this law that it is about small or contemptible matters 
that we are speaking ; or that we do so out of concern 
for your soul and for your reputation ? ' You must 
therefore abandon this discreditable state of mind, if 
indeed it really is a state of mind at all, and reflect 
upon the purpose of God and of our pious king, and 
of the glorious notables who are earnest upholders of 
the orthodox faith, and not set yourself in hostility to 
the saintly Peter bishop of your metropolis in any- 

^ Mansi ii. 1309. " vTr6\r]^i<;. 


I. 45. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 125 


thing, or rather not conceive any thought that is 
hostile and hateful to God, and to our triumphant, 
serene, Christ-lovinor kincr. The end. 

45. Of the savif to Coiioii the brigand-chaser. [From 513-8. 
those during episcopacy, from the ^th book the 237///- 
letter.) 

Concerning the unholy woman who in an unhallowed 
manner thrust herself into the degree of the diaconate 
I both wrote to your magnificence before, and am now 
aofain writino', thouoh I ascribe the whole affair to an 
evil demon and to my sins, not to you. However, p- 140. 
since much contumely is being poured upon me, and 
for the sake of the blamelessness of ecclesiastical 
order, and to preserve mere holiness itself, the object 
of veneration, I legally placed the hateful and all- 
presumptuous woman under deprivation, stripping her 
of the supposed office ; and she was convicted and 
even herself confessed that she had been married three 
times, her third husband being still alive. Therefore 
you for your part ought not to have recorded against 
yourself a thing that has been once condoned by me : 
but you should have been glad and have known clearly 
that we for our part love you sincerely, and hold you 
in all veneration and respect. In another letter also 
I made known to your greatness that the glorious 
patrician and lieutenant of the Master of the Soldiers ^ 

^ (jTparr]\aTy]<i ; cf. p. 60. 


126 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 46. 

in the East excellent in all good qualities has composed 
a letter to you which has the force of a command, in 
which he gives you leave to support the orthodox and 
the interests of the church with ample freedom and 
liberty. To speak plainly, in order not to make a long 
story, you have abundant warrant for displaying your 
qualities against God's enemies. The end. 

p. 141- 

513 8. 46. Of the same to the clergymen of Antaradzts. i^Froin 

those dziring episcopacy , from the '^th book the 264//^,, 

265/// letter.) 

When I had read your devoutnesses' petitions con- 
cerning the necessity of a shepherd being nominated 
for you,^ in accordance with the precepts of the holy 
canons and the laws of the Spirit, and concerning the 
articles that belong of right to your holy church, but 
are unreasonably and unjustly detained by others, after 
giving due consideration to the whole matter I thought 
it right to refer the whole case - to our serene Christ- 
loving king and his pious ears. For it is from him 
after God that we receive useful and satisfactory assist- 
ance in difficult affairs. Wherefore it is your duty at 
once to insert in a psephisma three men well-known for 
virtue and capable of being entrusted with a rational 
leadership of this kind, in order that we may choose the 
man who stands highest in these respects, and confer 

^ Cf. Mansi viii. 1075. " ^'''"o'^eo't?. 


I. 46. SELECT LETTERS OF TliE HOLY SEVERUS. 127 

ordination upon him ; or rather present him for the 
inspiration of the Spirit : for the choice and judgment 
and bestowal in such matters are from above : since in 
fact "every good bestowal and every perfect gift is 
from above, cominsf down from the Father of liofhts,"^ 
as the sacred scripture somewhere says. Let this be 
both considered and performed in this way, and may it 
be brought to a good end by God ! Whereas the 
devout deacon Stephen has just presented petitions to 
me and informed me that Leontius, who has lived an p. 142. 
unhallowed life, but was improperly admitted to ordina- 
tion as deacon, as if setting himself to act in accordance 
with his former life, contracted a second marriage after 
ordination, and after this was by the bishop's judgment 
struck out of the sacred tablets, and as an indulgence 
was allowed to minister again, but now wishes to retain 
deacon's rank and claims to be made head over the 
others, though he oucrht not to be ranked even amono- 
those that are under a head, how can we neolect the 
intimation that has been given us, and close our ears 
to such audacious deeds on his part ? Even if it is the 
case that, while your holy church was without anyone to 
act as shepherd, the man who then held the post of arch- 
deacon by a presumptuous action enrolled him in the 
order of deacons, this action is already in every way in- 
valid. This man ought therefore to stand entirely out- 
side the ministry, and to feel the sins that he has com- 
mitted, and to concrratulate himself that he does not Q^ain 

1 Ja. i. 1 7. 


128 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 46. 

experience of some canonical punishment ; not go on 
further to desire the headship that it is no way proper 
for him to hold. But the first position in the order 
of religious deacons shall be held by those who are 
summoned from amonof the members of the order. 
For the present this is the conclusion at which we have 
arrived : but, if Leontius thinks that he has any right 
p. 143- founded upon the canons that may help him, let him 
inform the apostolic see of this ; and the fact of the 
accusation will not do him any harm whatever, if he 
have truth on his side. If he was conscious of guilt 
even on one count ^ only of those that were related to 
us, he oucrht, he ouoht indeed to have restricted him- 
self to a modest and humble demeanour, and thought of 
Him who said by Jeremiah the prophet, " ' Hear these 
things, foolish people and without understanding, which 
have eyes and see not, and have ears and hear not ! or 
will ye not fear me,' saith the Lord, 'and will ye not 
tremble at my face, which have placed the sand as a 
bound for the sea, an everlasting decree, and it shall 
not pass it .-^ ' " "■ However for our part we feared for 
his sake owing to the terrible nature of the reports, 
and were unable to remain silent in such circumstances. 
And, since the church ministry "requires blameless- 
ness,"^ we decided that he should cease to exercise this, 
in order that we might not seem even to ourselves by 
acquiescing in the sins that he committed and the deeds 
that he thought good to do, to be by our silence actually 

1 K€<j>d\aiov. 2 Jer. V. 21, 22. 2 Mansi ii. 672. 


I. 47. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 129 


approving' the evil thing, and apply to ourselves the 
words spoken by God to the same prophet, " A 
wonder and a horror has happened upon the earth ; 
the prophets prophesy falsehood, and the priests 
clapped their hands." ^ 

But, since we are always desirous of arriving- at the 
truth, and we know that the maofnificent Christ-lovino 
count John is very desirous of this, we have written to 
his magnificence to examine into the true state of the 
case, and notify our meanness of it. For in everything 
let truth and justice be respected ; while at the same 
time the honour of the holy church is preserved, and 
the ministry has the reverence assigned to it which is 
its by right, especially by those to whom this ministry p. 144- 
has been committed, through the benignance and in- 
effable erace of God. The end. 


47. Of the same to Cassiau bishop of Bostra. [From 513-7. 
those during episcopacy, from the ^th book the 
288///. letter.) 

It is nothing surprising if the prelate of the city of 
the men of Jerusalem,"' being such in his character 
and in his faith as everyone knows him to be, but 
as I for my part loathe even to take upon my lips, | -f^^ 
has done this act also which you have mentioned in 
violation of the holy canons, I mean the act of 
raising to the bishopric a man who was included in 

1 Jer. V. 31. '- Cf. p. 119. 


130 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 48. 

the clergy of your holy church. On the contrary 
one ought to have been surprised if one such as he 
in his faith and in his character had done anything 
canonical and accordino- to regulation. We have told 

o o 

this therefore to those who manage our apokriseis in 
the royal city. 

As to Agapius the devout bishop, we have this 
much to say, that, if the offences committed by him 
are of such a nature, this man must be corrected by 
canonical reproofs : with moderation however on 
account of the difficulty of the time, and because the 
man has now "grown old in evil days," as the sacred 
scripture says,^ and has already come near to being 
reckoned with those that are in Hades. For " God is 
p- M5- faithful, who will not suffer " " those that are not 
rightly disposed towards Him to outrage the sacred 
prelacy for a great length of time, so that through 
them His name should be "blasphemed among the 
nations," as it is written.^ The end. 


513-7. 48. Of tJie same to Pliiloxemis bishop of Hierapolis. 
[From those during episcopacy, from the i oth book 
the 295/// letter.^ 

Hearing the divine writings which say, " Salvation 
cometh by much counsel," ^ I wish yet now again to 
ask your sanctity even about a matter upon which we 
have often already counselled and deliberated. You 

^ Su. 52. "I Co. X. 13. ^ Ro. ii. 24. ■* Pr. xxiv. 6. 


I. 48. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 131 


know that those who received ordination for payment 
and bought for themseIves~fromnFlavian tHe trnfficKer 
in all divine things the grace_of the^Spirit that is not 
to be bought, alleging ignorance of the strictness of 
the holy canons, begged you and the other bishops of 
the other resplendent metropolitan cities that they 
mioht obtain foro-iveness on the orround of ionorance 
of the sin. And, though the same said men further 
brouoht us letters written in lenient terms from one 
and another set of persons, even so they did not obtain 
release from the interdicts. And some of them even 
went up to the royal city, and showed letters of this 
kind to those who conduct our apokriseis and to all p. 146. 
those who are in power and deign to love our mean- 
ness, and caused them all, though certainly in a friendly 
manner,' to charge me with cruelty. For all being 
moved to pity for them granted them forgiveness. 
And, when they returned thence, they did not desist 
from this course of action, since we even after this 
would not incline our ear to their entreaty and 
lamentation : but they went to the holy cloisters of 
the orthodox and moved the chiefs or rulers of the 
solitary and sacred orders to compassion. And they 
also, after weeping for the fall of certain persons, in an 
exactly similar manner and much more earnestly than 
the others, addressed supplications to us in writing 
with the object of procuring for them liberation from 
their evil plight. Being in some sort harassed and 
troubled by all the facts stated, I have taken the 
course of asking your holiness by this letter whether 


132 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


1.49. 


these men ouoht to receive forolv^eness at the feast of 
the Epiphany or if they ought not, let your love of 
God put yourself to a little trouble, and after the 
feast mentioned repair to this great Christ-loving city 
of Antiochus, and assist in a course of lenient mild- 
ness towards men who have sinned from ignorance, a 
course perhaps not wholly inconsistent with canonical 
strictness : for they say that the gift was concealed 
under the name of a present by those gain -hunters, 
and it deceived them. The end. 


p. 147. 
519 20. 4g, 


^ 


Of the same to John and John presbyters and 
archimandrites and the rest. {From those after 
banishment, fron: the 1st booh the 55M, 53?"^^ 
/etter.) 

I am glad and rejoice greatly whenever I write an 
epistle to your holinesses, and, if one may so say, 
fancy myself speaking to )0u as if you were close by 
me. And after other things. For do not think of me 
that my concern for the church of the Alexandrines is 
different from my concern for that of the Antiochenes ; 
I shall not be lying even though I say it is much 
greater. In fact both the party of the learned 
Hippocrates, to whom I referred a short time ago, 
and a very large number of other well-known and 
distinguished men, who have always concerned them- 
selves about their own salvation and about the strict 
observance of the orthodox faith, and those who 
followed these, through the efforts and endeavours 


1.49- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 133 


(to Speak with God's permission) of my wretched 
miserable self joined the catholic and orthodox church 
in Egypt ; men who as you know for a long time had 
not communicated, but were satisfied by the minutes ^ 
of the records ' drawn up by the blessed Dioscorus 
who a short time ago departed to God, of which you v 
no doubt have an ison or copy, and are not ignorant of 
the purport of the things contained in them : since, 
after the sacred old man had received the epistle p- 148. 
written by my meanness, in answer to his synodical 
letter, with hands and feet, as the saying goes, and as 
far as was possible he complied with my advice and 
satisfied those who were separated ; who often wrote to 
me in their letters (although it is in folly that I speak), , 
" It is because we have confidence in your reputation ^ 
that we have communicated." How then can I 
neglect such men ? or how can it be said that I must 
not both "in season and out of season" as the divine 
Apostle says * search even into small matters, and cut 
away every cause of stumbling, and remove the stones 
and cast them out [of] the way that leads . 

or to satisfy so-and-so and so-and-so individually, so 
that all these and men like them were scandalized in 
that a door for vain speaking was being opened to the 
contentious. For neither are this time and that alike, 
nor yet can you on your part avoid doing everything in 
the capacity of my representatives. For, what you do, 

^ 7rpu$i<;. - v-rroiivrjiiaTa, ' {•7roX7;t//is. 2 Ti. iv. 2. 


134 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 49. 


that men will justly reckon to me ; for all, both 
brothers and strangers, both friends and enemies, 
know clearly that I and you are one, as in fact we 
are. Accordingly, if any man owing to his imperfect 

p. 149- intelligence needs to be directed by pilotage, being 
carried about like some ship by troubled thoughts, let 
him be so directed and controlled as not to rouse any 
storm or tempest against the great ships. Let not 
your sanctities think that this is the first time that 
I have been moved to this action. Even while I was 
living in Antiochus' city, I used to hear it said of the 
presbyter father Theodore of saintly memory that, 
when many came to Egypt and asked him whether 
they ought to communicate, he would answer and say 
plainly to them, "If you have been satisfied, communi- 
cate " : and other things that are like this and resemble 
it. And I endured because it was a time of endurance, 
and because none of the bishops in the East heard 
anything of the kind, but the reports were confined to 
yourselves, and did no great harm. For a man who 
is doing anything in accordance with God's purpose 
never halts and hesitates in his action : but he stands 
firm and steadfast, and increases what he has begun, 
like the gift of the talents in the gospels. 

And after other things. As to the devout and 
beloved brother Epimachus, you know how distinct 
the apostolic statute is through which I also was pre- 
vented from laying my hands upon this man, when he 
came to Antiochus' city, in order that he might conduct 

p. 150. my apoki^iseis in the royal among cities, in conjunction 


I. 49. SELECT LETTERS OE THE HOLY SEVERUS. 135 


with the presbyter l^eter of blessed memory, my brother. 
And, being afraid of the strictness of the canon, I re- 
strained my desire : and this though I loved the man, I 
mean the devout Epimachus, not out of human favour, 
but on account of his devout and modest conduct in the 
monastic life, and his venerable age and old-fashioned 
mind. For I saw that the canon of the church every- 
where " requires blamelessness" ;^ and at the same time 
also I was in the habit of proclaiming to everyone in 
Antiochus' city, " No man who has been twice married 
or labours under any disqualification similar [to this] 
can [receive] ordination from me.'' .... 


Therefore take the course of which our Lord shall 
satisfy you." Accordingly it would not have been 
right for us, when the thing has been made public, to 
advance him now to ordination, and let him be a blot 
in our ministry, as the very wise Paul says,-^ us who 
endeavour with God's help to do everything as far as 
we can without cause for blame. For we cannot in fact 
say that the man by his monastic habit and the long \ 
life that he has passed in this is able to mitigate the 
strictness of the canon, seeing that it nowhere in actual 
words makes any such further provision about the twice- 
married, and seeing that " what is rare is not a law of 
the church, " as the Theologian Gregory somewhere p- isi- 
says." The ninth canon of the three hundred and 

^ Mansi ii. 672. '' 2 Co. vi. 3. ^ Or. xxxix. 14. 


136 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 49. 


eighteen holy fathers also plainly says that presbyters 
who have been put forward without examination shall 
be set aside, even though it is after ordination that 
their sin which violates the canon is confessed.^ The 
twice-married have also a certain definite time pro- 
vided in the same canons, during which they are 
excluded from communion,- because these men ought 
to devote themselves to fastings and prayers. Hence 
it is very plain that devout conduct after the second 
marriage is of assistance to them only in the way of 
penitence, and does not besides this also assist them in 
obtaining admission to the clergy. We know also the 
letter written by the saintly archbishop and martyr 
Dioscorus concerning Irenaius the twice-married, and 
the order of Theodosius of truly pious and God-loving 
memory concerning this man.^ These things then 
being so, it rests with you and with those who disputed 
with you to consider whether one can extend the appli- 
cation of the fifty-third canon and compel it to cover 
the case of a man who, having contracted a second 
marriage, is ordained without examination, and to come 
to an agreement with one another on this point and 
settle your dispute and doubt. The canon itself is as 
follows : " If a presbyter be promoted after having 
previously sinned with his body, and confess that he 
p- 152- sinned before ordination, he shall not offer : but he 
shall retain the rest of his functions on account of his 
zeal in other respects. For in the case of other sins 


Mansi, I.e. - Ibid., 563 ; Bas. Ep. 188. 4. ^ Mansi v. 420. 


I. 49. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 137 


many have said that they are remitted by the mere 
fact of the laying on of hands. But, if he do not 
himself confess, and it is not possible for him to be 
manifestly convicted, the discretion shall rest with 
himself."^ Consider therefore whether the devout 
Epimachus also ought to communicate in the prayers 
and other things only. But even this 1 say as an 
indulgence, not as a command. For the principles laid 
down by the canon do not refer to an open and noto- 
rious second marriage, but to other bodily sins that are 
secret. But for your part, since it is upon you that 
the burden of judgment is laid, choose the course that 
seems to you good : my feebleness cannot write about 
this : in fact for my part whatever I have given if I 
have given anything I have given for your sakes as 
the representative of Christ. However it is with much 
sorrow and sighing that I have written this (I speak 
with God as witness), seeing that even to the devout 
Epimachus himself that which is thought an honour is 
beingf turned into a shame, and I too am beino- driven 
by the divine precepts to break out into grievous and 
bitter words. For what we are to say upon the point 
in question is laid down for us as a law by others. 
There is another thing that, as upon brief consideration 
appears to my meanness, would have been just and 
proper, I mean if you had asked me first and taken my 
advice, especially since it is now a kind of beginning of 
our state " of banishment. You are not unaware that in p- i53« 

^ /</,, ii. 542. *• Karao-Tacri?. 


138 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 49. 


' the case of the man of holy memory also, I mean Peter 
the bishop, even when he was not ordaining anyone, 
those who were ordaining took his advice. Timothy 

I too, who bravely endured in the contests of piety, when 
he was at a distance and was living somewhere far 

' away beyond the boundaries, used to regulate all these 

I things by epistle, and they were carried into effect. 

I However you may allege in defence that I was in 
hiding and that you did not even know where I am, 
and that you were in a hurry to satisfy your need, 
which it would not have been certainly possible to do 
when you wanted. Another matter, I confess, was very 
displeasing to me, I mean the fact that certain other 
men also who rejoice in two disciples only, and those 
boys, have presented those who are living with them 
for ordination, so that they are led astray from the very 
fact of livino- with them. For a boy who is admitted 
to an honour which passes his measure exposes himself 
to shame, while he has for the time brought no small 
blame on the community. 

Your remark that the God-loving Isidore the bishop 
ought not on account of the persecution to have again 
laid his hand on those who were ordained deacons by 
me is lukewarm and cold : for these regulations apply 
to deacons enrolled in the churches: and to monasteries 
round about that parish. But to extend this to those 
p. 154. who are in a province ^ beyond the boundaries and are 
united with us in respect of the right faith it is not 


* i-rrap^ia. 


I. 49. SKLECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 139 


a fitting season. In the same fashion also the practice 
of devout women living in their houses being ordained 
deaconesses is very usual and is diffused, if I may so 
say, over the whole world. 

Again the fact that in previous times Palestine also 
was subject to the apostolic see of the city of the 
Antiochenes is in no doubt. However I and the 
God-loving bishop Isidore make up one person, and 
I myself say that his love of God performed the 
ordination on my behalf ; therefore let all question 
and dispute cease. The quality of the person who 
ordained causes no detriment whatever, such that the 
ordination that has been performed should be thought 
to be uncanonical. But you, who are wise in the 
Lord, ought not to have dropped the religious 
presbyter Victor out of your consideration : seeing ^ 
that he would often introduce some useful action 
before the event itself, or that after consenting to 
what you did he was thenceforward ashamed to go 
ao-ainst his own consent ; and seeing ^ that manv find 
it hard to endure neglect. But that he was vour 
friend not only I but everyone is aware. I know, I 
know clearly that it was with judgment that you put 
forward your devout brothers : but the reason that you 
yielded to certain men who were putting forward boys 
was, as it seems, that you might not excite disturbance 
against you. These things I have written to you by 


1 Or " on the ground " : there is perhaps some corruption in this 
sentence. 


140 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 50. 


p. 155. way of admonition, and privately. For indeed I know 
how to admonish such men as you, but to find fault 
with those who are so exalted in virtue I have not 
learned, far less to rebuke them, as you write. I know 
my measure, even though the fact of the office and the 
spiritual honour that has been given me through the 
benignance of God tends to exaltation, a thing that to 
the unintelligent and foolish gives occasion for vanity 
and pride, but in those who do not deceive themselves 
and know that they are sinners implants endurance in 
contests and fear of the judgment, in w^hich we shall 
give account even for honours that are so high, when 
the Judge shall give judgment, as is threatened in the 
prophets, against those that are "clothed in other 
men's apparel." ^ iVot the end. 


519-20. 50. Of the sa)ue to the same John and John prastiyters 
and archimandrites and the rest. i^From those 
after banishment, from the first book the i6th 
letter. ) 

If those who were enlightened in their under- 
standing like you, and for this reason were properly 
called seers, were a cause of peace to others also by 
giving the inner man peace from warring passions, 
and heard from those who approached them the words, 
"Thy coming, seer, is peace,"" what wonder if you 
also by the long - suffering and humility implanted 

' Zeph. i. 8. 2 I R xvi. 4. 


I. 50. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 141 


in you have brought about a serene and peaceful P- 'S^- 
state of affairs ^ in place of the disturbance which had 
arisen ? Wherefore we must also for everything 
praise and laud our God and Saviour Jesus Christ, 
our peace and tranquillity ; who said to His disciples, 
" My peace I give unto you, my peace I leave unto 
you," ■' and ordered them, to whomsoever they went, 
to say, "Peace to this house." ^ Pray therefore that 
we may be men worthy of this peace, in order that 
it may also abide with us and never leave us, now 
that we have once received it, as in fact it wishes, 
provided of course that we do not do anything 
contrary to it. 

As to the religious Epimachus, because you the 
holy old man have, as you write, stretched the sinews 
of your mind and had recourse to the harshness of the 
strict execution of the canons owing to the admonitions 
that we gave,* ought we also to extend this matter 
further with them, and ourselves also to scratch (?) 
in a more violent manner that which has once been 
done, even thouo^h in an inconsiderate manner, and 
make it come to an ulcer and end by being incurable ? 
By no means. But on the contrary, we ought to 
devise some remedy and carry it out, by some kind 
of healing friction and humane refreshment. It does 
not seem that we are running counter to the intention 
of the canons in allowing him to conduct the prayers 
only and so forth, but not to offer the sacred sacrifice. 


KaTacrrarrt?. 


"' John xiv. 27. •' Lu. x. 5. ^ i. 49. 


142 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 1. 50. 


Accordingly let him have both the title and the 
privileges of a presbyter, on account of his long 
continuance in the monastic life, and on account of 
the fact that he thereby as far as possible purihed his 
previous life, and on account of the man's attested 
p- 157- devoutness, and because neither did he himself seek 
to be raised to this position, but was raised against his 
will and submitted to the decision and nomination of 
others. In fact even on the former occasion I did not 
write to you as a lawgiver, but rather as performing 
a service. And I did not do this of my own accord, 
but because some great "necessity is laid upon me," 
as the Apostle says, and because " woe is unto me 
if I do not" serve necessity and so "preach the 
gospel." ^ Indeed, although the burden is heavy, 
yet still " I am entrusted with a stewardship," - and, 
bowed down though I am, I must execute this with 
all fear and trembling. Still it would have been 
unjust that, because you " fear everything through 
devoutness," as it is written," while I submit to the 
necessity of the laws, the man who came to ordination 
against his will as we have said should be injured and 
not receive refreshment. Whence under compulsion 
and as a consequence we have, as is possible, been 
brouoht to these second thouohts, seeino- that we 
too are bowed down by the weight of many sins, 
and stand in need, if any man else besides, of the 
clemency of God. But may you, sacred man, be 

' I Co. ix. 16. " /i>i(i., 17. '^ Pr. xxviii. 14. 


1. 50. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 143 


preserved for us in health and youthful vigour, being 
more powerfully strengthened with spiritual sinews, 
and correcting our paralysis, and putting forth wings 
and being renewed like the eagles.^ and singing 
with the prophet David and saying, " And I will 
go in unto the altar of God, unto God that reneweth 
my youth ! " - : and there offering prayers on our p* '5^- 
behalf. 

As to the holy communion or oblation which is being 
sent to Alypius the poor child (so you often termed j 
him in your letter) I have this much to say : that, if you 
had previously told his father also the very thing which 
you have often said, I mean that he ought not to be 
in doubt as to the existing state of things ^ in the holy 
churches in Alexandria and in Egypt, since it is now 
(to speak with God's permission) free from association 
and communion with heretics, you would perhaps now 
have had the courage to say that the revered and sacred 
communion or oblation must not be sent to him. But, 
since the thing has been thus begun and has become 
known to the adversaries, what necessity is there for 
us to do further harm, and go on to ruin the boy who 
is about as your sanctity says to yield to his grand- 
father ? Let the child therefore be refreshed with the 
usual refreshment from you on account of his believing 
father, and not be neglected on account of his unbe- 
lieving grandfather. For it is written, " The thoughts 
of the righteous are judgments."* And henceforth for 

^ Ps. cii. 5. " Id., xlii. 4, ^ Karao-Tacrts. "* Pr. xii. 5. 


144 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 50. 

the future let us not turn aside to similar thinofs, nor 
give occasion to those who seek occasion, nor in order 
to content one person disturb the whole church. Know 
well that I was loth to write that the believing^ Mitra 
ought to have sent his son to communicate with the 
p- '59- church which by God's grace is clean and pure, the 
church which now looks to our banished self, and does 
not acquiesce in any cunning fraud. For, even though 
it had been right to send the often mentioned holy 
communion to the boy, how can it be anything but 
unreasonable that this boy should live with enemies, 
^, f / who reveal without shame even that which is thought 
to be ineffable ? 

And after othei' things. As to those who like the 
magnificent Anastasius are zealous for piety, and all 
who are settled in the land of the Philistines, who is 
there who is so wrathful and alien to the divine laws 
as to say that the communion or oblation ought not to 
be given them when they ask, to any extent that they 
wish and without stint } Our whole argument with 
you related to those who are residing in Alexandria 
and show doubts that are superfluous and intolerable 
because they inflicted injury on many. Do not there- 
fore omit to give at the due time and to those who 
require it the indestructible grace, which as it is written 
was oiven for nothino-/ and is beino- asked for for 
nothing. You know, even if we do not write it, how 
great punishment ■^ and reproof from God is caused by 

1 Mt. X. 8. - ^77/;lta. 


I. 51. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 145 


neglect to give readily and without any hesitation. 
The end. 

p. 160. 
51. Of the same to Philip the presbyter. {From those 519-38. 
after banishment, from the 2nd book the d^oth 
letter. ) 

I have read the words written by your religiousness, 
not without sorrow, but with sympathy : not like a 
stranger but like a brother : not as one who is above 
law, but as one who is subject to law. Wherefore I 
am writing to you that you may rejoice, not that you 
may be distressed : that you may know yourself, not 
that you may despair. Do not think that what you 
have written needs a refutation of the same lenofth. 
You perhaps made your letter so long from a desire to 
incline the reader to pity and draw attention to your 
purpose : but I listen to the sacred writings rather than 
to you : and in submission to the precise declaration 
of the Spirit I quote to you the ordinance of Koheleth 
which prdains that "there is a time for everything," 
and with the other things says this also, " A time to p. 161. 
weep and a time to laugh, a time to mourn and a time 
to dance." ^ At the proper time, as you say, you con- 
fessed the sins of your youth to the common and holy 
fathers. But to me you made the confession at an 
improper time and after the fitting season ; for I 
acquiesce in your written statement in order that you 

^ Ec. iii. I, 4. 

10 


146 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 5I. 

may know that, as the sacred text somewhere says, it 
is right to obey God under all circumstances/ But 
perhaps you will say that even now you have not 
missed the proper time, seeing that the canons admit 
the confession of gfreat sins even after ordination, and 
exclude those who confess them from the sacred minis- 
try, and allow them to share only the privileges and 
the name of the priesthood.^ Know that I too am not 
unaware of this statute. But what can the effect upon 
me be when the Apostle cries, "The covenant which 
was before confirmed by God the law which was after- 
wards does not annul ?"^ I describe as the covenant 
of God the testimony given by our common teacher 
and father John, the great man of God, when he pre- 
162. sented you for ordination, and I heartily confirm it. It 
seems to me therefore great presumption for me to 
annul the testimony of a father of this character and 
such as he, or to add anything to this and give orders 
that go beyond it. For we all know that that man 
was not a doer of his own will, nor presumptuous in 
actions, but one who, if any other man besides, makes 
the blessing his own which is promised to those who 
"fear everything through devoutness."* Wherefore 
also I assuredly know that after the confession which you 
made of your sins, unless he had received confirmation by 
inspiration from above, he would not have advanced you 
to this rank. Whenever therefore any of the lapses that 
you committed in youth troubles your memory, recall 

1 Ac. V. 29(?), - Mansi ii. 542. ^ Ga. iii. 17. ^ Pr. xxviii. 14. 


I. 51. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 147 

your thoughts to him who gave you the testimony and 
forget yourself, and be " turned into another man,"^ and 
boldly perform the duties proper to the sacred ministry : 
and do not show yourself excessive in devoutness and 
trust yourself to the pronouncements of the thoughts, 
lest you hear the sacred scripture reproving you and 
saying, " Be not righteous overmuch, neither make 
thyself over wise lest thou be astonied." " Whereas 
you are here, there, and everywhere representing p- 163. 
second marriage as a thing that is less serious than the 
greatest sins and yet is excluded from priestly func- 
tions, know that such a conception falls outside the 
range of spiritual interpretation. A second marriage 
was granted by way of indulgence, as a support of 
weakness : and he who has resorted to this of his own 
will and by deliberate judgment has enrolled himself 
among- those that are weak and have been g-ranted an 
indulgence and are in the second order, and are not 
raised to the first sacred rank. It is therefore manifest 
presumption, and contempt of the sacred laws, for a 
man to enrol himself among those that are weak and 
objects of indulgence, and to do this with the law's aid 
and openly, and then strive to rise to the first sacred 
rank, which is composed of those who are sound. But 
a man who has sinned in the times of his youth has 
not fallen under sin because he judged it lawful to sin, 
but has committed an involuntary lapse, insomuch that 
he may be purified by penitence. I do not say this in 

^ I R. X. 6. ^ Ec. vii. 17. 


148 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 52. 


order to show a second marriage to be a sin (far be 
it !) ; it is rather a support for weakness, that does not 
place those who are. married outside the company of 
those who are saved, but assigns them a low rank. 
p. 164. Incline your ear therefore to the divine law, and when 
it bids you perform priestly functions say the words 
•that are written, " Speak, Lord, for thy bondsman 
heareth."^ However, if for the present you shrink 
from offering" the perfect sacrifice, I will allow you to 
abstain for a time, but not to go so far as to bind 
yourself under such an inhibition. But in all other 
functions you shall not be restrained in any way what- 
ever. The end. 

520-25. 52. Of the same to John and John the presbyters and 
the rest. [From those after banishment, from 
the 2nd book the 4.2nd letter.) 

I sent an answer at once to the earlier letter which 
reached me from your sanctity : and, because no ship 
was at hand, the letter was delayed several days : but 
1 expect that you have by this time received it. As 
to the epistle that has just been sent, about the slave 
who was sold by the Jews and the question regarding 
him, I have nothing to write. For a letter was written 
by me about a similar matter to a certain Theodore 
the God - loving bishop of Olba (this is a city in 
Isauria),^ and I have thought well to give an ison or 

^ I R. iii. 9. ^ avaffiopd. ^ ix. 2. 


I. 52. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 149 


copy of it at the end of this letter, so that from it you p- 165. 
may know what our own conclusion was. 

As to clergymen who come from outside, who hold 
the correct faith but are not united in communion with 
us, the answer is plain : i.e., that we must not admit 
these men to the exercise of the ministry : but in all 
other respects, in order to promote sound and correct 
opinions, must hold intercourse with them as with our 
own people and extend goodwill towards them. If we 
do not do this, we shall, unknown to ourselves, be 
circumscribing, so to speak, the right ways of the 
Lord. But, if any man, being a clergyman, wishes 
to hold entirely aloof from communion with those to 
whom he is subject, let him go to the God-loving 
archbishop of the city of the Alexandrines or to the 
banished bishops, and the privileges of communion \ 
will be properly conceded to him by them. For your ..^ 
love of God it is a sufficient answer to these men 
to say that without the bishops you can do nothing, 
and this does not lie in your authority. By this plan 
you will be preserved from irregularity, and they from 
finding any occasion of stumbling or of offence. 

As to those in Isauria and in First Cilicia, an 
epistle that has just been sent to us is very gloomy : 
and, not to say anything harsh, it accuses those of _2^^ \ 
First Cilicia of remissness, and it announces a grievous ^ 

persecution and expulsion of the orthodox in Isauria, p. 166. 
as well of the devout monks, as of the clergymen 
and of those who are among the believing people, not 
to speak of what has happened in consequence, that 


150 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 52. 

all have abandoned communion with Stephen the 
disturber, the present prelate, and are not unaware 
of his treachery and falseness and the evil habits 
ingrained in him. The wretched man has even 
presumed to send some of the clergymen who have 
been corrupted by him here also to the saintly I saurian 
/ bishops in banishment, as if summoning them to him, 
I and heaping vanities upon vanities, as is written,^ and 

^-^ " beating the air" in vain, as the Apostle says.^ How- 
ever these impious men do not cease from making con- 
fusion, and from audaciously attempting to no purpose 
even things that are impossible, and from polluting 
the water for drinkinor with their feet, in order to eive 
those who are not cautious turbid pollution to drink 
according to the prophetic saying.^ Isidore the 
illustrious tribune has started in peace for Pelusium, 
after promising the devout presbyter Thomas to do 
all things in accordance with God's pleasure. He 
had also after the conversation held here written to 
the devout presbyter Epimachus to tell his religious- 
ness to go in the direction of Pelusium. In order 
therefore that you may not be ignorant of what has 
happened, this also has been added in this letter. 

Console and comfort with loving disposition the 

God-loving Isidore bishop of the city of the men of 

p. 167. Chalcis, who is troubled with a bodily infirmity, or 

rather who is being better proved in the furnace of 

trials ; and reckon it all as a gift to me : though 

^ Ec. i. 3 (?). ^ I Co. ix. 26. ^ Eze. xxxiv. 18, 19. 


I S3- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 151 


I know that I am acting superfluously in this, since 
ready help and zealous attention in these matters 
are innate in you and belong to your character. For 
you must believe that I was much distressed when I 
learned that he had been again seized with the same 
kind of infirmity. T/ie end, 

53. Of the same to the bishops from Syria in 519-20. 
Alexandria. {^From those after banishment, from 
the 2nd book the 6i\.th tetter.) 

To the saintly God-loving brothers and fellow- \ 
ministers, the bishops who are under the apostolic 
see of the city of the Antiochenes, and are now settled 
in the great Christ-loving city of the Alexandrines, 
Cassian, Constantine, Antoninus, and the rest, Severus 
greeting in the Lord. 

Though I am with your love of God in the spirit, 
I should have wished to be present in the flesh also, 
or, while absent in the body, to communicate with you 
more constantly through this remaining source of 
comfort, I mean by means of letters, concerning the 
hope laid down beforehand for those who have 
believed in Christ. But, since, when men are living p. i68, 
without fear, every time is convenient to them for 
sending letters, but, when they are under constraint 
or imprisoned, it does not lie in their power to do this, 
even against their will they check and silence the 
ardour of affection : but when need demands they 
then cut the fetters of constraint, and do not submit 


152 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 53. 


to the ropes that fall to them among the strong, 
to speak in the words of the Psalmist/ but move 
their tongue, and serve the divine law. For this 
reason Paul used to say that he " endured evil things as 
an evildoer even to bonds for the Gospel's sake," but 
that " the word of God was not bound."" Therefore 
I also the mean one look to that pattern and say, and 
that very justly, "Though I flee for Christ's sake, yet 
His word has not tied ; for it is present in every place 
where the law of the Spirit wishes to carry it." There- 
fore I salute you, and embrace you, the sharers of my 
flight, whose feet are beautiful, who do not preach,^ 
but by accepting persecution as the law requires walk 
aright and follow Him who said, " When they perse- 
cute you in this city flee to another " ; ^ or perhaps 
it is better to say that by the very fact of being 
persecuted you loudly proclaim the gospel, and by 
the fact of being silent speak. Therefore, since you 
have been brought to such honour, Christ who is 
persecuted with you is present with you also, and He 
is a chief and leader for you in purpose and in 
p. 169, commands. Those who were removed to the land 
of Babylon, and endeavoured there also to live in 
accordance with the law, and were bereft of the 
sacred fane and the service, and did not even sing 
a song, because it was not lawful to do any of these 
things outside the tabernacle or outside the sanctuary ,5 


^ Ps. XV. 6. - 2 Ti. ii. 9. ^ Is. Hi. 7. * Mt. x. 23. 

^ Ps. cxxxvi. 2-4. 


I. 53. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 153 


but Still set themselves to live in accordance with their 
fathers' customs and to pronounce right judgments had 
the Holy Spirit dwelling in them, insomuch that the 
divine Daniel being most divinely inspired from that 
source convicted those wicked elders, and those three 
boys not only performed a miracle by exulting in the 
furnace, the burning effect of the fire having been 
assuaged, but also sang a prophetic hymn of praise. - * 
Who is there therefore who will not say with greater 
justice that the Holy Spirit is dwelling among you, 
even when you are settled by the evangelic throne 
of the holy Mark, and are dwelling in a very loyal 
city, one whose special possession and high honour in 
addition to its other excellences is correctness and 
distinction in the faith, and as a chief and leader and 
counsellor and good teacher of everything that ought ' 
to be done and counselled you have the saintly 
Timothy the archbishop of this city, a man who not / 

only fills the place of my meanness, but is even able \ :^ 
to shelter me owing to his high position ? Hence \ 
also the case of the religious Paul, formerly bishop ot 1 
Olba in Isauria, has been very well treated by you 
and brought to a very proper conclusion : and this 
resolution that you have adopted is not at variance p. 170. 
with the sacred ecclesiastical ordinances. For a time 
of persecution more particularly invites us to be more 
than ordinarily mild, and to gather together the 
scattered limbs of the church, and to block the exits 
of unreasonable schisms. Secondly, if one understand 
the diataxeis or canonical commands also not accord- 


154 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 53. 

inof to the letter after the manner of a Tew, but 
according to the spirit and intention of the church 
law, one will find that they desire that a bishop who 
has been unanimously deprived by the synod in 
the province ^ shall in those cases only be denied 
restoration in another synod when the synod that 
has pronounced his deposition remains in the same 
mind. For the eighty-fourth canon says as follows : 
"If anyone has been excommunicated by his own 
bishop, he shall not be received by others unless he 
has first been received by his bishop himself, or a 
synod has been held and he has presented himself, 
and made a defence, and has persuaded the synod and 
received another verdict. And the same rule applies 
also to laymen and presbyters and deacons and all that 
are included in the canon."- The ninetieth canon 
also says as follows : "If any presbyter or deacon 
shall be deprived by his bishop, or a bishop also 
by a synod, and shall dare to trouble the king's ears, 
p. 171- and, when he should betake himself to a greater synod 
of bishops and offer the pleas which he thinks he has 
to a larger number of bishops, and accept examination 
and judgment from them, shall treat these with 
contempt and trouble the king, these men shall not 
receive any forgiveness, nor shall an opportunity of 
defence be allowed them, nor shall they expect any 
hope of future restoration."^ It is therefore manifest 
from this too that it is possible for a man who has 


f.TrapXi-0^- 


- Mansi ii. 131 2. ■' Ii>t'd., 13 13. 


I. 53. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 155 


been deprived by a smaller synod to be received in 
a greater one if the charges and complaints against 
him are examined and investigated afresh. It is in 
a sense similar to this that the eighty-second canon 
also is to be understood, which says : [Here follows 
the citation given at p. 1 24]. For the substance 
of these three canons is this : that, when a man has 
been deprived by a small synod, it is possible for him 
to discuss the causes of his deprivation before a 
greater synod and obtain restoration, if the great 
synod decide to absolve this man. But, if he shall 
dare after his deprivation to perform any priestly 
function, even access to a greater synod shall be 
refused him, if those who have once effected his 
deprivation continue to maintain the same judgment 
of deprivation. For the whole purpose of the canons 
is directed to this ; that the verdicts ^ of those who p. 172. 
have duly decided shall not be annulled, so long as 
they continue to maintain their verdict "" which they 
have pronounced. But, if these men (I mean those 
who deprived the man) with the same unanimity 
recede from the unfavourable verdict,"' and betake 
themselves to another which absolves him, how can 
anyone doubt that the forgiveness is certainly war- 
ranted by law, especially if another synod greater than 
it also confirms this ? If therefore the saintly bishops 
in Isauria who effected the deprivation of Paul and 
his companions continued to maintain the same ver- 

1 aTTO^ao-et?. " u7ro<^tt<Tis. 


156 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 53. 

diet ^ of deprivation, it is absolutely necessary that the 
severity of these canons shall prevail, and that the 
punishment which was inflicted upon them shall be in 
no point annulled by the authority of a greater synod. 
But, if they also all alike consented to absolve those 
who were condemned, and Solon also of saintly 
memory, the bishop of their metropolis, acquiesced 
in this decision, we for our part will not show ourselves 
harsh searchers of the canons, which in no way 
prevented those who have deprived a man from 
coming to a more lenient state of mind, but laid 
down a law and issued a command regarding 
another synod, saying that it has no right to 
lay additional commands, to speak in the words 
of the Apostle, upon the bishops who effected the 
p- 173 deprivation, and tyrannically to annul the judgment 
given by these. We find that the holy fathers for 
the benefit of the churches often receded and orranted 
an indulgence even after sentence of deprivation had 
been passed by a catholic and oecumenical synod, for 
the sake of the general benefit and peace of the 
churches themselves. For instance in the holy synod 
at Ephesus Helladius of Tarsus and Eutherius of 
Tyana, and Dorotheus and Himerius were deprived 
together with Nestorius, on the ground that they were 
infected with opinions akin in impiety, and were afflicted 
with the same madness as he to a oreater extent than 
the others. And yet afterwards, when the bishops of 

1 aTr6(f)a(Ti<;. 


I. 53. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 157 

the East had abandoned the unreasonable schism and 
submitted to the resolutions of the holy oecumenical 
synod which assembled in the city of the Ephesians, 
upon Paul bishop of the city of the Emesenes coming 
to the city of the Alexandrines and on their behalf 
asking Cyril the chief champion of orthodoxy, a man 
who in apostolic contests endured dangers even to 
death, that they might remain in their sees in the p- 174 
position which they actually held he waived the depri- 
vation of the said wicked men, insisting only on this 
point which was more particularly necessary. I mean 
that the deprivation of Nestorius should be confirmed 
by all of them together and in writing, and that they 
should confess that the holy Virgin is the God-bearer 
and such conditions as follow upon these. This 
he stated in the letter to Eusebius the presbyter, in 
which he wrote as follows : " I have read the letter 
from your devoutness : and I have found you to be 
distressed by the supposition that the peace of the 
churches has been completed upon an unreasonable 
basis ; but I imagined that it was by love that your 
gentleness was moved. However it is probable that 
you have no accurate knowledge of the points settled. 
For certain persons are, I learn, circulating letters 
purporting to have been written to me by the devout 
and religious bishop John. But it is probable that 
either they are forgeries or they contain additions 
made to please those who hold the opinions of Nestor- \ 
ius. For, in accordance with the resolution of the 1 
holy synod in the metropolis of the Ephesians, I did 


158 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 53. 

not orive him communion until he had anathematized 
in writing the doctrines of Nestorius, and confessed 
that he held him to be under deprivation, and assented 
to the ordination of the devout God-loving bishop 
Maximian. But when the religious Paul bishop of the 
city of the Emesenes exerted himself vigorously on 
p- 175- behalf of those who had been deprived, Helladius I 
mean and Eutherius and Dorotheus and Himerius, 
and begged that, when the peace of the churches was 
established, their case ^ also might receive a typos or 
determination, I used these words : ' I do not take 
any account of those who have been deprived : but 
they must remain in the position in which they in fact 
are now.' But the insult which they levelled against 
me I have forgiven. For it was not indeed fitting 
that for this reason and no other the churches should 
fall into a state of schism and division, when the more 
necessary point was brought to a conclusion, I mean 
the requirement that the doctrines of Nestorius should 
be anathematized and his deprivation acknowledged 
by those who would not do this before, and they also 
confessed in writing that the holy Virgin is the God- 
bearer.'"-^ This generous forgiveness he bestowed, for 
the sake of the peace and union of the holy churches, 
upon men who, as the succeeding time showed, were 
incurable. And yet he endured for the sake of an 
object that was better and of higher advantage, I mean 
for the sake of the unification and binding; tooether of 

1 VTrd^co-ts. ^ Ep. 54. 


I. 53. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 159 

the more important limbs. For in the same letter he 
added these words also : " For, even though Helladius / 
in Tarsus and certain others do not think rightly, this i^- ^76. 
has nothino- to do with those who wish to think what 
is right. For let two or three go if they wish, so long- 
as the churches everywhere hold one and the same 
faith." How then are we for our part not bound to 
regard the mind of those who fed and ooverned the 
churches of God with such understanding, and to con- 
clude that the course sanctioned by you in the instance 
of the religious Paul must also be followed in that of 
the devout bishop Elpidius, particularly since Paul as 
I have learned during the time of his deprivation pre- 
sumed so far as to attempt the performance of high- 
priestly acts or services, but Elpidius, they say, did 
nothing whatever of the kind. I forbear to mention 
also the celebrated case^ of the holy John who was 
bishop of Constantinople. Since you read church 
histories, you know that he incurred deprivation ; but, 
because of his reputation for right teaching and in order 
that those in the royal city who were in separation on 
account of the mention of his name mioht be reconciled 
to the body of the church, the holy Cyril waived the 
point, being apostolically minded in this matter also. 1 
and not seekino- his own but that which belongs to ' 
Christ Jesus,^ and setting the benefit of ecclesiastical P- J77. 
union and reconciliation against all subtle words and | 
strict procedure, and that though in letters he often ^ 

^ VTroOecris. ' Ph. ii. 2 1. 


160 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 53. 

/ contended for canonical strictness. Therefore I bestow 
' all praise upon the whole of your God-loving synod, 
seeing it both examined the demands of strictness, and 
at the same also considered the suoo-estions of a be- 
nevolent mind. In fact both those who desired strict 
procedure did so because they took account of pre- 
serving an appearance worthy of confidence and suited 
to the church, and equally also those who inclined to 
mild measures were not of this opinion because they 
had anything else at heart than to bring about a bond 
of peace and to gather together those who were dis- 
persed. However in such cases as these that plan 
must be followed which oathers tog-ether the limbs of 
the church and has clemency as a superfluous advocate, 
and the example of the fathers who were thus minded 
in similar cases, and thus provided for what lay before 
them. Do not therefore think to yourselves that you 
did anvthinof unreasonable in discussing^ this matter 
with one another (it is not right or proper for us to say 
that you were divided). Did not this happen among 
the apostles also ? The book of the Acts relates that 
"certain men had come down from Judaea and were 
teaching the brethren, saying, ' Unless ye are circum- 

p. 178. cised after the custom of Moses, ye cannot have life ' : 
and, as Paul and Barnabas had no small dissension and 
dispute with them,"^ the disputation passed to other 
churches also, until Peter the chief of the apostles and 
James, who was termed brother of our Lord, but had 

^ Ac. XV. I, 2. 


I. 53. SKLECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 161 

received the first episcopal office in Jerusalem, were 
inspired from above, and brought forward the prophetic 
words, and so put an end to the dispute that had been 
raised : and they extended their resolution to the other 
churches also, so that all members of all of them mi^ht 
say the same and think the same. I forbear to say 
that there was a quarrel not only about doctrines but 
also about a person between Paul and Barnabas, since 
the one said that they ought to take John who was 
called Mark with them on their preaching, while the 
other said not. These things are written as a pattern 
for us, in order that we may not fear and be caused to 
fall. It is not possible that being men we should not 
be anoered : but, if we are anorered, we must turn from 
our anger. Therefore in the case of Paul and Elpidius 
the devout bishops also let the suggestions of a benevo- 
lent mind and the course of forgiveness prevail, and 
let them share in the privileges and title of bishops, 
but not thrust themselves into their cities, if the time p- tq- 
invite to this, seeing that other God-loving bishops 
have once been lawfully designated to their sees, nor 
have any share in the rights belonging to that parish : 
a principle which, as I have been told, they have in 
fact with great propriety as well as with much justice 
acknowledged to you in writing. For they also shall 
not lack any kind of consolation which, while consistent 
with the canons, will not cause any useless annoyance 
or injury to anyone, if it take place here. For indeed 
"our life is swifter than a runner,"^ as it is written : 

1 Job ix. 25. 

II 


-\ 


162 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 54- 

and "what the day that is coming will bring forth" 
we know not at all.^ I have written this epistle while 
suffering the affliction of a fugitive and unable to set 

foot in .... as it is written and, 

as ... . says, no book and no ... . sur- 
rounds me. But .... remembering the sacred 
and .... in [my] memory the laws 
and customs also that were practised from of old in the 
holy churches. Wherefore also I have both received 
and duly praised the resolutions canonically adopted 
by you and inserted in an epistle concerning those in 
the Christ-loving city of the Antiochenes who wish to 
come to repentance. For they were lawful and proper, 
p. 180. and such as, while not falling outside the limits of what 
is lawful, bore the marks of a loving disposition and of 
clemency. If anything else also of this kind should 
happen, ......... 

519-38. 54 

in truth that the mouth should be silent which never 
grows weary and seems as if it had been set apart for 
prayers, the mouth which in very deed says "I will bless 
the Lord at all times, ""^ and at all times circulates His 
praises. You did well and conferred a great service 
upon us by relating in the course of your letter how you 
celebrated the memories of the holy fathers, and which 
of you have departed to God, one among whom is the 
religious presbyter Patrick. We are much profited 

^ Pr. xxvii. I. - Ps. xxxiii. r. 


I. 54. SELliCT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 163 


when we learn the names of these in order that we 
may remember them in our prayers, and as far as v 

])0ssible, cast from us the weariness that dominates 
us, and prepare ourselves for the final departure from 
this world. 

As to the events that have happened in the East, 
and the way in which the believers in Antioch have 
girded themselves for a second and third contest, as if 
they had never been tried by any tribulation, it is 
superfluous for us to write to you, since these are 
things which you learn also from report. Only we ask 
you to keep those who are thus combating in more 
earnest remembrance, and to ask that endurance may 
be granted them all by God. In trials which are so 
unendurable it is in fact impossible to be steadfast 
without help from that source. Wherefore Jeremiah p. iSi. 
also said to God over all, " Lord, the endurance of 
Israel! Thou savest in the time of evils." ^ But I 
beg your holinesses to grant a place among those who 
are remembered by you over the rational sacrifice and 
have alreadv gone to God to Eustochius of God- 
loving memory, deacon of the holy church in Alex- 
andria, who has now put off his life in much zeal for 
the orthodox faith, with ail accuracy and in knowledge 
as the divine x'\postle says," so that he often longed for 
the bodily sight of your love of God also. Of him the 
religious presbyter Philip also made trial to a moderate 
extent. The end. 

1 Jer. xiv. 8. =^ i Co. i. 5 ; Ph. i. 9 (?). 


164 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 55. 


525-31. 55. Of the same to Theodore presbyter and archi- 
mandrite of the monastery of father Romanns 
among the saints. [Fivm those after banishment^ 
from the ;^rd book the ^2nd letteri) 

Even I, thouoh I am in hidino- and live in different 
places at different times on account of the present 
stress, was not unaware of your religiousness' praise- 
worthy life. Wherefore also I thought the expressions 
p. 1S2. of John the Evangelist and Apostle fitted to be 
addressed to you by me, which he composed when 
writing an epistle to someone and speaking thus : 
" I rejoiced greatly when brethren came and testified 
to the truth that is in thee, how that thou walkest in 
the truth." ^ Continue therefore to show the same 
energy, and press forwards, and enlarge the rational 
flock of those who practise with you the ascetic life of 
solitariness, and let them henceforth have a ' measure 
of wheat ' of the doctrines of philosophy with under- 
standing, as the gospel text advises ; which also 
promises a blessing to him who does this carefully 
and with diligence, saying, " Blessed is the bond- 
servant whom his lord shall come and find so doing. 
Of a truth I say unto you that he will set him over all 
that he hath." -^ The question also that you have now 
been pleased to ask of the religious presbyter Thomas 
by your letter was in truth in consonance with your 

1 3 J. 3- ' L"- ^''- 42-44- 


I. 55- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 165 


understanding. For he sent me the letter that you 
wrote, and, when it came to my knowledge, I praised 
it. And, owing to the urgency of the matter, I con- 
sidered it right to treat all other things as secondary, 
and send you this mean letter : in which it is pointed 
out that alj_^jLy;QU wiiQ-liold to communion with us 
must not recognise any distinction between those who 
are banished from the East, and made illustrious by 
the combat of confessorship, and the saintly bishops 
in Egypt, and that you must reckon that to be one 
church which is compacted together in the orthodox 
faith, and confession and communion, and is most pure 
and free from the no-association with the heretics ; i. 183. 
aiid that you must also have no vain hesitation about 
ordinations : but that both your religiousness and the 
other religious archimandrites of the holy cloisters that 
have been banished from Palestine ^ on account of the 
word of truth must after probation present your own 
brethren to the God-loving bishops in Egypt, in order 
that they may ordain presbyters and deacons for you, 
and satisfy the requirements of your need. How is 
it anything but an unreasonable state of affairs and 
one fraught with matter for every kind of accusation 
that, while the bishops who have been banished from 
other countries and bear upon them marks for Christ's 
sake flee to the great orthodox apostolic church in 
Alexandria as to a mother, certain men out of a. _ 
childish mind should create a distinction that does not 


' This was therefore written during the exile of the monks (Zach 
Rh. viii. 5). 


166 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 55. 

exist between those who are thus united and make up 
^- the compact union of the Hmbs of the one body, and 
through the very facts themselves proclaim the im- 
mobility and steadfastness of the holy persecuted 
churches in the East and those in Egypt, which are. 
already preparing to suffer the same things, and showing 
the immoveable nature of their piety ? I think that 
the events which happened a short time ago in 
Alexandria have reached your ears also, events 
capable of showing even to those who are very foolish 
p. 184. the steadfastness and fixedness of the saintly arch- 
bishop Timothy, and of the God-loving bishops under 
him, and of the churches in their cities : so that one 
may fitly utter the celebrated expressions of Isaiah the 
prophet. "Tabernacles that shall not shake ; nor shall 
the pegs of her tabernacle be moved for ever, and her 
cords shall not be broken asunder." ^ Therefore for a 
man to try to separate by vain thoughts things that are 
so admirably united, and to divide things that are sO' 
indivisible through the inspiration of grace from above 
is a thing fraught with matter for every kind of evil- 
speaking and fault-finding. This we warn both your 
love of God and all who communicate with us to shun» 
and to cast such stones of stumbling out of the Lord's 
ways as it is written," and, as we said before, to reckon 
the ordination of the saintly bishops of the East and 
that of those of Egypt to be one, and not recognise 
any distinction between these. If you wish to read 

' Is. xxxiii. 20. 'Id., Ivii. 14 (?). 


1. 56. SELKCT LETTERS OK THE HOLY SEVERUS. 167 

this letter to any other persons also, in order to show 
what our opinion is, neither do we forbid this. How 
can it not be right that we should also proclaim 
openly in words the things that we in actual practice 
think and do ? The end. 

p. 1^5- 

56. Of the same to P roc I us the bishop. [Fro?n those 519-38. 
aftei' expulsion, from the ^rd book the 2,^th letter). 

The words that I wrote to the two of you in common^ 
were enough to show '^ your love of God my opinion, 
since you thought me at all competent to give advice. 
For my part, since " I have boldness of speech towards 
you," as Peiul says to the Corinthians,^ I thought that, 
inasmuch as you have been brought up from the earliest 
times in w^orks of piety, and have stood with us from 
the beginning, and borne the assaults of many waves, 
that you are competent to give advice and direction to 
others also in what is rig-ht. However choice is an 
evil thing, evil indeed, and may involve even wise men 
in ruin in adverse times, for, " they were confounded 
and staggered like a drunken man, and all their wisdom 
was swallowed up,"* says he that sings figuratively and 
instructively. Wherefore I myself also recognise our 
nature's feebleness, and, inasmuch as I am subject to 
the same weaknesses, I grant you forgiveness for having 


1 V. 13. 

- Whether the following to p. 1 70, 1. 4, belongs to this letter is doubt- 
ful : see vol. i., Intr. ^ 2 Co. vii. 4. "* Ps, cvi. 27. 


168 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 56. 


shown a common weakness and beino- in need of en- 
couragement. Perhaps also some thoughts are spring- 
ing up in your heart, which put such ideas as these 
into you and say, "This man, because he has nothing 
to do with the affairs of the world, and is not assailed 
1^6. \^y trouble of this sort, and does not know what kind 
of thing is the tie of nature that arises from the 
marriage connexion and the birth of children, will give 
you impassioned advice from beyond the boundaries, 
and will speak as from some exalted height with those 
that creep upon the earth." Therefore in answer to 
these things also we must use introductory words and 
say what is the truth. Paul the wise man and chosen 
vessel, who had Christ so firmly established in him 
that in orivinor ecclesiastical commandments he would 
sometimes appeal to the laws of Christ, and draw his 
admonitions from them, and at another put forward 
his own thoughts in place of a law and say, '* I have 
no commandment of the Lord ; but I give counsel ; 
inasmuch as I have obtained mercy of the Lord to be 
a believer,"^ when appointing bishops, did not take 
men from the trainino -school of the solitarv life and set 
them over the churches, nor men of philosophic habits, 
free from wives, and without children, but he said, 
" The bishop ought to be the husband of one wife," 
and, "one that ruleth his house well and hath his 
children in subjection with all gravity " ; '^ and he was 
not assured as regards these ties of nature, the ties of 

^ I Co. vii. 25. - I Ti. iii. 2, 4. 


J. 56. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 169 


children I mean and of a wife, that they would corrupt 
the character of a shepherd in times of stress. But, 
as to what the character of a shepherd is, hear the 
shepherd Himself crying and saying, "The good shep- 
herd layeth down his life for his sheep." ^ If therefore 
we have been called by Him to so great a height of p- i^7. 
spiritual authority, it is absolutely necessary that we 
should rise to the same height, and that we should 
"mindhio'h thingfs " and "seek the thinos which are 
above, where Christ is, sitting on the right hand of 
God " : so that, when He " is revealed," then we " also 
may be revealed with Him in glory,'"" and share with 
Him in splendour. But, that you may not think to 
yourself that you alone among bishops have had a wife 
and children, and are required to "resist sin even to 
blood," as it is written,^ and to distinguish yourself in 
combats on behalf of piety, the words of the apostolic 
legislation that have just been quoted, words that have 
a general application to every bishop, would in them- 
selves have been sufficient answer to such a fancy : but I 
will quote to you from actual experience also an example 
worthy of consideration, which shows that in times of 
martyrdom the women also who were joined in marriage 
to those who held the rank of the episcopate contested 
and strove in the same contests. Here it is. Diony- 
sius, who was bishop of the great Christ-loving city of 
the Alexandrines, in an epistle to Flavian * bishop of 

^ John X. II. - Col. iii. i, 2, 4. 

•^ He. xii. 4 ■* Fabius is meant. 


170 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 56- 

Antioch, in which he describes the combats of those 
who were martyred in the neighbourhood of Alexander's 
city in the days of Decius, after describing the other 
events introduces this statement also : ^ 

p. 18S. in sin. and utterly refuses to turn her eyes upwards 
while there is time. For for you, who bear with 
patience that which has happened in this matter also, 
a worthy reward will surely be reserved, although you 
did not treat her case with circumspection at the begin- 
ning. But, if you both exert yourself and bring her 
back from the error in which she is involved to repent- 
ance and recoo^nition of the truth, then vou will in truth 
be doubly a father to her, insomuch as to be able to 
say, " Behold I I and the children whom God has given 
me." - For you must do all these things to the best of 
your power, in order that you may not have your con- 
science accusino- you, as if vou ouoht to have done 
something and had neglected it. You know well from 
the sacred writings what Eli suffered, because, though 
he spoke reprovingly to his sons and chid their folly in 
the unhallowed deeds which they committed, yet he 
did not deal with them as a ruler. But the Lord will, 
I know well, grant your sanctity understanding, so that 
with fatherly admonitions you may mingle such cen- 
sures as are likely to produce conversion and are suited 
to a ruler, and that you may take the sheep upon your 
shoulders, and present it to the chief shepherd Christ, 

' Eus. H.E. vi. 41. 2 Is viii 18. 


I. 57. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 171 


and reckon it among- those that are saved. For indeed 
He alone is able by His almighty power and His grace 
to make things possible that with men are impossible. 
The end. 


57. Of the same to Didynius the bishop. [From 
those after banishment, Jrom the yd book the 
50/// letter.) 

The news of the attack of the barbarians ^ and of 
the captivity that has fallen upon those who live in 
your neighbourhood, and the siege and war that have 
been hanging over your city have caused intolerable 
grief and sorrow to all who hear of it, but especially to 
us. Our anxiety on other grounds and general sorrow- 
was further increased by thinking of your religiousness, 
who have had to endure such an unexpected attack at 
thevery beginning of your episcopate : since men who 
have been admitted to feed rational souls reckon 
common and public" calamities as their own. Where- 
fore David also the great among prophets and kings, 
when he saw his subjects being destroyed in the death- 
dealing plague by the divine wrath, being unable to 
endure the siofht, beog-ed that he mio-ht suffer instead 
of those under his rule, saying to the Lord, " It is I 
who have sinned, and I the shepherd have done 
wickedly : and these the sheep what have they done ? 
Let thine hand be upon me, and upon my father's house. "^ 

^ Probably the incursion of Al Mundhir (Zach. Rh. viii. 5). 
' ?iy]/jia<ri,a. " 2 R. xxiv. I J. 


p. 189. 
519-25. 


172 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 57. 

And by so saying he changed the wradi to mercy, and 
stayed the plague. Therefore you also must know 
that such events are fraught with no small hardship : 
but, when men consider things in the right spirit, and 

p.iigo, accept the chastisement as a help, they bring them 
great profit, and lead them into close relationship with 
God. Therefore we also, looking at what has hap- 
pened, believe that it is by divine providence that you 
have been raised to a sacred headship of this kind, in 
order that you may show yourself a man capable of 
comforting the flock that has been entrusted to you. 
As to the question that you ask about presbyters who 
have grown very old, I mean whether their customary 
share in the distribution of presents ought to be cut 
off from them, on the ground that they cannot perform 
the sacred ministry, and others introduced in their 
place who ought to be supported, and receive the 

P-I9I- portion cut off from these, know that such a thing- 
is not legal, nor otherwise holy. If men who perform 
bodily services as soldiers for kings on earth, when 
they reach old age, receive higher stipends, inasmuch 
as they have previously toiled and laboured in wars, 
how is it anything but abominable that men who have 
served in the sacred military service should not only 
not receive hiorher honour in their old aoe, but even 
be deprived of the customary emoluments ? David's 
soldiers also once thougrht somethinof like this, when 
they went down with him to fight against the bar- 
barians who had come against them, and mightily 
overcame them, and stripped them of all the booty 


I. 57. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 173 


that had been carried off by them from the wars ^ with 
Israel. For. when they returned from the war and 
their minds were somewhat upHfted on account of 
their victory, they claimed that they alone should take 
all the things that they had captured from the bar- 
barians, and not g'ive an equal portion to those who 
stayed in the camp and guarded their baggage, on p- 192- 
the ground that they had not taken part with them 
in the fight in exactly the same fashion. And upon 
this the just David was indignant, saying that those 
also who remained to guard the baoQ-aCTe ougfht to eet 
a portion equal to that of those who formed part of 
the array in war. Moreover also he repressed their 
greed and said to them in rebuke, " And w^ho will 
hearken to these words of yours ? For they are not 
inferior to you. But, as his portion is that went down 
to the war, so shall his portion be that stayed by the 
baggage. They shall part alike."- Knowing there- 
fore from the divine writinsfs that these things are 
laid down as law, give greater gratification, if 
possible, to those who have grown old, both in 
stipends and in honour. For honour is the due of 
elders, and the enjoyment of the good things that 
come after war. The o-reat o-overnor Moses also 
wrote in Numbers that he said to Hobab his wife's 
brother, who was journeying with Israel in the way in 
the wilderness, '" Leave us not, forasmuch as thou 
wast with us in the wilderness. And thou shalt be an 


' The translator therefore read 7roAe/xwv for TroAeojr. ' i R. xxx. 24. 


174 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 57. 


elder among us. And it shall be, if thou go with us, 
we will do thee o^ood out of all the orood things which 
the Lord shall do unto us." ^ But I beg your love of 
God not to associate indiscriminately with those who 
unreasonably cut themselves off from our communion, 
men who magnify with lips only an orthodoxy that is 
inactive and runs no risk, while they take no part in 
the sufferings of the persecuted church which it has 
p- 193- suffered for the sake of the sound word of faith and is 
still even now suffering, but justify themselves in vain. 
Lack of discrimination towards them confirms them 
yet more in the evil itself, and they think to themselves 
that we blame ourselves as if there had been somethino- 
wanting in our conduct, and honour and praise them 
as men of strictness. We listen also to our Saviour 
in the Gospels crying, "He that is not with me is 
against me : and he that oathereth not with me 
scattereth." - Ignatius also the great bishop and 
martyr, who fed the church of the Antiochenes after 
Peter the captain of the apostles, and, because he was 
full of the Holy Spirit, was called "the God-clad," 
says in his letter to the men of Smyrna, " Shun 
divisions, as the beginning of evils." ' Further also 
in another letter of his to those at Philadelphia he says 
thus : "If anyone follows a man who makes a schism, 
he does not inherit the kingdom of God." ^ Again in 
writing to the Ephesians he expresses the same thing 
in a more fearful form, saying, "He therefore that 

^ Nu. X. 31, 32. '" Lu. xi. 23. ' Sm. 8. ■• Phila. 3. 


I. 57. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 175 


does not join in the assembly has already behaved 
proudly, and separated himself. For it is written, 
' The proud God resisteth.' " ^ Irenctus also a man 
of ancient times, bishop of the city of Lyons (this is 
one of the cities of the men called Gauls), who was a 
hearer of Polycarp bishop of Smyrna and martyr, who p- 194- 
was a disciple of John the Evangelist, wrote thus, in 
his fourth book against heresies, about the Lord who 
will judge every breathing thing, and as it is written 
the whole "world in righteousness" - : " But he will also 
judge those who create schisms, who are men void of 
the love of God, and seek that which is for their profit 
but not the union of the church, and for small and con- 
temptible reasons cleave and divide the great and 
o-lorious bodv of Christ and, as far as in them lies, 
destroy it, men who speak peace and make war, who 
truly strain out the gnat, but swallow the camel. For 
it is impossible that any benefit can spring from them 
of the same kind as is the injury that springs from 
their schism." -'• To these things therefore direct your 
mind, and beware of the obstructive forces every- 
where : especially of those that arise from thoughts 
on the right side, which lead astray from the "royal 
road " ^ : and, looking to heaven and making God your 
guide in all things, cry, " Direct my paths according 
to thy word " ' ; and you will surely go straight, and 
not fail to do what is riofht. The end. 

^ Eph. 5. - Ps. ix. 9. ■' Adv. H^er. IV. xxxiii. 7 (62). 

^ Nu. XX. 17. ^ Pr. iii. 6 (?). 


176 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. !. 58. 


p. 195. 

519-25. 58. Of the same to Didyinus the bishop. [Froiu those 
after banishment, from the yd book the goth 
letter.) 

I have learned with accuracy the whole story of the 
devout deacon Sannus : and how before coming to the 
see where your love of God is priest he lived an indis- 
criminate or disordered life, and how you brought him 
back to devout habits, and how you laid down an 
injunction for him to keep. Now after examining the 
whole matter I have found that, because he appro- 
priated to himself some small sum which formed part 
of the revenue, you were wroth and angry with him, 
and removed him from the charge with which he had 
been entrusted. Therefore I beg you to receive this 
man, and place him in the same rank, without any 
difference whatever. If by careful observance he ob- 
served all the other points on which reform was difficult,. 
and gave up the long-standing practice of disorderly 
habits, which is like a necessity of nature, and was 
converted to a devout life, and took upon him the 
character proper to deacons, let us not upset everything 
on account of a sin in one single point : for it is im- 
possible for everything to be reformed at once. This 
is the practice of teachers also, gently to bear with 
pupils once and twice and many times, when they are 
at fault and do not repeat without mistake, until they 
p. 196. attain to perfection. Physicians also after the same 
fashion, when they warn patients to abstain from things 


I. 58. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 177 


that are pleasant and harmful, are often defeated and 
orant them indulo-ences, allowino- them to taste some 
of the things that they like : and they do not in every 
point insist upon strict observance of the irksome 
methods demanded by science, but they treat the 
patient in accordance with what is possible. This 
method of trradual treatment and cure was shown 
in a figurative manner by our Lord and God Jesus 
Christ also in the Gospels. When He might have 
healed one of the blind men who were brought to Him 
by word only, as He did in the case of that leper, saying 
in a manner befitting God, "I will be thou clean," ^ 
and immediately upon the word completed the cure, 
He cured him with a certain delay and procrastination. 
For " He led him," he says, " out of the village. And, 
when He had spat on his eyes. He put His hands upon 
him and was asking him if he saw aught. And, his 
eyes having been opened, he said, ' I see the men 
walking like trees.' Then He put His hands again upon 
his eves and his si^ht was restored and his eves were 
opened, and he saw everything clearly."' There- 
fore He that is our God and the instructor of our 
souls by working this cure with a certain wise delay 
instructs us that the bishops in His holy churches, who 
are His representatives, ought to make use of gradual 
modes of treatment in order to bring those whose 
minds are blinded to the fight, until their eyes are p. 197- 
gradually opened and they see the rays of truth clearly. 


1 Mt. viu. 3. 2 Mlc. viii. 23-25. 

12 


178 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 59. 

Accordingly do you also adopt this plan, both in this 
present affair and in others that happen after the same 
pattern. The end. 


622-27. 


59. Of the same to Juhan the presbyter and archinia^i- 
drite of the monastery of the blessed Bassus. [Froin 
those during banishinent, from the ^th book the ^2nd 
letter.) 

Those who loyally follow the ascetic and solitary life 
grow rich in the spirit of understanding, and from it 
learn the paths of right action. Wherefore also the 
sacred text of Proverbs says, " The thoughts of an 
understandino- man are ways of life " -.^ and aofain " Let 
the heart of a man think just things, in order that his 
steps may be directed by the Lord."" Sharing in this 
instruction therefore and bemo- o-uided bv the divine 
Spirit, your religiousness also has not treated church 
order with contempt : but, when the holy monastery of 
the blessed Bassus, in which you have been appointed 
to be governor, was lacking in the needful provision 
lor the ministry of priests and deacons, you properly 
p. 19s. resolved to inform me of this by a letter from you, 
and from me to obtain a solution of the doubt. Know 
therefore that in times of persecution anyone soever of 
the God-loving bishops who is of the same confession 
and the same communion with us in everything may 
properly supply the need of anv among the orthodox 
who is in need. On this principle I have written to 

' Pr XV. 24 - Id., xvi. I. 


I. 60. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 179 

the saintly Sergius bishop of Cyrrhus, and to the saintly 
Marion bishop of the fortress called Sura ^ to satisfy 
your need : and under the inspiration of the Holy 
Spirit to apply their sacred hand, and impart to those 
that are in need the gift that was given them from 
above, about which Jesus Himself the giver of the 
Spirit cries in the Gospels, " Freely ye have received 
freely give." ^ The end. 

60. Of the same to Phot ins and Andrezv the presbyters 519-38. 
and archiviandi'ites of the holy cloisters m Caria. 
iyFrom those after banishment , from the Jth book 
the i^th letter.) 

Since you loyally fulfil the active part of the ascetic 
and philosophic life, therefore you also gather the p- i99- 
fruits of knowledge from your labours, which are 
sound faith and zeal on its behalf which raises itself 
to God, and devoutness and a spirit of understanding 
and of discretion. ....... 


[You ^ also therefore, who through practice in asceti- 
cism are pure in your minds, in the same manner burn 
in the spirit, and carry the flame of zeal blazing in 
you : knowing as you do that all zeal is not praise- 
worthy, but that which is according to knowledge. 

' V. 15. 
- Mt. X. 8. 

•'' The bracketed portion is supplied from another version : see text 
p. 199 note I. 


180 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I 6o. 

For you listen to Paul accusing the Jews and saying, 
" For I bear record of them that there is a zeal of God 
in them : but not according to knowledge " : ^ and you 
have restrained the ardour of zeal with the cords of 
devoutness : for " blessed is the man that feareth all 
thino's on account of devoutness." " The case of the 
man who was received by you to communion and was 
converted from the heresy of the Nestorians and the 
Diphysites and the believers in two persons to the 
orthodox faith and said that he- had received ordination 
to the diaconate vou have thought fit to brino- to the 

p. 200. knowledge of my meanness, and learn whether you 
received this man lawfully and in accordance with the 
strictness of the canons or not. We say therefore 
that, in so far as you required him to anathematize 
on oath and in writing the heresy of the Nestorians 
and of the Diphysites, and renounce communion with 
them, the transaction was good and lawful : and he 
should not otherwise have shared in the reception of 
the divine mysteries, unless he had after this model 
done something to satisfy the mind. But neither 
\ should he have been presented for the ministry of 
the diaconate at all, nor on the other hand should he 

/ have proclaimed in writing the diaconal rank. For no 

canon or precept orders that those who have been 
converted from the heresy of the Nestorians shall 
receive ordination afresh. If they received ordi- 
nation afresh, those also besides who were bap- 

' Ro. X. 2. ' Pr. xxviii. 14. 


I. 60. SKLECT LETTKRS OF TIIH HOLY SEVERUS. 181 


tized by the same heresy would always be baptized 
afresh. For, when men who have received ordination 
from particular heresies receive the laying on of hands 
afresh, those also who have been baptized by those 
very same heresies are baptized afresh : as the synod 
of the three hundred and eighteen holy fathers ordered 
in the case of the heresy of Paul of Samosata, and the 
heresies of those who are like them in impiety.^ And 
no one has ever been shown to have perfected by 
a second baptism those who tiee from] the Nestorian p- 201. 
and Diphysite heresy, and have taken refuge in the 
church of the orthodox. Timothy also of saintly 
memory, archbishop of the city of the Alexandrines, 
who wrote in more severe terms from exile owing to 
the extreme ardour of the people, which would not 
consent even to cast a glance at those who derived 
ordination from the Diphysite error, which Proterius 
introduced there, after his return both communicated 
with Paul of God-loving memory, high-priest of the 
city of the Ephesians and head of the holy churches 
in Asia, in the Encyclical formula, upon his anathe- 
matizing with the bishops under him the Chalcedonian 
impiety : and also, after he had reached Alexandria, 
received those who came from the heresy of the 
Diphysites in the rank in which they were,^ bishops 
I mean and presbyters and deacons, upon their 
anathematizing the heresy itself in writing, and 
accepting such a period of separation for peni- 

1 Mansi ii. 676. . - Cf. v. 6. 


182 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 6o. 

tence only as he judged and determined to be 
good. In such cases in fact it is in the discretion 

p. 202. of high-priests to shorten and to extend the spaces 
of time according to the consciousness of the penitents 
with regard to the sins committed by them. But he 
has not been shown to have done anything else what- 
ever as to these men which impairs or disturbs the 
strictness of the canons in any point whatsoever ; no 
second ordination, no second baptism, no chrism ; as 
some from unreasonable fervour and inconsiderate 
zeal dared to do, at the beginning immediately after 
the synod at Chalcedon had been held, and became 
a cause of schisms and of divisions. For this reason 
also, after the holy Timothy of whom we are now 
speaking had thus received those who came from 
the error of Proterius and of the Diphysite heresy in 
accordance with the laws of the apostolic church, many 
men, fired as it were by some disorderly madness and 
self-willed ardour, separated from communion with 
him, while they did their best to intiame others also 

p. 203. among those who were more than ordinarily weak,, 
like those who said, "We have no part in David, 
neither inheritance in the son of Jesse," ^ and divided 
Israel into two. Hence also they ascribed to them the 
name of the Novatians - who do not accept penitence 
for sins committed ; and for a long time they disturbed 
the church, although they gradually melted away, and 
as the book of the Acts says "were scattered and 

' 3 R. xii. 24 t. ' Cf. Zach. Rh. v. 4. 


I. 60. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 183 

came to naught," ^ like the rebellious band and 
seditious tlock of Theudas and of Judas the Galilaean. 
These things we have related, not because we would 
reckon acts done by heretics valid (they are in fact 
invalid and without foundation and unsubstantial), but 
because we would explain that healing is not applied 
to converts from heresy in one way only, but accord- 
ing to the nature of the error : perfection and the cure 
of the disease being granted to some through baptism 
and ordination, to others through chrism, to others 
through their anathematizing the heresy in writing, / 
and repudiating it and showing fruits of penitence. It — ' 
is in fact absolutely necessary for us to follow the 
canonical precepts and regulations of the saintly 
bishops as medical directions given with understand- 
ing, and from them to apply to each man the cure p. 204, 
suited to him. Therefore he also who has been 
received to communion by your love of God, if he 
scrupulously fulfil the prescribed time in the reforming 
practice of penitence and you bear witness to it, will 
be allowed the position of deacon by the orthodox 
bishops, upon presenting to them a written petition 
containing a confession of his sin and an anathema of 
the heresy. For the voice of a high-priest and bishop 
and his permission is a law of the Spirit, and full of 
power to turn the convert into another man, as is 
written about Saul when he heard the voice of the 
prophet Samuel, and went in the way that he ordered 

1 Ac. V. ?6 


^ 


184 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 6o. 

him to go : and the sacred scripture speaks thus : " And 
it was so that, when he turned his shoulder to go from 
Samuel, God gave him a changed heart, and all these 
signs came upon him that day." ^ Those also who are in 

P- 205- the rank of laymen, if they repudiate by anathema the 
Nestorian and Jewish heresy of the Diphysites, and 
by sincerely repenting place themselves within the 
bounds of the orthodox apostolic church, and are 
included among the sheep of the great God and chief 
shepherd Christ, will immediately cast from them 
everyone soever who is an alien, and will be invisibly 
adorned with the manifestations of the Holy Spirit. 
If a man on entering by night a house full of torches^ 
is completely pervaded by the flashing light, who 
doubts that the church of the orthodox, which is full' 
of the gifts of the Holy Spirit, causes the man who 
opens the eyes of a repentant heart to be pervaded by 
the light that is suprasensual and divine ? The power 
of the true church assembled in a pure fashion in the 
Lord's name is so great that it even constitutes men 
who come to it prophets, men who have not joined the 
congregation in order to share in any divine gift, but 
in order to carry out a royal order. For in the first 
book of Kingdoms it is written thus : " x-\nd Saul sent 
messengers to take David. And they saw the church 
of the prophets, and Samuel was standing at their 

p. 206. head. And the Spirit of God came upon the mes- 
sengers of Saul, and they prophesy. And it was told 

* I R. X. 9. - XafiTrdSa. 


I. 60. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 185 

Saul and he sent other messen(j;ers and they also 
prophesy. And Saul again sent a third set of 
messengers, and they also prophesied." ^ If there- 
fore at a time when the practices of the legal 
shadowy service prevailed the Holy Spirit granted 
such things to the assembly and the name of a 
church, what oreat and wonderful thine will it not 
do in the church that was bought by the divine 
blood of the Lamb and God, and has nothing 
shadowy in it, but the whole sun of righteousness 
flashing upon all the acts that are performed in it ? 
For many other instances might have been added to 
those mentioned. At the very beginning when I was 
set over the Christ-loving city of the Antiochenes, and 
immediately, so to speak, upon my being raised to the 
episcopal throne (unworthily indeed, but still by God's p. 207 
mercy), certain men who were infected with the self- 
created relitrion' of the Re-anointers, followinof a certain . 
deceiver named Theodotus,^ who unlawfully re-anointed 
converts from the Nestorian heresy to the orthodox 
faith, composed a petition consisting of uncanonical 
propositions,'' and had this given to me as I was going 
out into the street by a certain man who was himself 
also a victim of their disease ; and I have composed a 
certain short treatise against it. Accordingly out of 
respect for the love of teaching and the strictness of 
your religiousnesses I have thought it necessary to look 

1 I R. xix. 20, 21. - I.e. iUe\oti[)i]rrK€ia (Col. i. 23). 

" C/. Zach. Rh. V. 5. •* 7ri}0Tii.(T€L<;. 


<e 


186 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 6o. 

for this and copy it out and send it you, in order that 
nothing bearing upon this subject ^ may remain unknown 
to you, so far as the power and the Hmited capacity that 
has fallen to the lot of my meanness extends. For we 
must " walk in the royal road," as it is written,^ and " not 
turn aside to the right or to the left." For many, start- 
ing from considerations that are rather upon the right 
side than otherwise, have been led into excess, and so 
fallen into the very pit of destruction. For this reason 
p. 208. also the text of the law commands that he that pursues 
alter justice shall pursue it justly : ^ that is, know the 
principles of justice and be instructed in them when 
you pursue that which is just : and be free from all 
passion, and be in this respect a just seeker of justice, 
and restrain yourself on all sides, and stand within the 
bounds of justice. Many by the very fact of wishing to 
be just have become mentally drunk, and have injured 
justice through their justice which had the appearance 
of being strict. Whence also the wise Koheleth, or 
rather the teacher of wisdom (for the true Koheleth is 
Christ, the head of the church and the wisdom and the 
sublime and substantial power of God and the Father), 
checking" excess, even if directed to the riorht side, 
gives admonition, saying, " Be not very righteous nor 
contrive superfluous wisdom, lest thou be astonied."* 
On all points therefore I praise your religiousnesses for 
having informed us of this present question, in order 
that you may wisely follow the precepts of the Holy 

^ v7ro^€o-i9. ' Nu. XX. 17. De. xvi. 20 * Ec. vii. 17. 


I. 60. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 187 

Spirit : for it is written, " The wise turn not aside 
from the mouth of the Lord : but they reason in assem- 
bhes."^ Accordingly, when a man is not so minded, p. 209. 
but, making his will law, does what comes into his mind, 
death is the penalty "". For he that said these things 
said also this : " Death lights upon the uninstructed."^ 
In answer to your other question I shrink and hesitate 
to say anything, and I tardily and reluctantly bring 
myself to answer, lest I be thought to be a cruel and 
harsh man, when I bring forward the strictness of the 
church tradition. For indeed this custom has prevailed 
in the holy churches up to the present day, I mean 
that after the reading of the holy revered book of the 
Gospels there should be a petition on behalf of the 
catechumens, one of the deacons proclaiming the names, 
and the presbyter thereupon offering a prayer applying 
to those whose names have been proclaimed, in order 
that they may receive the laver of regeneration and 
the communion of the holy mysteries, and that imme- 
diately afterwards another proclamation and prayer 
should follow on behalf of those that are possessed, in 
order that they also may be freed from the possession 
of evil spirits, and may receive the communion of the 
all-holy body and blood. Further, when the holy 
symbols that are consecrated in the mysterious sacrifice 
are about to be brought out into the church, and to be 
placed on the holy altar, the first of the deacons, look- p- 210. 
ing out of the door of the deacons' chamber, utters the 

1 Pr. xxiv. 7, 8. -' ^77/xt'a. 2 Pr. xxiv. 8. 


188 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 6o. 

fearful and awful words, " No catechumen, no possessed 
person, no one that is incapable \" and so those that 
consecrate and those that have been consummated 
begin the ineffable sacred sacrifice, and send upwards 
the mysterious words. But I have nowhere found in 
the divine canons that such a distinction as this con- 
cerning those that are possessed is contained in them, 
the tenor of which is that if a man fights with a fierce 
demon, and is in the habit of assailing and attacking- 
those who come in his way, and rends chains and fetters 
asunder like the man mentioned [in the Gospels 

■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ ] 

which" Paul the o-reat also in writino to the Corinthians 
commands men to do, and to discern what is the power 
ot the all-holy body, and to consider its greatness, and 
what the disposition ^ is in the heart of him who is to 
communicate in it. This is what he says : " But let 
a man examine himself, and so let him eat of the bread 
and drink of the cup. For he that eateth and drinketh 
when he is unworthy eateth and drinketh condemna- 
tion to himself, in that he hath not discerned the 
Lord's body. For this cause the sick and diseased 
among you are many, and there are many that sleep. 
For, if we judged ourselves, we should not be judged. 
p. 211. jj^ji-^ being judged by the Lord, we are chastised, that 
we may not be condemned with the world : " ^ even as 


' I.e. under penance ; (f. Liturgy of Antioch ap. Brightnian Litur- 
gies, i. 471, 472. 

■ The subject of this fragment seems to show that it belongs to 
this letter. ' Sta^ccn?. ^ i Co. xi. 28-32. 


I. 60. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 189 

He that cares for our souls and is their benion 
instructor directs everything to this end, that He may 
not condemn us on the day on which He will judge 
the world and the earth in righteousness, in the last 
condemnation to which there is no end. Those that 
do not judge themseh^es, but communicate without 
fear in the holy body and blood He judges for a time, 
chastising them with sicknesses and with diseases that 
they may come to conversion and penitence. And 
some, even when they are incorrigible. He removes from 
life, in order that they may not be afflicted by endless 
torments of greater severity and greater bitterness in 
the world to come. Blessed therefore is he who has 
been visited here and been chastised as by an instructor 
and been moved to prepare for the better life, and does 
not "owing to his hardness and impenitent heart," as 
the Apostle says, " lay up " for himself " a store of wrath 
for the day of wrath, and for the revelation of the just 
judgment of God, who will render to every man 
accordino- to his deeds." ^ Therefore he also who 

o 

is possessed by an invasion of evil spirits must submit 
to the canon of the apostolic church, and endure 
the chastening with devoutness, and take upon him 
thoughts and expressions of thanksgiving and make 
confession to the Lord and say, " I have submitted to 
the Lord and made supplication to him " : and He will 
assuredly have pity upon him (for " He is one that 
loveth mercy," as the prophet Micah says^), and will 

' Ro. li. 5, 6. 2 Mi. vii. r8. 


190 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 6o. 

p. 212. rebuke the operation of the evil spirit, and will deliver 
His creature. For a man to be contemptuously dis- 
posed, and to communicate in the sacraments or take 
part in the sacred ministry contrary to what is com- 
manded makes the assault of man-hating spirits yet 
more fierce. This is also confirmed by the wise John 
who was bishop of Constantinople, in the sermon 
entitled " On the treason of Judas and on the Pass- 
over and on the institution of the mysteries, and 
concerning the principle that we should not retain 
aneer," in that he wrote as follows : " For then also 
it was after Judas had received the oblation that the 
devil assailed him ; not that he despised the Lord's 
body, but that he despised Judas on account of his 
presumption : in order that you may learn that it is 
especially those who communicate in the divine 
mysteries without being worthy that the devil con- 
stantly assails and attacks, as he attacked Judas then. 
For privileges benefit those who are worthy : but, 
when men enjoy them undeservedly, they expose them 
to greater punishment. And these things I do not 
say in order to frighten, but in order to secure." ^ As 
I said before, the intention of the disciplinary regula- 
tions of the canons is to preserve the visible appear- 
ance of the church blameless. For this reason they 
forbade those also who are possessed by an invasion 

p- 213- of demons to communicate in the holy mysteries: 
but invisible and secret afflictions [they left] to the 

^ P.G. xhx. 380. 


I. 6l. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 191 

conscience of each man, ...... 

6 1 519-25. 

a law-court, or to cry out or to annoy in return those 
who annoyed him. or to insult in return those who 
insulted him, or to bring an action against them for the 
insult to him, similarly and much more is it unbecom- 
ing for him who has just received the high-priestly 
chrism upon the crown of his head, and from whom 
the sweet savour therefrom is newly breathing, to in- 
volve himself in any of the said matters. Do not think 
to yourself, because the man who was ordained high- 
priest is not clad in white raiment, that he is without 
the garments that are suprasensual and shine more 
brightly than the brilliancy of the sun, and are as much 
better than those of men who have just been baptized 
as a high-priest is greater than one who is among the 
people, and as a shepherd is higher than a sheep. 

And again after other things. But you say that 
the devout brother Joseph told you such-and-such a 
thing about the devout brother John, and the devout 
father Zacharias such-and-such a thing about another 
topic. ^ But know that in every matter it is not the 
word of one man that is needed, but that of two or 
three witnesses. For the sacred law says of everyone 
soever who is tried, whether he be good or whether he p. 2i4« 
be evil, that "under two or under three witnesses he 
shall die that dieth : he shall not die under one wit- 

^ KiffxiXaiov, 


192 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 6l. 

ness : ^ and again, " One witness shall not continue to 
testify against a man, [in all] iniquity and in all sin and 
in all sinfulness soever that he commit. At the mouth 
of two witnesses, and at the mouth of three witnesses 
shall every word be established.""' I have used these 
arguments not in order to show that your religiousness 
is lying (I am convinced that you wrote as you heard) : 
but in order to establish the fact that, according to 
church regulations and the precepts of the holy fathers, 
and the laws of the God-inspired scripture, I cannot 
upon this report pronounce a sentence of censure or of 
condemnation against anyone, while I am far away. 
Your love of God ought therefore to have devoted that 
evening to thoughts of patience : and on the next day 
taken with you in the morning the saintly bishops the 
lord Constantine and the lord Victor, as in fact you 
actually did, and [with] all gentleness and humility, 
[and with] God .... also present .... at the 
discussion [first described] the circumstances of the 
annoyance that the deaconess and archimandritess 
Heracliana inflicted upon you, and the insults which, 
as you write, were levelled against you by brother 
* John ; and thus your sanctity would have judged, with 
p. 215. the awful tribunal of Christ, before which we shall all 
stand, before your eyes, whether it was right for your 
love of God on account of the annoyance that you 
justly felt to remove those sisters from the monastery 
of the religious Heracliana as persons who were suffer- 

' De. xvii. 6. -' Id., xix. 15. 


1.62. SKl-KCT LETTERS OF THE IIOLV .SEVERUS. 193 


in<j^ injury or not, and what method of treatment ought 
to be devised (?) for the affair in order to remedy the 
injury ; and the use of this method would have been 
decreed ; and besides this fitting punishment would 
also have fallen upon brother John, inasmuch as he 
would have been shown by proofs to be an utterer of 
insults, and a man who is living an unchaste and indis- 
criminate life. If these things had been thus decided 
by discussion, and made known to my meanness, I 
would without anv hesitation have confirmed them, 
seeing that they would have been carried out in accord- 
ance with the custom of the holy churches, and in 
accordance with the rules of the monastic life. 

And again after other things. But, since these things 
are thus recorded and supported by evidence, if any- 
thing displeasing to God be done in secret, know that 
it is not possible that until the end .... 


519-38. 


And it seems to me that it was owing to this modera- 
tion of character and humility of mind that the God- 
inspired scripture in Omissions named Moses "the p. 216. 
man of God," the words of the context being as follows : 
" And Moses, the man of God. And his sons were 
called to the observance^ of Levi.''' As to your^ 
saying, "We were afraid on account of the present 

^ The translator therefore read cf)vXaKi]v for (f>vXy]v. 

^ I Pa. xxiii. 14. ^ Fern, pi.; so throughout. 


194 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 62. 

time of confusion and persecution, lest we and the places 
in which we live should lack bishops to ordain/' as far 
as the ordination of a presbyter or of a male deacon, 
by whom the bloodless sacrifice is of necessity per- 
formed, is concerned, this plea would have been good. 
But in the case of a female deaconess, especially in 
monasteries, ordination is received not so much tor the 
sake of the requirements of the mysteries, but for the 
sake of honour only (for the deaconesses in the cities 
are in the habit of ministerinor to the divine laver of 
regeneration in the case of females who are baptized). 
These things I have been compelled to repeat owing- to 
my wish and prayer that in accordance with your high 
and praiseworthy character you may do everything in 
a lawful manner and, as it is written in Proverbs and 
in the Apostle, " provide things honest not only before 
the Lord but also before men,"^ so that, in accordance 
with the testimony of our God and Saviour Jesus, "your 
light may shine before men" and "they may glorify 
your Father in heaven," - and we ourselves may justly 
boast of you. And, now that these words have been 
thus spoken, we pray that God may grant a good 
ending to the things which have once in whatever way 
been done by you, and may cover them with the 
abundance of His graciousness. N^ot the end. 

^ Pr. iii. 4; 2 Co. viii. 21. ^ Mt. v. 16. 


1.63. SELECT LETTERS OF THE IIOLV SEVERUS. 195 

p. 217. 

63. Of the same to Alisacl the deacon. i^Fi^om those 537. 
after banishment, from the gth book the ^2,rd 
letter. ) 

I received the letter of your religiousness, which 
was forwarded to me from Alexandria, from the devout 
Andrew the reader on the eighth of July. And after 
other things. The holy Basil also, the teacher of 
truth, says in his ascetic treatise that he who is 
entrusted with the duty of ministering to the needs 
of a monastery, even if it be the archimandrite, ought 
not to use or spend any of the property of the brother 
hood on any pious object, for example on the support 
of the poor and needy or on the ransoming of captives. 
Therefore neither would the case of the saintly man, 
though it seems to be a matter of piety, have given you 
a right to do anything without my consent, if you are 
certain from the laws and from the will ^ which left the 
legacy- that it is mine. For you must excuse me from 
adopting the honorary expressions used by friends or 
by men who are otherwise on familiar terms with one 
another, " My things are yours," and, " You are my 
lord, lord both of my own person and of what I 
possess." For the subject of the present argument 
is the true state of the facts. Moreover also the 
saintly man ■' does not need a gift from us, seeing p. 218. 
that he has the serene queen, who will provide him 

' Sia^€frt5. - Xqyarov. '' Marg. "he speaks of Theodosius." 


196 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 63. 

if he wish even with more than he needs, and now he 
has all the orthodox also on account of his attested 
steadfastness in the matter of the confession of the 
faith. These things I have written for the sake of 
the principles of the evangelic laws, and for the sake 
of preservinq' a blameless conscience. If it were not 
so, I reckon things once given by you just as if they 
had been given by me. 

And after other things. As to the impious Sergius, 
who is called Bar Fathya ^ and has become broad in 
impiety, so far am I from saying that it was by my 
advice that he was ordained deacon that I even 
anathematize him and the man who, if even in this 
he speaks truth, ordained him : the one for unlawfully 
sleeping with his father's wife or concubine, and the 
other for daring to perform ordinations without wit- 
nesses in other men's cities which do not belong 
to him at all, without an invitation and on his 
own authority, and not even without price but for 
tilth V lucre. Under the same anathema lies also 
Anatolius, who after ordination to the diaconate has 
married a second time and is godless in his doctrines, 
p. 219. even if it is not stated by us, and Podolirius- who has 
taught his children to play the harp and dance, and 
has made them serve the devil, and has fallen under 
the divine canons of the apostles. To the same 
anathema those also are liable who cause confusion 

^ I.e. son of the broad. Probably a rendering of some Greek, 
name (Platys?). -Sic. 


I. 63. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVICRUS. 197 

besides these, and imagine vain things against the 
orthodox faith, Hke those who once " imagined vain 
things against the Lord and against his Anointed,"^ 
and fell from His glory. For these too by always 
reckoning the belly and the passions that are subject 
to the belly as a god inflicted a stain and a blot upon us 
by being numbered with the orthodox. Therefore they 
must plead not to us but to God, whose name they are 
profaning among the nations as Isaiah and Paul say.- 

And aftei' other things. But I was much dis- 
tressed that the serene queen presumes to say such 
grievous, not to say blasphemous, things against the 
holy fathers in respect of doctrines which she does not 
understand, and mocks at the holy Alexander the 
archbishop, who is one of the prelates of the holy 
synod at Nicaea, and father of the apostolic preacher 
Athanasius, on the ground that even in the theology 
of the Trinity he termed person "nature," and jeers 
at him as one of those who practise manual crafts, a 
coppersmith for instance or a carpenter of the name of 
Alexander, or as she says by way of accusation an p. 220. 
advocate of the treasure-chambers.^ Let her then 
mock and jeer at the other saintly Alexander also, 
who was in the same times bishop of Constantinople, 
and by stretching out his hands all night and praying 
brought it about that, when the impious Arius was 
going to communicate hypocritically with the orthodox, 
his entrails fell through his belly and he gave up the 

^ Ps. ii. I, 2. '■' Is. Hi. 5 ; Ro. ii. 24. ■' I.e. advocatus fisci. 


198 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. I. 63. 

p-host ; if the fact that a man is called Alexander is a 
jest, and an occasion and subject^ for jeering. What 
are we to do about these things, except be silent and 
grieve our heart, and ask God to have mercy upon our 
many lawlessnesses ? For, though much might have 
been said in answer to these things, it is better for us 
to be silent. As to the mischievous words that the 
heretics invent, the expressions of the holy fathers 
show what they are, blinding as they do like some 
lightning-flash their keen eyes, and enlightening the 
minds of the orthodox and understanding, while the 
uninstructed and unlearned see that God is glorified 
and admired among His saints, as David says in song,"^ 
for the things at which they jest and against which 
they blaspheme. I speak the truth and do not lie 
when I say that, since I wrote the treatise "Against 
the Grammarian," ^ there has been no one among 
p. 221. the believers who had a high or moderate or small 
share in divine knowledge who was not astonished 
when he found such expressions of the holy fathers 
collected there, some expressed at length others in few 
words, and stopping the mouth of the blaspheming 
heretics, who plot against the truth itself. From what 
you now say, that the serene queen has not shrunk 
from saying such presumptuous things against the holy 
fathers, I certainly iniagine that she has also spurned 
and despised, as vain trifling and superfluous futility, 


' vTTo^eo-ts. '" Ps. Ixxxviii. 8. 

■■' Add. 17,154 ; cf. Zach. Rh. vii. 10. 


/ 


II. I. SKLECT LKTTERS OI' THK IIOL^■ SEN'KRUS. 199 

my little treatise on the question whether our Lord 
and God Jesus Christ should be said to be from two 
substances even as from two natures, which she 
thought good to accept when it was copied by you 
in laro-e letters, or throug^h fear of the kino's laws 
which were put forth against my writings has not 
dared to accept it. I wrote to you at that time from 
Chios and to the magnificent and Christ - loving 
chamberlain Julian to give it to be copied : but you 
wrote nothing at all to me upon these matters. He 
who writes an answer should reply to all the points 
contained in the letter. Not the end. 


II. Second section.' About his ordination before p. 222. 
episcopacy ; and about the precedence of 
bishops and another doubtful point regarding 
them ; and about men who give themselves 
out as bishops and ordain ; and about the 
proper ordination of bishops. 


1. Of the same to the pati'icians. [Fivj/i those before 508-11, 
episcopaey, fro))i the ^rci book the ^th letter.) 

As the brightness of the stars brincjs comfort to 
those who in the depth of night raise their looks 
towards heaven, so it is good for us also, whose 

^ titAo5. 


200 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. II. I. 

mind's eye is darkened by the darkness of sorrow, 
to look towards you the rational stars of the sacred 
Senate. 1 If we are allowed to enjoy your genial 
splendour, all the cloud of despondency will pass 
away, and we shall certainly see the sun also which 
is surrounded by you shining gently upon us as at 
hot noonday. It has come to the ears of our 
p. 223. worthlessness that our pious Christ - loving king 
believed that some of us without having priestly 
rank are officiating as priests with profane hands 
and handling the sacraments. Such reports it is 
the practice of slanderers to put forth about us : 
who, being unable to accuse the orthodoxy of our 
faith for which we were persecuted, betake them- 
selves to such unholy futilities. But our acts are 
known to everyone, even if we ourselves keep silent. 
Although we are sinners, yet we are not unversed 
in the divine scriptures, nor have we an uninstructed 
mind with regard to them (I forbear to say that 
we make these our meditation by night and by 
day, as we are commanded -). Trying therefore as 
we do to direct our own life by them, we know 
that all who coveted the priestly functions without 
being in the position of priests suffered sudden death. 
Such were Dathan and Abiram and the company of 
Korah : who wished to usurp the high-priestly office 
of Moses and Aaron, and dared to burn incense, and 
the earth opened and swallowed some of them up, 

^ (rvyK\r]Tos fiiovXy]. ' Josh. i. 8. 


11. I. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 201 

while others were consumed by the strange fire. 
Another man. because he presumed to touch the 
sacred ark with profane hand when it leaned over 
and was about to be dashed to the ground, was 
immediately struck lifeless. And what of Uzziah the p- -24. 
king ? Is it not the fact that, because he incon- 
siderately dared to be called a priest, he was smitten 
with the scab of leprosy between his eyes before he 
passed the sacred barrier^ or veil, and was thenceforth 
ashamed even to rei^n ? How then could we who 
through mercy devote ourselves to the study of such 
teachings, and so know that there was power even in 
the legal shadowy service, have presumed to officiate 
as priests with unconsecrated hands at the heavenly 
sacrifice, which even to angels is inaccessible, but out 
of benignance has been made accessible to the priests 
only, because they typify Christ ? For it is in truth 
He who down to the present time offers Himself every 
day on our behalf to God and the Father. Those who 
minister in the new covenant - do not ofier any new 
sacrifice upon the altar, but celebrate the memory of 
that one, in which Christ, God the Word the high- 
priest, the priesthood, the new and glorious victim, 
and noble oblation preparative for immortal life, offered 
Himself. In fact the wise Paul also in his epistle to 
the Hebrews says of Christ, " By one offering He hath 
perfected them that are sanctified :" ^ and again, "So 
also Christ, having been once offered to bear the sins 

' Kay/ceXov. - 8ia6t]K-q. '■' He. X. 14. 


202 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 11. I. 

of many, shall appear a second time without sin, to 
those who look for Him for salvation through faith." ^ 
That Christ's mystery is inaccessible even to the 

v-^-s- sublime hosts Isaiah the loud trumpet of the prophets 
bears witness who said that one of the suprasensual 
and immaterial hosts of the seraphs took a coal 
with the tongs and not in his hand, and laid it on 
his lips and said, " This shall purge thy sins." ^ 
That the coal signifies the one Christ made out of 
two elements, of the Godhead I mean and of the 
manhood which are each perfect, undoubtedly does 
not escape your God-loving" excellencies. Hold- 
ing therefore to such right principles, in order 
to cause perfect confidence in what we say, we lay 
ourselves under the direst curse, to fall from the 
glory of the Holy Trinity and not attain to the 
hope promised to Christians, if we are conscious in 
ourselves that any such presumptuous deed has been 
committed by our fathers or is being committed. If 
anyone presumes to lay hands upon the priesthood 
without having received the sacred ordination lawfully 
and in accordance with the apostolic canons, let him 
be anathema, and let him be ranked with men that rob 
a sanctuary and lie in wait at altars.^ The other 
slander also we cast from us and assert that no one 
who has been admitted to the clergy in the churches 
has been re-ordained among us. Wherefore we even 

i>. 226. place under anathema the man who re-ordains these. 


' Jd. ix. 28. ' Is. vi. 6, 7. ■'• I.e. UpocrvXoi and f3o)iJ.o\6\ou 


II. I. Sl'XECT LETTERS OK TIIK I[OL\ SKVERUS. 203 

or says that they must bt.- re-ordained. I^ut, if anyone 
after he has been admitted to the clergy has turned 
his eye towards the soHtary mode of life, and, being" 
trained in the toilsome exercises of philosophy, and 
desiring to know how to bear contempt for Christ's 
sake, has debarred himself for a time from the 
ministry, this is not re - ordination (far be it !), but 
a philosophic and divine exercise which renders the 
priest more worthy of reverence. It is in fact the 
custom of our fathers to look to the soul's profit onl)'. 
and, when men ha-ve once taken upon themselves to 
practise philosophy, whether they be priests or whether 
they be kings, to lead them on through the perform- 
ance of humble services, in order that by trampling 
upon pride they may imitate Him who humbled 
Himself for our salvation and became flesh and took 
the form of a slave. For the correct definition of 
philosophy is this, that a man imitate God as much 
as possible. Therefore, now that you know these 
things, we beg your glorious noble eminences to 
convey them to the ears of our Christ-loving trium- 
phant king. For it is not just that, when we are 
near and able to give satisfactory answers to the 
slanders against us, that we should be condemned by 
default as if we were absent. The end. 


204 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. II. 2. 


p. 227. 

519-38. 2. Of the same to John and John the presbyters. [From 
those after banishment, from the \st book the 6th 
letter. ) 

Your holinesses' letter, which was brought me by 
Zenobius the devout deacon, has refreshed me greatly, 
and has been to me, as in the words of the proverb, 
"as cool water that relieveth a thirsty soul."^ And 
after other things. As to what you say about those 
who are residing in Byzantium, the report that has 
been received is true, that they contended about pre- 
cedence. In fact at an earlier time also thev discussed 
this doubtful point, and the proper regulation - was 
given. Now however, when they are outside the 
phantasy^ of worldly sleep, they ought not to have 
contended as with a shadow and seen dreams. But 
may the hateful passion of jealousy and envy perish 
from among men, a passion that goes down with a man 
even to Hades itself and is a thing unendurable! For 
this reason the God-inspired scripture says, " Wrath 
is merciless and anger sharp, but nothing endureth 
jealousy.""* For both the merciless wrath and the 
sharp anger eat away and destroy those against whom 
they are whetted : but still it is sometimes possible for 
us to assuage them and turn them aside, by lapse of 
time and by methods of treatment and by gifts. But 
jealousy there is nothing than can endure. This 
p. 228. passion knows one relief, the destruction of the man 

' Pr. XXV, 25. ^ TiVo?. ^ cfyavTaaia. * Pr. xxvii. 4. 


II. 2. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOL^' SEVERUS. 205 

who is its object, and his ruin : and in the same fashion 

also the death of the man hiniself who is jealous : 

especially that of the soul before that of the body. 

For the very wise book of Job says. " Jealousy slayeth 

him that is in error." ^ Such annoyances I received 

from the two aforesaid men : and He who came down 

from on high and humbled Himself for our sake and 

said, '' My peace I give unto you, my tranquillity I 

leave unto you,"' - breathed upon them and extinguished 

their gall, and even caused them wholly to disappear. 

Do not wonder if these strove about precedence. Such 

things indeed happened even in former times. W^hen 

in old days Helladius succeeded to the see of the men 

of Caisarea after the o-reat and renowned Basil, a man 

who lived a virtuous life and was worthy of such a 

succession, and was one of the holy men of the synod 

of the hundred and fifty, Cappadocia having been 

divided into two, Theodore, a man praiseworthy both 

for faith and for character, was bishop of the other 

metropolis (this was Tyana) : and under him among 

others was Bosporius, a good man and one who had 

reached such a high standard of holiness that even his p. 229 

grave performs miracles down to the present day. 

But, though they were both of such a character and so 

hiofhlv exalted in virtue, thev strove with one another 

about some contemptible claim of right in their parish, 

and fell into ereat and lone rivalrv : and they had the 

two Gregories, he of Nyssa siding w^ith Helladius and 

' Job V. 5. -John xiv. 27. 


206 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. II. 2. 

he of Nazianzus with Theodore, and Bosporius the 
renowned, divided in sympathies, and like armed men 
bringing help to the generals when they engaged in 
battle, and writing letters in opposition to one another. 
If then those towers of the church and men of heavenly 
minds were convicted of sometimes walking upon earth, 
what will a man say of ourselves the gnats, who are 
ever flying over the sores and mire of passions and 
feeding on them ? Nor yet at this must one wonder, I 
mean that one of the very men who have been men- 
tioned now uses humble words, saying, "It is against 
the things done at Chalcedon, not against the actual 
p. 230. synod itself, that we must put forth a sentence and 
anathema." For Liberius, the bishop of Rome, re- 
sisted Constantius even to blood, on behalf of Athan- 
asius the apostolic preacher of the orthodox faith, and 
went out to the figurative stadiiuii, and readily allowed 
himself to be carried into exile : and at last, bent bv the 
long continuance of the sojourn in the place of exile, 
he gave way, and yielded to the violence of the time. 
Hosius also the bishop of Corduba (a little city so 
named), who had always been arrayed on the side of 
the orthodox, owing to his extreme old age and ad- 
vanced time of life, was overcome at Nice in Thrace, 
and submitted to compulsion. And Athanasius the 
champion^ of the truth in word and in deed, a man of 
practised skill in doing service, who discharges the 
rational shafts against enemies with understanding, 

^ dycovicTTv;?. 


II. 3- SELKCT lktti;r.s ()1- the holy SEVHKL'S. 207 

both in epistles and in treatises against the Arionianita- 
calls Hosius "of honourable old age,"^ and mentions 
him with distinction : while in respect of the contests 
undergone by Liberius he praises and extols the man ; 
saying not a word of what happened to them under 
violence, but like a wise man passing rapidly over it ;'. 231 
with closed eyes, as the saying is. Let us also there- 
lore, inasmuch as sacred contests lie before us, follow 
the spiritual captains, and in respect of actions on 
the right side, both be ourselves edified and edify 
others thereby, in order that the others also may be 
strengthened : but human actions let us pass rapidly 
over. For we are mortal and weak, and we are put 
under compulsion and led by force by spirits of wicked- 
ness. Let us pray therefore that the details of our 
weakness be not greatly exposed. But you for your 
part have the power of sharing the contest with every- 
one through your prayers. Not the end. 

3. Of the same to the orthodox in Eiuesa. [Fnvn those 518-9. 
aftei"- banishment, fj'oni the 2nd book the gyrd letter. )' 

Men often think that time is bringing them new and 
unwonted events. Nevertheless they are not such as 
are wholly without similar instances in times that have 
already passed. This is confirmed by Koheleth who 

^ Ap. c. Ar. 44 (?). This is in a letter of the Synod of Sardica. 
- A comparison with ix. i seems to show that this letter was 
•written very soon after banishment. 


208 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. II. 3. 

says, "There is nothing new under the sun."^ Many 
indeed have desired the priesthood in an unhallowed 
manner ; of which unlawful thought an instance was 
provided in time past by Dathan and Abiram, and the 
company of Korah who rose against Moses and Aaron, 
the first priests under the shadowy law. A scion of 

p- 232. this impious action and of this audacious deed is this 
also which has just been reported to me in the desert, 
where I am dwelling unseen for the sake of the com- 
mon hope and substance of our salvation, which is 
the orthodox faith. I learn that a certain Gregory 
and Isaiah, who register their fathers' house the one 
in Pontus, the other in Armenia, have appeared in 
the countries of the East and are falsely and lyingly 
ascribinor to themselves the orreat name and the func- 
tions of the episcopate : and it is reported that their 
mad practices do not extend to words only : but 
Gregory in the great distinguished Christ-loving city 
of the Antiochenes, and Isaiah in the illustrious believ- 
ing metropolis of the Emesenes, have laid their pre- 
sumptuous and illegal hand upon certain men, and by a 
mockery as in a play will create certain men ridiculous 
priests for filthy lucre ; like those whom Jeroboam the 
rebel created, after he had led the ten tribes away from 
the lawful service which was established through Moses 
the great, and fashioned golden calves, and by one and 
the same creation instituted at the same time both the 

P- 233- hateful thing and the falsely-named hierophants - of 

' Ec. i, 9. ^ Marzane = ixvcrrai. 


II. 3- SELECT LETTERS OE THE IIOLV SEVERUS. 209 

the creation itself. Gregory, I learn, has created a 
traud more plausible than that of Isaiah ; having in 
fact stated of himself that he is bishop of Diocaesarea 
which is situated in the Pontic diocese, and that he left 
his throne on account of the sound faith : which, if 
true, would be worthy of crowns, and of all praise that is 
warranted by the spiritual laws : and, to speak plainly, a 
thing preparative for the kingdom of heaven according 
to the voice of the Lord that cannot lie which cries in 
the Gospels, '* Blessed are they which have been perse- 
cuted for risfhteousness' sake for theirs is the kingdom 
of heaven."'^ But Isaiah's elaboration is, I learn, twice 
as abominable : and it has been so badly concocted 
that, even if the foolish tale were established, he would 
have no confirmation whatever for his position nor any 
plausibility. Certain men in Egypt told me that he 
says he is a bishop, but, when he alleges ordination to 
have been performed over him, he produces no evidence 
or proof, names no city, and says that it was performed 
by one man, and by him when he was drawing his last 
breath and lying dead. For, when he kept perversely 
lying and was asked for proof of what he was saying, 
he came down to this as the sum of the allegation and 
tripped himself up. This is in fact established by the 
sacred text which says, "He that is incautious with his 
lips in that he is perverse shall be tripped up."^ Who p- 234. 
is there who is reckoned amoncr Christians to whom 
it is not manifest that these thing's stand outside all 

' Mt. V. 10. - Pr. X. 8. 

14 


210 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. II. 3. 

canonical order and the apostolic church ? Indeed 
from the very beginning those who were disciples and 
eye-witnesses and ministers of the Word Himself 
divided the bishops among cities, and to each church 
as to a spiritual bride figuratively united the bishop as 
a brideoroom. A witness of this is the divine Paul 
who writes to Titus and says, " For this cause left I 
thee in Crete that thou shouldest set in order the 
things that are wanting, and appoint presbyters in 
every city as I commanded thee." Here he calls 
bishops presbyters : for indeed after saying, " In order 
that thou shouldest appoint presbyters in every city," 
he went on further to say, " For the bishop must be 
blameless, as the steward of God."^ This the holy 
John also, who was bishop of Constantinople, inter- 
preted in this way when he wrote as follows about 
Titus : " This man was highly approved among those 
who were with Paul : and, if not, he would not have 
entrusted the island to him in its entirety, nor have 
commanded him to supply the things that were want- 
ing ('in order that thou shouldest set in order the 
p. 235. things that are wanting'): he would not have entrusted 
him with the selection of so many bishops, if it had not 
been that he had great confidence in the man."- The 
apostles also divided the peoples by the lots of the 
Holy Spirit : and each of them took possession of the 
inheritance that was g-iven to him, and was contented 
with it : and the gift of it was made to him by inspira- 

1 Tit. i. 5, 7. ^ P.G. Ixii. 663. 


II. 3- SELECT LETTERS OF THE IIULV SEVERUS. 211 

tion from above. This gift the singing prophet com- 
pared to the wings of a dove that are covered with 
silver and her feathers superbly decorated with gold ; 
and he foretold that this grace would be eiven them 
openly and in actual deeds, in that he addresses his words 
to them thus, "If ye lie among the lots, there there are 
the wings of a dove that are covered with silver, and 
her feathers with the yellowness of gold ' : ^ the words 
manifestly showing this, that, if each apostle had not 
been satisfied with the lot that fell to him and shown 
regard for order, the Holy Spirit would not have 
bountitully bestowed upon them illustrious powers 
of working siijns and wonders, and teachino" that 
shone after the fashion of silver, and the steadfastness 
in sufferino's which oold shows when tried in the fire 
of the furnace. But the excellent Isaiah does not fear 
to give himself out as holding a bishopric not obtained 
by lot and irregular and without a city. Who has 
seen a marriage-chamber of an unnamed bride, and 
a foul bridegroom without a consort, or rather one 
who becomes everything to himself, as the nature of 
his fiction requires ? I hear that those who after the p- 236. 
fashion of some brute beast have adhered to his error, 
three or four wicked creatures, bring forward a canon 
also to substantiate their fraud which is without sub- 
stance and full of all absurdity. This they also say is 
a canon of Simon the Canana;an, and it has never pre- 
vailed in the holy churches and been accepted by holy 

^ Ps. Ixvii. 14. 


212 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. II. 3. 

synods, or been named in them at all. How could it 
have been, when the holy canons once for all enact 
that the ordination of a bishop must not be performed 
under any other conditions by him who has the right 
to ordain except when all the bishops of the same 
province ^ take part in the solemn function, or, if they 
are not all present, at any rate there shall be no 
smaller number than three, and the others also shall 
give their psephisma by their letters, even if they are 
absent in body ? " For in ecclesiastical regulations 
enactments carefully made at a later time in the 
churches allow no play to those of ancient date. For 
p. 237. example Cyprian the divine among bishops, who 
adorned the chief throne of Africa with all excellencies, 
but above all with a crown of martyrdom, once 
assembled a synod of the saintly bishops under him 
and ruled that converts from heresy must not be 
accepted, unless they have received the baptism given 
by the orthodox. And in modern times, now that 
the high-priests who fed the churches in the West 
and in the East, as well as the great and holy synod 
of the three hundred and eighteen, have discussed the 
quality of heresies, and enacted that we ought not in 
the case of all of them to accept penitents through 
baptism, no one presumes contrary to this conclusion 
to apply baptism to those who come from all heresies, 
as seemed right at an earlier time to Cyprian : but, 
if anyone contrary to the law which has prevailed shall 


\/ 


iiTapx^a.. - Mansi ii. 669. 


II. 3- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 213 

presume to re-baptize, he will fall within the grasp of 
the canons as having performed unlawful actions. The 
bishop also of the cit\' renowned for its orthodox faith 
of the city ^ of the Alexandrines was in old times 
appointed by presbyters. But in modern times, in 
accordance with the canon which has prevailed every- p- 23^- 
where, the solemn institution of their bishop is 
performed by bishops : and no one makes light of 
the accurate practice that prevails in the holy churches 
and recurs to the earlier condition of things, which has 
given way to the later clear and accurate, deliberate 
and spiritual injunctions."' However, if agreeable, we 
will also adduce the canon that is given out as having 
been enacted by Simon the Cananaean, in order that 
everyone may learn that Isaiah's partners in the idle 
fiction are stirring up destruction against themselves, 
as the common saying is. It is said to be as follows : 
" I also, Simon the Canansean, command you by how 
many the bishop ought to be ordained. A bishop 
should be ordained by two or by three bishops. But, 
if anyone be ordained by one bishop, let both him and 
the man who ordained him be deprived. But, if 
necessity arise for him to be ordained by one, since 
a lara"e number cannot come, because there is a 
persecution or some other cause, let him bring a p. 239. 
psepJiisnia of authority from several bishops."-^ Where 
then are we to place the fictitious ordination of Isaiah, 

' Misunderstanding of 7roA.eojs Ti]<i 'AAefavSpewr. 

" See Journ. of Theol. St. ii. 612, iii. 278. "■ Const. Ap. viii. 27. 


214 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. II. 3. 

which passes all plausibility ? Who are the bishops 
who confirmed for him the ordination that was per- 
formed by one as he says ? or where are those who 
made iho. psephisuia about him ? It is known to every- 
one that the apostles made all their enactments through 
the Holy Spirit, and saw the future like the present 
through the illumination of the heavenly liofht from 
above. Therefore it seems that Isaiah's ordination 
escaped the notice of Simon the Canansean, and the 
fact that it alone was to be devoid of bishops to make 
a psephisma about him, and to confirm that which was 
lame and imperfect. This is an absurdity, and a piece 
of silly trifling : nay rather it is a fit subject for sorrow, 
and fraught with tears. For how will even the spirits 
of the saints refrain from sighing when they see the 
high priesthood, which is awful even in the sight of the 
heavenly powers themselves, turned into a mockery ? 
For of such a kind are the mysteries to which we 
summon, which, as Peter the chosen one of the 
apostles wrote, even "the angels desire to look into." ^ 
What need is there of many words, when the very 
devices of Isaiah the stony man, who has taken to him 
all the madness of Satan, show the demon-like nature 
of the act ? He has indeed refuted his impiety which 
he falsely reported of himself by means of another 
p. 240. impiety, adding iniquity to his iniquity according to 
the saying of the Psalmist in the Psalms." For he did 
not even stay his presumptuous and unholy hand at 

1 I Pe. i. 12. - Ps. Ixviii. 28." 


II. 3- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 215 

the name of deacons and of presbyters, but he assigns 
bishops also and archbishops to peoples and to cities, 
after the manner of the giants of the fable who sprang 
from the earth. And "let so-and-so," he says, "be 
archbishop of Egypt : and so-and-so of Pamphylia : 
and another of Palestine " : and, since he lacks instru- 
ments for such madness, I have learned that he even 
collects men for himself from the crossroads, some 
blind men some lepers, some men with other bodily 
afflictions or suffering from disease. When I say this, 
I do not put forward the infirmities of the body as 
something shameful (the one real sickness and disease 
is the sin of the soul and falling away on our part from 
God), but I ani desirous of showing the folly of the 
lunatic, how he is eager to lay his unholy and all- . 
presumptuous hand even upon irrational things, if 
one may so speak, if the fatuity of men fail him. 
The holy Basil also in his letters mentions such 
roving pseudo-bishops as having been foolishly in- 
stituted by the foolish Apollinaris, writing thus : "Is 
not the great mystery of religion made a laughing- 
stock, in that bishops are going about without p. 241. 
people and clergy, carrying about the bare name 
onlv, and doingf no such rioht action as tends to the 
extension of the gospel of our salvation?"^; so the 
spirit of error, which uttered much nonsense in Apol- 
linaris and in the heretics who resemble him, but was 
deaf and dumb, as the Gospel says,"-^ was in Isaiah 

^ Ep. 265. 2. -^ Mk. ix. 25. 


216 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. II. 3, 

and knew how to do uncanonical acts. Many other 
things might be said to refute the illegal fraud and this 
irrational madness. But, since the greatness of the 
unseemly and unstable abomination reaches to absurd- 
ity, it is a very superfluous thing to extend the dis- 
cussion unnecessarily. What synod of saintly orthodox 
bishops has accepted this ? Who has not closed his 
ears and refused to endure even so much as the bare 
mention of this unlawful report ? In what other country 
did not the gentle Isaiah deceive, or to what place did 
he not betake himself, as we may hear those that 
know relate ? Did he not move his erring steps to 
Egypt seeing that he has no stability, but as Jeremiah 
the prophet says loved to move his feet ^ ? did he not 
p. 242. betake himself to Pamphylia, boasting and lying and 
saying that he was called to this illegal episcopate by 
Leontius the saintly old hermit, who practised the 
philosophic life in the wilderness ? for on the contrary 
he was actually anathematized by him by word of 
mouth, as all who dwell in that country testify. Did 
he not also come to the great Christ- loving city of 
Alexander, having been driven to it, like some ship 
without a helmsman, by the stormy waves of error ; 
and, after he had been rejected by all, form the plan, 
as he in fact said, of confirming the fiction regarding 
him by supposed signs, and setting himself to imitate 
Christ, and fast forty days continuously, in order to 
raise a dead boy who lay like meat that has been dried 

^ Jer. xiv. 10. 


II. 3- SELECT LETTERS OE THE IKJLV SEVERUS. 217 

and thrown into an earthenwares vessel ; but, when the 
greater part of the forty days had passed, he was sorely 
tried by the lack of food, which was broken by bread 
taken by stealth, though he hypocritically pretended 
not to have tasted anything ; while the dead boy's 
father was beginning to mourn and weep at having 
been disappointed of his hope, and was crying aloud 
and wailing bitterly and after the manner of a rustic 
(he was a gardener) ; but the body having become 
putrid filled the house with noisome corruption and a 
deadly smell, so that the pretended bishop, simulated p- 243- 
faster, and false miracle-worker was in danger of being 
delivered to the lire, seeing that his hateful conduct 
had been exposed, if it had not been that he hid him- 
self and escaped from the hands of those who sought to 
inflict a just vengeance upon him for the drunkenness 
of his mind ? Is inquiry therefore needed in the case 
of such men, who from the declaration ^ of our Saviour 
himselt have the confutation which plainly says of false 
shepherds like them, " By their fruits ye shall know 
them""'? If "the less is blessed by the greater,"^ as 
the wise Paul says, let us examine as a proposition who 
it was who gave Isaiah the fictitious ordination. Was 
it one who has the right of ordaining bishops and, 
being a metropolitan, knows also the prayer for the 
appointment of high-priests? or, if as a concession we 
grant this point also, how does a bishop of a metropolis 
give a man who is ordained by him authority to institute 

' a7rd</)ao-ts. " Mt. vii. 1 6 ^' He. vii. 7. 


218 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. II. 3. 

archbishops among peoples and cities, as in fables and 
dreams? If, as he says, bishop Epiphanius of saintly 
memory -^ was actually drawing his last breath and giv- 
ing up the ghost, a man who was not bishop of a 

p. 244. metropolis, but of one of the cities under a metropolis, 
and gave him the hand of ordination at the moment of 
death, and never finished the ordination such as it was, 
what are we to say of such a prayer ? and how is it not 
a matter for tears, if Paul in speaking to the Corinthians 
about all prayer says, " I will pray with my spirit, I 
will pray also with my understanding,"'-^ while Isaiah's 
institutor uttered the prayer which is, if one may so 
say, higher and more solemn than all prayers, I mean 
that which institutes high-priests, with faltering tongue 
and indistinct and feeble voice, when he had not even 
ordinary intelligent consciousness, and heard it repeated 
from a book like a small boy who goes to school, and 
each word ^ was pronounced and lisped to him by those 
standing round him, since they elaborate this also as 
part and parcel of the snare and fraud ? All the details 
of this elaborate play and of the case * show weakness 
and lack of substance, but set the saintly bishop Epi- 
phanius free from calumny, who departed blamelessly 
to the Lord, and, when he stands before the judgment- 
seat that does not respect persons on the last day, will 
have no knowledge of what the prayer of the ordination 

p. 245. of a bishop is, and by the sentence of the just Judge 
wrll send those who calumniate him to the fire that is 

1 Cf. vit. Sev. p. 26 1. 37. 2 I Co. xiv. 15. 


II. 3- SELECT LETTERS OF THE IIOLV SEVERUS. 219 

not quenched, and the wicked Isaiah to the outer dark- 
ness, with those that are "clad in strange apparel," as 
one of the prophets said.^ Why should one repeat the 
whole story ? It has been told me that he has reached 
such a height of madness as even to entitle himself 
"high-priest of high-priests," and even "apostle" also, 
and thereby to show everyone that he has received the 
evil spirit of Montanus and of Mani. For in fact those 
also named themselves apostles, and presumed to exalt 
themselves to the title of Paraclete which cannot be 
shared by any creature, and fitly belongs to Christ only 
and to the Holy Spirit; imitating Satan the chief of 
the rebel host, who in ancient times said, " I will exalt 
myself to heaven, and above the stars of heaven will I 
set my throne," "^ and is also expected through Anti- 
christ, as Paul the speaker of divine things foretold, 
" to sit in the temple of God and make it appear con- 
cerning himself that he is God."^ And yet, after those 
stupid unlearned advocates of the error have gone 
through all these things which show the artificial nature 
of the fiction, they presume, I hear, to cite, as if the 
imao-inarv ordination of Isaiah were valid, the action 
that was taken in the case of Gregory the Miracle- 
worker, I mean how Phaedimus who ordained this man p- 246. 
hunted him by the power of prayer when he was flee- 
ing from the burden of the bishopric, and when absent 
and at a distance uttered a prayer, so that even when 
absent he was involved in the chains of prayer, and 

^ Zeph. i. 8. - Is. xiv. 13, 14. ^2 Th. ii. 4. 


220 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. II. 3. 

was caught in the nets of the Spirit from which there 
is no escape, and hastened to him who was lawfully 
pursuing him, and thus underwent and received all the 
legal requirements of ordination, and did not stop at 
the prayer made at a distance, as is thought by the 
men who are bereft of intellioence and do not under- 
stand what they read. A witness of this is Gregory, 
who wrote his history, the brother in blood and in the 
Spirit and in the office of the high-priesthood of the 
great Basil, and bishop of Nyssa, who wrote as 
follows : " For this reason Phsedimus having been by 
some specially divine impulse roused to the task 
before him, paying no regarci to the intervening space 
by which he was separdted from Gregory (seeing he 
was three days' journey distant from him), but, looking 
to God and saying that he himself was seen by God 
at that hour in the same way as he was, in place of 
a hand applies the spoken word to Gregory, dedicating 
to God a man who was absent in bodv, and allottinsf 
p. 247. him to a city which down to those times had, it so 
happened, been held in the error of idols, so that, 
while those who dwelt in the city itself and in its 
neighbourhood were without number, there were not 
found more than seventeen who had received the word 
of faith. Having thus therefore received the yoke by 
force, and all the legal requirements having afterwards 
been performed over him, and having asked the man 
who proclaimed the priesthood over him for a short 
time to reflect upon the exact character of the mystery, 
he no longer thought it right for him, as the Apostle 


II. 3- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 221 

said, to ' attend to blood and flesh,' but asked God that 
a revelation of the secrets might be made to him. " ' 
You see he has clearly shown that the prayer made at 
a distance only stopped his course of flight, but all the 
legal requirements were performed over him after he 
had hastened to him who consecrated him, and nothing 
whatever was lacking. At the same time it has 
certainly been admitted that, since Phaedimus was 
head of the metropolis of the men of Amasia, that 
he had his bishops close by him, and with them 
pursued Gregory. For, when he pursued, he pursued 
promptly : so that, when he had caught the quarry, 
he immediately performed the ordination. Accord- 
ingly he had the bishops standing round him, and 
taking part with him in the prayer also that was made 
over the divine Gregory at a distance. But it seems p- ^^ 
ridiculous for us to pass beyond the proper limits in 
considering the silly arguments of those deceivers, and 
to OTQ on to refute arguments that are feeble and have 
no substance, which some intelligent and devout 
hermits repeated to me in Egypt as having been 
invented by one of Isaiah's deceivers. To these 
I also said, " The saintly bishop Epiphanius we 
ourselves committed to the grave in our monastery ^ 
in Palestine : and of these follies and futilities we have 
a clear written refutation. For indeed at the very 
end of his life he made a will,^ in which he appointed 
count Eusebius the Alexandrine of magnificent 

' P.G. xlvi. 909. - Cf. vit. Sev. p, 26. ^ hadijKrj. 


222 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. II. 3. 

memory, who was called ' Eleonos,' ^ who was living 
at that time his heir, because he knew that the man 
had spent all his property on the poor, ordering that 
what was left by him also should be distributed to the 
needy in an exactly similar manner : and Isaiah was 
to have charge of the distribution of it, who was then 
educating the sons of the magnificent Eusebius, who 
were being brought up in the monastic fashion. And 
the man who made these provisions at the actual 
very gate of departure from the world named Isaiah 
'presbyter,' thereby leaving a written confutation of 
the dead calumny. For, if he had had the intention 
p- -49- of ordaining him bishop after the will,- he would not 
yesterday have named a man in writing 'presbyter,' 
whom to-morrow he was a-oing- to make an unrecorded 
and unnamed bishop. This is manifestly foolishness. 
But let the reproof be turned against the head of those 
who invented the fraud." They, having heard these 
thinofs and been delighted at what w^as said, said to 
me, " One of us was invited bv Isaiah through a 
certain intermediary to become archbishop of Egypt. 
However all we Egyptians made answer with one 
consent, ' We for our part do not inquire into this 
foolish tale of Isaiah's ordination : but we hold to 
the canon of the holy and great synod of the three 
hundred and eighteen fathers, knowing an ordination 
that is performed by one bishop to be void and 
illegal.' " To this I made answer and said : " Let 

^ I.e. 0 'EAewvos (gen.). " ^iaBr]Ky]. 


II. 3- SELECT LETTERS OK THE HOLY SEVERUS. 223 

your devoutnesses know that at a later time also, when 
Paulinus, being- patriarch of the city of the Antiochenes, 
himself alone at the end of his life ordained Evacrrius 
and appointed him his successor, while the orthodox 
bishops in the East lawfully ordained Flavian arch- 
bishop of the same Antioch, a synod was assembled 
to deal with this case ^ : in the West in the city of p- 250. 
Capua : and in the East at Ccesarea in Palestine : 
because Siricius, who was then archbishop of Rome, 
had decided that after the discussion at Capua the 
task of makino- a more careful investigation of the 
actual facts of the case ^ should be transferred to 
the East, Theophilus, the archbishop of the great 
city of the Alexandrines, having been invited to 
preside over those who were assembled : who owing 
to the overthrow of the heathen temples and of the 
images in Alexander's city had his time occupied and 
failed to join in assembly with them. And then the 
synod of saintly bishops which was assembled at 
Csesarea in Palestine reported its decree to the God- 
loving kings of pious memory, Theodosius, Arcadius, 
and Honorius, and made it known to them in these 
words : ' For we have read the letter of our 
reverend brothers to our reverend brother and 
bishop"' Theophilus, and that which was written to 
ourselves the bishops of the East by the bishops 
at Capua, and that of the religious Siricius the bishop p. 251. 
of Rome, to the effect that before all things we must 

^ iiTTo^co-is. " The Greek must have been a-vveTrLa-Koirov. 


224 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. II. 3. 

look to this point, i.e. not to disturb the canon of 
Nicsea which clearly lays down that it is not per- 
missible for the ordination of a bishop to be performed 
by one only.^ There was further inserted in the letter 
of the religious bishop Siricius a decision also upon 
the hearino; that was to be held : in which was inserted 
the statement "there must be one bishop of Antioch, 
he who has been legally and ecclesiastically appointed 
according to the canon of the Synod of Nicaea " ; and 
which clearly decreed that an ordination performed by 
one is illegal and not to be accepted. With joy there- 
fore we have received the accurate teaching of bishop 
Siricius concerning the church canons, and, following 
this letter, we have decreed that these things be 
ratified : in that we have given legal and just votes, 
to the effect that we know one bishop of Antioch only 
the religious lord Flavian the bishop.' " ' After I had 
ofiven vent to these words, the devout old men and 
p. 252. Egyptian monks to whom I was speaking added that 
the advocate of Isaiahs deception who promised them 
the archbishopric of Egypt used to say that the holy 
Timothy also, the archbishop of the city of the Alex- 
andrines, was ordained by two bishops only, not by 
three accordincr to the canon. And it has been shown 
clearly that Peter also the bishop, he of saintly 
memory, the apostolic man, who came from Iberia, 
our father, was present there, and held the gospel over 
Timothy's sacred head, and made up the number of 

^ Mansi ii. 669. - See Journ. of Theol. St. iii. 433. 


II. 3- SELECT LETTERS OF THE IKJLV SEVERUS. 225 

three bishops : he having been brought by force to the 
church by the orthodox people, and dragged from the 
very bed on which he was still lying as being an old 
and iniirni man. But, while he was being carried 
along by violence, he in an ineffable manner heard 
a voice from heaven commanding hini not to flee from 
the sacred service.^ Whence also he gladly and with 
much assurance - assisted in the ordination. After- 
wards, when the institution had been thus legally 
completed, the whole synod of the God-loving bishops 
of the Egyptian administrative district after these 
things acknowledged and considered the saintly 
Timothy as archbishop : and again, when he was 
returning after exile to Alexander's city, all the p- 253 
bishops of the other districts made union with him 
through the Encyclical letter and proclaimed him 
archbishop. How then do those presumptuous and 
unlearned men presume to compare with those 
legitimate bishops the illegitimate Isaiah, who was 
not even carried in the womb at all or conceived 
like the abortive and imperfect offspring of mothers 
who bring forth abortions, but by the fact of wishing 
it only created himself bishop for those silly men ? 
These things I have written not because I wish to 
upset a thing that is tottering on all sides and contains 
feebleness in itself, but because I desire none of the 
statements made about him and discussed in my 
presence in Egypt to be unknown to your diligences : 

^ Cf. Zach. Rh. iv. I. '' Trky^pof^opia. 

15 


226 SELFXT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. II. 3 

since this other futility also was, as I heard, being ad- 
vanced by that deceiver : " Some men, you know, in the 
churches buy ordinations for gold contrary to the canons. 
Therefore " (he says) " it is in no way beyond the 
limits of what is proper for me too to become a bishop 
contrary to strict canonical rule": and the wretched 
man is not ashamed of daring to confirm his illegal 
fiction by a similar illegality. Who when taken in 
adultery says, " I am not an adulterer because so-and-so 
p- 254- also is a murderer," and, " I have not offended against 
the laws because that man also is an offender"? In 
the next place, in which of the churches of the orthodox, 
fellow, is it openly put forward as a law that it is right 
for some men to be ordained for gold, as you make the 
fictitious and illegal episcopate into a law, and call sin 
rio-hteousness ? If a man tramples in secret on church 
ordinances, he will give account to the just Judge, but 
he will not inflict any stain on the appearance of the 
holy churches, which is confident in its enjoyment of 
freedom from blame and reproof in all things. I forbear 
to say that he even presumed to circulate a fictitious 
letter as having been written by me, which makes a 
show of finding fault with the fraud concerning him, 
and gains the plausibility thence derived, but admits 
that the mockery of the spurious and pretended epis- 
copate was carried to completion. Isaiah therefore, 
who has been on all points rejected as illegitimate and 
unhallowed, and has been cast out as a stinking abom- 
ination, is trying to force himself into your distinguished 
believing metropolis, though there also (speaking under 


II. S. SKLKCT LKTTKRS OF TllK lloLV SKN KKUS. 227 


God's permission) he will not find an entrance. For p-255- 
the proof of your faith and loyakx' has even by actual 
experitnice been disseminated amon^- all men : and we 
know well and are confident that you are gloriously 
minded in the Lord, all you who belong to the revered 
clergy, who have respected the orthodox faith, and all 
vou mao-nificent and distino-uished ktctorcs, who hold the 
first place, and all you who fill up the body of the church, 
and cleave to the sound faith. But I have thought it 
right and seemly for me and a deed consonant with the 
ordinances of the Spirit not to commit to silence that 
which has just come into my thoughts, but to testify 
beforehand to the delusion of error and mark it before- 
hand and point it out beforehand, lest, when the divine 
wrath comes upon those who are led to act in violation 
of the divine laws, and have become the prey of the 
devil, I find myself under condemnation for those men's 
blood. For He that speaks through Ezekiel says, "And 
thou man, I have given thee as a watchman to them of 
the house of Israel, and thou shalt hear a word from 
my mouth. When I shall say to the sinner, ' Thou 
shalt surely die,' and thou speak not that the impious 
man may refrain from his way, the wicked man shall 
die in his wickedness, but his blood will I require at 
thine hand. But, if for thy part thou forewarn the 
impious man concerning his way that he may turn from 
it and he turn not from his way, he shall die in his 
impiety, and thou shalt deliver thy soul." ^ In the same p. 256. 


Eze. iii. 17-19. 


228 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. II. 3. 

way as Isaiah Gregory also has been convicted, as I 
have learned, in the great city of Alexander. For he 
too has been detected, and his guile exposed in the 
minutes^ of the records.- Therefore, learnings these 
things as you do through this mean letter of mine, if 
anyone presumes to name Gregory or Isaiah a bishop, 
or shall reckon as valid the profane ordinations per- 
formed by them, and does not reject even the very 
mention of them as being altogether abominable and 
unlawful, such a man shall be anathema, and shall be 
found an alien to the glory and communion of the 
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, both in 
this world, and in the world that is to come. If anyone, 
despising our exile and the persecution by which we 
are persecuted for the sake of the orthodox faith, shall 
reckon the things written as nothing, he shall give 
account to Him who said to the holy apostles and 
disciples, " But when they persecute you in this city 
flee to the other" ;^ and again, "He that scorneth 
me and receiveth not my words hath one that judgeth 
him ; the word that I have spoken it shall judge him in 
the last day";* and again, "If they have persecuted 
me they will also persecute you " ; ^ and all the expres- 
P- 257- sions that are like and similar to these. For, when 
men have such an unlawful and unholy disposition, and 
reduce the great mystery of religion to an absurdity, 
the sacred scripture commands us not even to give 

TTpa^i?. ^ VTTOfJivriiJiaTa. * Mt. X. 23. 

^ John xii. 48. ^ John xv. 20. 


II. 3- si:lkct letters of the iiolv severus. 229 

them oTccting, and not to receive these men in the 
house or take them under our roof, nor to have any 
dealings at all with them. " If any man," it says, 
" Cometh unto you, and bringeth not this teaching, 
receive him not in the house, and say not to him 
' Hail ! ' : For he that saith to him ' Hail ! ', is partaker 
of his evil deeds." ^ And again Paul the Apostle, " But 
I beseech you, my brethren, to mark them which cause 
the divisions and offences contrary to the teaching 
which we have learned, and avoid them. For such 
men minister not to our Lord Jesus Christ, but to their 
belly. And by mild words and blessings they deceive 
the hearts of the simple." If you observe these things, 
the words also that the same sacred Paul added to 
these will assuredly be fit to address to you in praise 
and approbation : and we will truly say, " For your 
obedience has reached the ears of all men. I rejoice 
therefore over you.""^ For with this it is well to con- 
clude what we have to say. The end. 

' 2 J. lo, II. ■ '" Ro. xvi. 17-19. 


PIUNTED BY 

NEILL AND COMPANY, MMITEI), 

EDINBURGH. 


04110::. 


{ 


PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE 
CARDS OR SUPS FROM THIS POCKET 

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY 


