     __________________________________________________________________

           Title: The Sixth Book of the Select Letters of Severus, Patriarch of Antioch, in the Syriac Version of Athanasius of Nisibis -- Vol. II (Translation), Part II
      Creator(s): Severus of Antioch (c. 459-538 CE)
                  Brooks, E. W. (Editor/Translator)
     Print Basis: Text and Translation Society (London: Williams & Norgate,
                  1904). English translation volume, Part II of II.
          Rights: Public Domain
    Rights Basis: Published 1904; long out of US copyright.
Source Collection: Internet Archive (archive.org), identifier sixthbookofselec0000ewbr
     __________________________________________________________________

NOTE ON THIS TRANSCRIPTION: the source is a raw OCR (djvu) text layer from
a scanned physical volume, not a clean digital edition. Runs of 2+ spaces
between words (a systematic OCR-layout artifact of the scan, not a feature
of the printed text) have been collapsed to single spaces throughout; no
word, spelling, or punctuation has been altered. OCR misreads may remain
uncorrected elsewhere in the file; any passage this build quotes verbatim
has been checked by eye against this file directly, not assumed correct
from the OCR alone.

jlua v<^‘ i-=> Lx^ooi 

H;.\ llibns 

itfetb i-H art) ut bo Uibrarp 

The Malphono George Anton Kiruz Collection 

U'm S ^3 bo- o^. -o£tio< 

1^^ Jv Ln m vi looo poo ou^o -om°) ot 
to 0UL-ii loooo L°l^-cu -jo ^*a Lo>ajo 

N. - |; \ m O^i. loou ©UL»i lo-CD 0^>- 

.;■ ■> ^ ^o,N. oui. Lioo. -©■oi.-'v^ 

Anyone who asks for this volume, to 
read, collate, or copy from it, and who 
appropriates it to himself or herself, or 
cuts anything out of it, should realize 
that (s)he will have to give answer before 
God’s awesome tribunal as if (s)he had 
robbed a sanctuary, I Art such a person be 
held anathema and receive no forgiveness 
until the book is returned. So be it. 
Amen! And anyone who removes these 
anathemas, digitally or otherwise, shall 
himself receive them in double. 


WORKS ISSUED 

BY THE TEXT AND TRANSLATION SOCIETY 


SELECT 


OF THE 


PATRIARCH OF ANTIOCH 


VOL. II. (TRANSLATION) PART II. 


THE SIXTH BOOK 


OF THE 


SELECT LETTERS OF SEVERUS 


PATRIARCH OF ANTIOCH 


IN THE SYRIAC VERSION OF ATHANASIUS 

OF NISIBIS 


EDITED AND TRANSLATED 


BY 

E. W. BROOKS, M.A. 


VOL. II. (TRANSLATION) PART II. 


PUBLISHED FOR 

THE TEXT AND TRANSLATION 


SOCIETY 


BY 

WILLIAMS & NORGATE 
14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London, W.C. 


1 9 0 4 


Text and Translation Society. 


president. 

Professor Sir R. K. Douglas, British Museum. 

lDtcc=fl>restoents. 

Mr F. C. Burkitt, University Lecturer in Palaeography, Cambridg 
Mr A. Cowley, Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford. 

Ibon. {Treasurer. 

Dr C. D. Ginsburg. 

Committee. 

The Rev. Prof. W. E. Barnes, Cambridge. 

Dr J. S. Black, Joint- Editor Encyclopedia Biblica. 

Mr R. C. Conybeare, formerly Fellow of University College, Oxford. 

Mr S. A. Cook, Fellow of Caius College, Cambridge. 

The Rev. Prof. S. R. Driver, Oxford. 

Mr Norman M‘Lean, Fellow of Christ’s College, Cambridge. 

The Very Rev. The Dean of Westminster (Dr Armitage Robinson) 
Mr J. F. Stenning, Fellow of Wadham College, Oxford. 

Mr Alois Wright, Vice-Master of Trinity College, Cambridge. 

Ibon. Secretaries. 

Mr W. E. Crum, London. 

Prof. H. W. Hogg, Manchester. 

Prof. J. Dyneley Prince, New York. 


CONTENTS OF PART II. 

SECTION III. 

PAGE 

1 To Anastasius the count, son of Sergius . . . . -231 

2 To Ammian and Epagathus . . . . . .233 

3 To Misael the deacon ....... 236 

4 To Caesaria the patrician ....... 244 

SECTION IV. 

1 To Zacharias of Pelusium ....... 249 

2 To Ammonius presbyter of Alexandria about the mention of Peter 

Mongus ........ 253 

3 To Dioscorus archbp. of Alexandria ..... 257 

4 To Dionysius bp. of Tarsus ...... 260 

5 To Cosmas archimandrite of the monastery of Cyrus . . . 261 

6 To John the count from Antaradus ..... 263 

7 To John Canopites ....... 266 

8 To the believers at Antioch ...... 268 

9 To Andrew reader and notary ...... 270 

10 To Caesaria the patrician . . . • • .272 

SECTION V. 

1 To John the tribune in the name of Leontius . . . -275 

2 To bp. Nicias ........ 282 

3 To the monastery at Tagais ...... 2S3 

4 To Theotecnus presbyter and archiatros ..... 286 

5 To Dionysius bp. of Tarsus ...... 290 

6 Against those who say that converts from Diphysitism should be re¬ 

anointed ........ 294 

7 To Dionysius bp. of Tarsus ...... 3*^ 

8 To the orthodox at Antioch . . . • • • 3X9 

9 To Simeon archimandrite of the monastery at Teleda . . 323 

10 To the monastery of Isaac ...... 324 

11 To John and John the presbyters and the others .... 325 


VI 


CONTENTS 


12 To John and John presbyters and archimandrites 

J3 To bps. Proclus and Eusebuna 

*■ • • • • 

14 To John, Philoxenus, and Thomas the bishops on the hill of Marde 

15 To Sergius bp. of Cyrrhus and Marion bp. of Sura 


SECTION VI. 

1 To bp. Eleusinius 

2 To Archelaus reader of Tyre 


SECTION VII. 

1 To Valeriana deaconess and archimandritess 

2 To Jannia deaconess and archimandritess 

3 To Simeon archimandrite of the great monastery 

4 To Nonnus bp. of Seleucia 

5 To Victor bp. of Philadelphia 

6 To Stephen bp. of Apamea 

7 To the wife of Calliopius the patrician 

8 To Eustace a young monk 

9 To Isidora .... 


SECTION VIII. 

1 To Stephen the reader 

2 To Cassian bp. of Bostra . 

3 To Aurelius the scholastic 

4 To John scholastic of Bostra 

5 To Andrew reader and notary 


SECTION IX. 

1 To the fathers 

2 To Theodore bp. of Olba 

3 To Thecla the countess 

SECTION X. 

1 To Aly pius ...... 

2 To a woman on behalf of Maximus in the name of Abba 

3 To Theodore tribune and notary .... 

4 To Conon the silentiary ..... 

5 To Theodore a Byzantine monk, brother-in-law of the prefects 


PAGE 

337 

342 

345 

350 


• 359 

• 363 


364 

• 368 

• 37 1 

• 373 

• 378 

. 380 

• 382 

• 384 

. 386 


• 39i 

• 394 

• 395 

• 397 

• 413 


40 

420 

423 


427 

433 

436 

439 

442 


CONTENTS 


Vll 


PAGE 

6 To the monks of the monastery of Bassus ... • 447 

7 To Csesaria the patrician ... 44^ 

8 To Georgia daughter of Anastasia the hypatissa . . -455 

SECTION XI. 

To Misael the chamberlain . . 459 

Notes of Scribes ....•••• 4^3 

Index of Persons, Places, etc. • • 4^5 

Index of Quotations . • • • -473 

Addenda and Corrigenda . . . • • • -479 


The Sixth Book of the Select 
Letters of the Holy Severus. 


III. I hird section.1 That one ought not to hesitate 
on account of the politeia or character of 
priests, but only ask whether they are orthodox 
or of the right opinions. 


i. Of the same to Anastasius the count , the son of 
Sergius . ( From those during episcopacy, from the 

fh book the 40 6th letter.) 

See ! overcome by the fervour and purity of your 
gracious father’s faith we have sent you the com¬ 
munion or oblation, as seemed to you to be desirable : 
because, while one and the same faith prevails in the 
holy churches in the East and those in Egypt, one 
must reckon the communion also to be one and of the 
same value, since priests, whatever they be in their 


1 titAo?. 


l6 


p. 261. 


513-8. 


232 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. III. I. 


p. 262. 


conduct, cannot increase or diminish the sacrament. 
This the I heologian Gregory also somewhere says, 
making use of the following example. As, when two 
seals, one made of lead and the other of <^old, bear one 
impress without any difference whatever, it of necessity 
follows that the wax sealed by them will bear the 
same signet and seal, a man who has not seen being 
unable to discern from the wax which stamp was made 
by the gold and which by the lead, so also in the case 
of priests, so long as they hold one and the same 
orthodox faith, and consummate a baptism, it may be, 
or the bloodless sacrifice, it is impossible to discern in 
which case the consecration or consummation was 
performed by the man who is golden or pure in his 
character, and in which by the man who by reason of 
the faultiness of his character resembles lead.1 For 
the operation and grace of the sound faith which con¬ 
summated both of them is one : but let no one look at 
the greater and less arising from the character of those 
who officiated. However, as I said, having been over¬ 
come by the abundance of fervent love which you have 
towards Christ, we have done what was commanded 
by you. The end. 


1 Or. xl. 26. 


233 


III. 2. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


2. Of the same to Ammian and Epagathus . (From 519-34. 

those after banishment, from the Jth book the 29 th 
letter f 

I am astonished at the extent of your admirable 
goodness, that alter such expenses on my behalf, who 
am not worthy ol anything* of the kind, expenses 
which you have incurred from love of God, you have 
considered it right to bestow these things upon me 
even when I am at a distance in greater abundance 
and with greater generosity. And after other things. P* 263- 
But I rejoiced greatly, and offered prayers of thanks¬ 
giving to Christ who is God and the giver of all good, 
who has willed that a male child should be born to 
you the Christ-loving Ammian beyond all human 
hope. Since you have submitted the choice of his 
name to my judgment, out of the abundance of faith 
that you possess, and make me bold by urging me to 
say and do things above the measure that belongs to 
me, I have judged it to be a good and fitting thing 
that he should be named John : since the holy Baptist 
and Forerunner also was born to his parents beyond 
hope and expectation ; and I believe that through his 
intercession he will live and reach the due length of 
life and advanced old age. Indeed on the very day 
on which I received your welcome letter that notified 

1 This was written two years before iii. 4 (p. 246), so that, if the 
inference as to the date of that letter (p. 244, note 3) is correct, this 
must be placed not earlier than 531. 


234 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. III. 2. 


his birth to me I placed it on the holy mysteries : and, 
when I was about to communicate after my custom in 
the divine communion (for it was a day of assembly), 
after the other lessons and the sacred song of Alleluia, 
I be gan to read the revered gospel : and I found the 
appointed lesson to be the story of the holy Fore¬ 
runner and Baptist, and his divine martyrdom and 
consummation, when he was beheaded for the sake of 
p. 264. God's law ; and from the fact that it happened so I 
concluded that Jesus also the God of the sacred 
Gospels had sanctioned and approved the method of 
naming the boy which I had chosen. I beseech you 
not to delay even for the space of one day : but to 
seize the favourable opportunity that has been given 
us by God, and present the boy to the God-loving 
father Z‘ura, for the divine laver of regeneration. 
But, when you enjoy such freedom from restraint, how 
can it be anything but a very unreasonable action, and 
such as to provoke Christ our Redeemer and God, 
to ask lor the communion or oblation to be sent you 
by my meanness ? Those persons to whom it is 
necessary to send it are those who are wholly deprived 
of divine communion : for, when the faith is one, the 
p. 265. holy communion also is assuredly one, not somethin^ 
different and diverse, even if one of the offering priests 
have a heavenly and high, and the other a degraded 
and low character. It is not the man who offers the 
sacrifice, but Christ completes it through the words 
uttered by the offerer, and changes the bread into 
flesh and the cup into blood, by the power, inspiration, 


SELECT LETTERS OE THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


235 


III. 


z,. 


and grace of His Spirit. P'or this reason too it 
happened once that, when a famine had extended 
over the whole land, and Elijah the prophet was 
living in the torrent-bed called that of Cherith, by 
God's command ravens brought him every day bread 
in the morning and flesh in the evening, the narrative 
signifying that, though certain men be unclean like 
ravens, they are mediators through whom the divine 
food is given and imparted to us, and they do not 
indict any injurious stain on those who partake, nor 
does the uncleanness and loose character of those who 
administer the divine grace cause any detriment to 
those who are fed, provided of course that their faith 
is orthodox and sound (you are not unaware that the 
law inserts the raven among the unclean kinds of 
birds).1 Gregory the Theologian also, who was bishop 
of Nazianzus and teacher of all that is under heaven, 
in the discourse on holy baptism teaches that there is 
no difference whatever between the divine laver of 
regeneration performed by a priest of lax character 
and that which is given by a priest eminent for 
asceticism and the other virtues : explaining the 
matter by the following image and simile. As two 
seals, he says, of which one is made of pure unalloyed 
gold, and the other of lead, it they bear one and the 
same signet without difference in any point graven 
upon themselves, will both impress one and the same 
likeness upon wax without variation in any point, and 


p. 266. 


1 Le. xi. 14. 


236 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. III. 3* 


no one who has not seen them can discern from the 
wax which is the signet that was made by the golden 
seal, and which by the leaden, so, though one priest 
be a man of gold by reason of the purity of his 
character, and the other one that has the darkness and 
worthlessness of lead by reason of the remissness of 
his life, so long as they possess the one seal of the 
orthodox faith alike in all points, and in no way 
p. 267. adulterated by heretical doctrine, both perform one 
baptism and one oblation, of the same power and 
glory, and nothing inferior in any point whatever.1 
Therefore your intelligences in the Lord must with all 
assurance" approach the divine communion of the 
saintly bishops who are living among you and of the 
God-loving presbyters who confess the same faith as 
we in all points and proclaim it with boldness, and do 
not shrink from fear, nor craftily adulterate it, as the 
Apostle says : 3 for men such as these one ought to shun 
as manifest heretics. But, to speak with God s per¬ 
mission, you have plenty both of bishops and of 
presbyters that are genuine and have no adulteration 
about them. Not the end. 

519-34. 2. Of the same to Misael the deacon. ( From those 
after banishment , from the *]th book the 30th 
letter.') 

Those who wish and desire to receive tokens of 
affection in God avoid under all circumstances receiving 


1 Or. xl. 26. 


2 Tv\rjpo^>opia. 


3 2 Co. ii. 19. 


III. 3. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


237 


such outside the scope of the divine laws or obtaining 
gratification beyond what these wish as something 
grievous : amone whom I had come to believe with 

o o 

the greatest possible confidence that your devoutness 
was included. For I confess that I loved you and do 
love you greatly on account of the gentleness of your 
manners and on account of the modesty of your 
character : and, in fine,1 because for the sake of the 
orthodox faith you spurned all the stage-play of the 
world, and the deceitful pomps" of this life, and pleas¬ 
ures that wallow upon the earth and honours. But the 
request which, as I have been informed by letter, you 
are making, that the divine communion should be 
offered by my meanness and sent to you, for the sake 
of certain persons who are desirous of this, seems to 
have some kind of appearance of faith, but offends 
against the laws of the Spirit. For to those the 
oblation is of necessity sent who, while living in 
countries outside the boundaries and being orthodox, 
are deprived of priests to offer the rational and 
heavenly sacrifice. To speak with God’s permission, 
since both saintly bishops and God-loving presbyters 
are living in the royal among cities, and without 
restraint and with boldness give the bread of life 
and the cup of immortality, it is a very superfluous 
and hurtful thing that the holy communion beyond 
the boundaries should be sent to you by my feeble¬ 
ness. Since there is one faith and the same sound 


K€(f>d\ CUOV. 


- </>avra(rias. 


p. 268. 


238 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. III. 3. 


confession not corrupted at all by any adulterating 
p. 269. doctrine, there is also assuredly one communion of 
different priests who offer it ; who are as far apart as 
east from west, and confess the same unadulterated 
faith : although some be high and exalted to heaven, 
and elevated by labours of asceticism and the highest 
degree of virtues, and others men that creep on the 
earth owin^ to the remissness and idleness of their 
character. It is not the offerer himself who, as by 
his own power and virtue, changes the bread into 
Christ’s body, and the cup of blessing into Christ’s 
blood, but the God-befitting and efficacious power of 
the words which Christ who instituted the mystery 
commanded to be pronounced over the things that 
are offered. The priest who stands before the altar, 
since he fulfils a mere ministerial function, pronouncing 
his words as in the person of Christ, and carrying back 
the rite that is being performed to the time at which 
He began the sacrifice for His apostles, says over the 
bread, “This is my body which is given for you : this 
do in remembrance of me ” : while over the cup again 
he pronounces the words, “This cup is the new* 
testament in my blood, which is shed for you.” 1 
Accordingly it is Christ who still even now offers, 
and the power of His divine words perfects the 
things that are provided so that they may become 
His body and blood. But the priest who stands, 
p. 270. since he fulfils a mere subsidiary function only, makes 


Lu. xxii. 19, 20. 


1 


III. 3. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


239 


no addition whatever to the rites that are performed, 
although he be an angelic and heavenly man in his 
character, nor does he detract anything from the 
divine grace, if he has lived a degraded and low life. 
This the divine writings confirm in another place also. 
Once, when Elijah the great among prophets was 
commanded to decree a famine against the land of 
Israel, because of the lawlessness and the prevalence 
of idolatry, he himself was commanded to dwell in 
hiding beyond Jordan, in the torrent-bed of Cherith ; 
“ and the ravens brought him bread in the morning, 
and flesh in the evening : and he drank water from 
the torrent.” 1 But the law given by Moses reckoned 
ravens among unclean birds.- Hence this historical 

o 

event that happened in the case of the prophet is 
pregnant with mystic and secret teaching. It teaches 
that the food given by God, which in the morning as 
it were, that is in the visible sense, is bread, but in 
the hidden and invisible sense (this is the signification 
of “ the evening ’) is flesh and Gods body, is in no 
way injured or impaired by those who mediate and 
minister, even if they be unclean men and loose in 
their character after the manner ol ravens. Gregory 
also, the Theologian, who fed Xazianzus the small 
among cities, but is the teacher of the whole world 
over which the church is spread, who in the exalted 
nature of his theology reached to the citadel of 
| erusalem in heaven, says in the discourse that was 


1 3 R. xvii. 16. 


2 Le. xi. 14. 


. 271. 


240 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. III. 3. 


delivered by him upon baptism that the same grace 
of adoption is obtained from the laver of regeneration 
both by a man who has received baptism from a 
priest eminent for virtues, and by a man who has 
received it from one who is degraded and grovelling 
in his character, both by a man who has received it 
from an archbishop, and by a man who has received 
it from a presbyter who holds the lowest rank. For 
both give one and the same seal, so long as they 
solemnize and preach one orthodox faith like in all 
points and sound. Just as, he says, a seal of gold 
and one of iron, or of some other cheaper material, 
so long as they bear one image and likeness engraved, 
p. 272. not differing in anything, impress one and the same 
stamp on wax, and no one who was not present and 
saw can discern which is the wax that received the 
seal from the signet of gold, and which on the other 
hand is that which was sealed by the signet of iron, 
or by a cheaper signet, since both bear the same 
signet not differing in anything, in the same way 
baptism, and similarly also the offering of the sacrifice, 
in no way differs, not if the priest who celebrated these 
be, so to speak, a man of gold in his character and 
approved and illustrious, by reason of the purity which 
comes from the practice of virtues, nor if he be one 
who is, so to speak, of iron, and a man who is murky 
and dark in his life.1 The difference of the character 
of those who officiate makes no difference whatever 


1 Or. xl. 26. 


HI. 3. SELECT LETTERS OF TIIE IIOLY SEVERUS. 


241 


in the mysteries that are celebrated, so long as both 
confess one orthodox faith, and are not stained by the 
stain of any heresy, nor do despite to the freedom of 
the preaching through servile fear and do not declare 
the glory of the truth “ with open face, 1 or act craftily 
and speak with treacherous and deceitful tongue both 
what pleases the heretics and what pleases us the 
orthodox, and laugh at both sides in an illiberal 
and meretricious fashion, or lie under the stigma of 
open abominations : for such as these one ought to 
avoid and spurn as standing outside the sacred limits : 
but let us not inquire into sins that are not open. Of 
these we are not the judges, but God, who searches 
into things that are unknown and knows things that 
are hidden. Paul, who had Christ speaking in him, 
rejecting grovelling fear, said, “ But we are not of 
timidity that leadeth to perdition, but of faith that 
craineth us ourselves ’ *. " and spurning accursed crafti- 
ness, u For we are not as many which adulterate the 
word of God : but, as from the truth and as from God 


before God, speak we in Christ Jesus : and again . 
“ Not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of 
God deceitfully', but by manifestation of the truth com¬ 
mending ourselves to all conscience of men before 
God ” 4 And excluding open and notorious and stig¬ 


matized abomination he writes, “ But fornication and 
all uncleanness and covetousness, let it not be even 
named among you, as becometh saints : nor abuse 


P- 273- 


p. 274. 


1 2 Co. iii. 18. 


2 He. x. 39. 


3 2 Co. ii. 7- 


4 Id. iv. 2. 


242 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVER US. III. 3. 


or words of folly or of derision and of jesting, which 
are not desirable’:1 and again in another place, 
I hou that preachest, ‘thou shalt not steal,’ dost 
thou steal ? Thou that sayest, ‘ thou shalt not 
commit adultery,’ dost thou commit adultery ? ” 2 
I hese things, being open and matters of shame, 
are certainly to be avoided, and are unhallowed. It 
will be good and useful and will further confirm 
what has been said, if we also adduce the actual 
words of the Theologian Gregory which run thus : 
“ Say not, ‘ Let a bishop baptize me, and he a 
metropolitan or a bishop of Jerusalem’ (for the grace 
does not belong to places, but to the Spirit), ‘and he 
one of those of high birth ; for it is hard if my nobility 
shall be insulted by a baptizer ; or a presbyter, but he 
also one of the unmarried, and he one of the continent 
and angelic in his character ; for it is hard if I shall 
be defiled at the time of cleansing.’ Seek not trust¬ 
worthiness in the preacher, nor in him that baptizes. 
Another is the judge of these matters and searcher of 
things that are not clearly visible : since, ‘ man on the 

face, but God on the heart - ’ 3 But to you everyone 

is trustworthy for the cleansing. Only let him be one 
p. 275. of those that are approved, and not of those that are 
openly stigmatized, nor an alien to the Church. 
Judge not the judges, you who need healing. In¬ 
quire not, I pray you, into the authority of those 
that cleanse you. Hesitate not concerning begetters. 


Eph. v. 3, 4. 2 Ro. ii. 2i, 22. 


1 


3 3 R. xvi. 7. 


III. 3. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


243 


One is better than another, or lower ; but everyone 
is higher than you. Hut look at it in this way. 1 akc 
gold : take iron : and both of them rings : and suppose 
the same royal image impressed on them. 1 hen let 
them stamp wax. How will this seal differ from that 
seal? In no way. Recognise the material in the 

wax ; and, if you are wiser than everyone, say which 

is the seal of the iron and which of the gold. And 

how is it one? Because the difference is in the 

material, not in the image. So let every baptizer 
be to you. For, though he is more exalted in 
character, yet the virtue of the baptism is equal : and 
everyone who imitates the same faith brings you 
perfection in the same way.” 1 Strengthened therefore 
by these wise admonitions of the God-inspired 
Scripture and of the approved instructors ’ of the 
apostolic church, inasmuch as you are entrusted with 
the ministry of God, warn our beloved brothers not 
to deceive themselves with such self-made fears, but 
to reckon and firmly believe the communion offered p.276. 
by our meanness to be one with that which is con¬ 
summated by our fellow-ministers, by the saintly 
high-priests and God-loving priests who arc living 
there, or are passing their lives in other places, and 
in all points think and say the same as we do, as 
aforesaid. If one man say, “ I partake of the 
communion that was offered by so-and-so the 
patriarch,” and another boastingly say, “I partake 


1 


Or. xl. 26. 


2 Marzane = fxvo-Tau . 


246 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. III. 4. 


p. 279. 


p. 280. 


God deliver both you and our poor self! In the 
case of the religious deacon Misael also,1 as well as 
the Christ-loving brothers Ammian and Epagathus, 
who about two years ago sent me a box and asked to 
have it filled full for them with the communion or holy 
oblation, I did not fall in with the impiety and super¬ 
fluity of the request, writing as follows : [Here follows 
a citation from ep. 2, extending from ‘ But, when you 
enjoy’ (p. 234 1. 17) to the end]. But it is incumbent 
upon us to lay down as a law concerning these things 
the utterances of Gregory the teacher of truth which 
we have mentioned, the actual words 2 of which are as 
follows: [Here follows the extract from Greg. Naz. 
given on p. 242 ff.]. If therefore both the divine laws 
of the sacred Scripture and the precepts of the saintly 
fathers and teachers give these commands, how is it 
not manifest breach of the law for a man to say, “ I 
will not consent to partake of any other oblation but 
that which is consummated by so-and-so”? In the 
first place he divides Christ who in this also is one and 
undivided, and draws upon himself the condemnation 
of those who divide Him : in the second place, if such 
a man depart from human affairs, and go without 
having communicated and taken with him the last 
provisions, his soul will be liable to be seized by the 
demons, who will prevent it from making the upward 
journey and resting at once in some light countries, 
but will drag it away and convey it by force to the 


1 * • * 

in. 3. 


III. 4- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


247 


depths of countries that are dark and not light : in the 
third place, he will also lay himself under the burden 
of another condemnation for opposing the precepts 
of the fathers and high-priests and laying down a law, 
if one may so say, in opposition to these. Indeed Paul, 
when writing to the Romans about those who oppose 
political powers and authorities and their command¬ 
ments, says these words : “ Let every soul be subject 
to higher powers, for there is no power that is not 
from God : and those that exist are appointed by God. 
Whoever therefore opposeth the power opposeth the 
commandment of God. And those that oppose them 
shall receive judgment.’’1 If these words apply to 
political or military powers, how great will be the 
condemnation of those that oppose the rulers of the 
holy church and their ordinances! For the difference 
and distinction is as great as between heavenly and 
earthly things. Withdraw therefore and dissociate 
yourself from such an awful and terrible judgment, and 
look upon all the orthodox priests as one and as Christ 
Himself : and reckon the sacrifice performed by all of 
them to be one, and do not lay down decrees against p. 281. 
your soul, decreeing and saying, “ I will not touch any 
sacrifice except that which is performed by so-and-so.” 

It is said in the legal writings given through Moses 
that, if a woman, being in her parents’ house, decree a 
fast against her soul, or vow and promise to accomplish 
any other action, or swear that she will do something 


1 Ro. xiii. 1, 2. 


1 7 


248 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. III. 4- 


p. 282. 


or other, and her father hear and keep silent and do 
not dissent, she that vowed or decreed shall certainly 
and by all means be bound to accomplish her vows 
and decrees : but, if, when her father hear what his 
daughter in the first instance decreed, he do not 

o 

consent, but dissent and reject the decrees, God also 
will annul them, and will not require her that decreed 
to accomplish them. Know therefore that your 
excellency's decree also is null and worthless. For 
Gregory the father, the speaker of divine things, 
rejects it, and does not allow you to discriminate 
between priests, and say positively, “ I will not com¬ 
municate in the holy mysteries, unless they be such 
as have been consummated by so-and-so. Hear 
also what the legal commandment says : “ But, if her 
father dissent in the day on which he heard her vows 
and decrees which she decreed against her soul, they 
shall not stand. And the Lord shall absolve her, 
because her father dissented.”1 Do not therefore 
seek to accomplish in fact the things which you decreed, 
but which the father resisted and disowned ; and the 
Lord will absolve you, and will free you from all 
sickness of soul and of body, and will grant you power 
to follow His laws in all things, and to impute divine 
things, as divine things, to God alone, and not to any 
man. 

You say that all methods of treatment have been 
tried by the physicians, but all have been found useless 


1 Nu. xxx. 6. 


IV. I. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


249 


and have been defeated by the long continuance of 
the illness. Look therefore at the pattern of the 
praiseworthy woman in the Gospels who was troubled 
by an issue of blood for twelve years, and had spent 
all her wealth on physicians, and like her draw near to 
Jesus, and, as Mark the Evangelist says, tell Him as 
God the whole case and the truth. If you do this in 
a pure fashion He will assuredly say to you, “ My 
daughter, thy faith hath saved thee : go in peace, and 
be whole of thy plague.”1 Such illnesses need only 
the divine working in order to be healed, and this 
right-minded souls draw upon themselves in its entirety 
by confessing the sins that they have committed. 
The end. 


IV. Fourth section.2 That one must not communicate 
indiscriminately or without investigation with 
heretics ; and how one ought to avoid being 

o o 

with them while they pray. 


i. Of the same to Zacharias of Pelusium . ( From 513-8. 

those during episcopacy , from the 1st book the 
208th, 209 ih letter.) 

You say, “What can be made pure by that which 
is impure ? ” But I say that this expression, inasmuch 


1 Mk. v. 33, 34. 


- rtVAo?. 


250 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. IV. I. 


p- 2S3. as it was uttered in the right spirit, makes your 
offering pure, although it was by nature impure and 
a thing acquired by iniquity (we will refrain from 
mentioning this in words). For there is nothing that 
makes God so glad as for a man to be the first to 
blame himself, even though he be a man who is free 
from all blame. He who has been the first to blame 
himself, progressing by degrees, will certainly give up 
the iniquity also. Wherefore He cries through the 
prophet, “ Tell thou thy sins first, that thou mayest 
be justified.”1 So also that Canaanite woman, when 
she was compared to a dog and accepted the insult 
as true, heard the high and loud testimony, “ O 
woman, great is thy faith, be it unto thee as thou 
wilt.”2 You deserve admiration for giving, and giving 
in such a spirit : but you would certainly have deserved 
Greater admiration, if while doing this you communi- 
cated with us the orthodox. Do not think to yourself 
that, because you communicate with those who have 
prayer-house buildings, and for this reason say that 
you communicate with the church, that you say 
anything sound. This argument is childish and 
ridiculous : for a church is a collection of pious men 
which is joined in one union by right belief. As a 
witness of this, take Gregory the Theologian. In the 
discourse against the Arians he said, “ These have 
the houses, we the indweller : these the temples, we 
God, and the privilege of becoming temples of the 


1 Is. xliii. 26. 


2 Mt. xv. 28. 


IV. I. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


251 


living God and living ones, soul-possessing oblations, 
rational whole burnt-offerings, perfect sacrifices to God 
through the adored Trinity : these a people, we p. 284. 
angels : these presumption, we faith : these the power 
of threatening, we of praying : these the power of 
throwing, we of enduring : these gold and silver, we 
the pure word. You have made for yourselves houses 
of two stories and three stories (know the words of 
Scripture : “ A cooling chamber divided by windows ”) : 
but these are not yet higher than my faith and 
heaven to which 1 am going. Small is my flock, but 
it does not go towards the rock. Narrow is my fold, 
yet it cannot be leaped over by wolves : yet it is not 
such as to admit a robber, or to be captured by thieves 
and strangers.”1 So far he. And we might have 
further quoted many other testimonies of the God- 
clad fathers, which say this same thing. But, not to 
extend the discussion to a great length, I leave the 
rest on one side, but will cite for you a passage 
from a certain presbyter (Isidore, I mean, a native of 
your city of Pelusium, who was wise in learning and 
in piety) which is sufficient for this present purpose. 

In writing to a certain bishop named Theodosius he 
speaks thus : “ Let Eusebius who presides over the 
people that have their habitation in Pelusium learn 
what a church is. For it is most shameful and 
grievous that, when he does not know even this same 
thing, he should think to perform priestly functions. 


1 Or. xxxiii. 15. 


252 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. IV. I. 


p. 285. For that the gathering of holy men gathered from 
ricrht faith and illustrious character is a church, is 

a 

well-known to those who have tasted wisdom. And 
that he, not knowing this, is pulling down that which 
is really the church by giving offence to many, while 
raising up the church-building, and spoiling the 
former by driving out the earnest men, while em¬ 
bellishing the latter with fine marble, this also is well- 
known to everyone. But, if he were to gain any 
distinct knowledge that a church is one thing and a 
church-building another (for the former is made up of 
spotless souls, while the latter is built of stones and 
beams) I think he will give up pulling down the 
former, and embellishing the latter beyond what is 
needlul. For it was not for walls, but for souls 
that the Kino- of Heaven came here. But, il he 

o 

pretends not to know the fact stated, although it is 
abundantly clear even to those who are very deficient, 

I will try to explain this by examples. For, as a 
sacrifice-building is one thing and a sacrifice another, 
and an incense-building one thing and incense another, 
and a council-building one thing and a council another 
(for the former means the place in which they 
assemble, and the latter the men who deliberate, on 
whom the issues both of danger and of safety rest), 
so also with a church-building and a church. But, if 
he shall say that even so he has not understood, let 
him learn that in the apostles’ days, when the church 
p. 286. abounded in spiritual gifts, and a glorious mode of 
life was practised, there were no church-buildings : 


IV. 2. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


253 


but in our days the church-buildings are embellished 
beyond what is right : while the church (but 1 do not 
wish to say anything harsh) is jeered at. For my 
part, if the choice had been laid before me, I would 
have chosen to be in those times, in which church- 
buildings embellished in this way did not exist, but 
the church was crowned with heavenly and divine 
orifts, rather than in these, in which the church- 
buildings are embellished with all kinds of marbles, 
but the church is stripped and bare of those spiritual 
gifts.” 1 Not the end. 


2. Of the same to Ammonias a presbyter of Alexandria, 
in which he gave him information as to the 
mention of Peter who was bishop of Alexandria. 
(. From those during episcopacy, from the ist booh 
the 22 nd letter.) 

You bear witness to a wisdom in us which we do 
not possess, and you call yourself weak in comparison 
with this, as if we were inviting you to a wrestling- 
arena or a contest : but for my part I will in due 
season use the words of Job who says, “ But where 
was wisdom found ? and what is the place oi under¬ 
standing ? Man knoweth not the way thereof, neither 
is it found among men.’' 2 Wherefore I looked to the 
Giver of wisdom, and to Him I yielded abundance of 


Ep. ii. 246. 


513-6. 


p. 287 


1 


2 Job xxviii. 12, 13. 


254 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. IV. 2. 


understanding thoughts, and I do not come to your 
brotherly person with many words, but use as few 
words as possible. For I think that either you have 
forgotten what I wrote to you before, or you are 
purposely turning your mind away from it. For 
what else ought I to have done but communicate 
with you when the mention of Peter was inserted 
in the sacred tablets, without raising any objection ? 
but I ought not also to be required to praise and call 
distinguished a man who is not at heart so regarded 
by me, although you are otherwise minded. And 
after other things. Whereas you say of Peter who 
was bishop of your city that he wrote to those 
who were at one time and another bishops of the 
city of Antiochus, and openly anathematized the 
things done at Chalcedon against the right faith, and 
the impious Tome of Leo, know that we too are 
not unaware of this : but we express blame on the 
o-round that he embraced the communion of those 
who did not write the same things as he did. Indeed 
not a single man among those outside in the epistles 
that he addressed to him can be shown to have 
anathematized those who spoke or speak of two natures 
after the union, let alone the Chalcedonian Synod, or 
the blasphemous Tome of Leo. Tell me : it now 
also upon our writing to the prelate of the royal city 
2 88. maybe, and anathematizing the things that we 
actually anathematize he were to draw up a trimming 
letter, containing only a confession of the right 
faith, but not further an anathema of the offending 


IV. 2. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


255 


things also, would this suffice for a pure, sincere, 
firm conjunction? Not in the least, Por instance, 
when Timothy was instituted after the expulsion 
of Macedonius, and sent a synodical letter to the 
saintly John, archbishop of the city of the 
Alexandrines, with nothing satisfactory about it, 
his holiness both wrote an epistle in answer, and 
through some method of mediation required him 
to remove the offending things by anathema ; for 
he had held his peace, and had adopted the 

reprehensible course of silence. But the party 
of Dioscorus and Chaeremon, having always been 
hirelings and hucksters of piety, were not contented 
with this only, but also caused a letter to be 
drawn up by the pious king, addressed to the 
saintly John, archbishop of your city, which con¬ 
tained no small complaints, on the ground that he 
had not been contented with the Henotikon only, 
as Peter and Athanasius and John who succeeded the 
latter had been, without requiring reference to be 
made in actual words to the impious things done at 
Chalcedon or to the impious l ome of Leo. And 
they induced the illustrious king for the purpose of 
proof to include in his pious letter a copy of the letters ; 
the letters that Peter, Athanasius, and John addressed 
to the bishops who were outside : which had been 
produced at an earlier time also in the city ol the 
Sidonians, when the synod of bishops was assembled 
there, and cast great shame upon us who were combating 
on behalf of orthodoxy, and nothing else was left to us 


p. 289. 


256 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. IV. 2. 


except only to hide ourselves and yield to manifest 
refutations.1 To these was also attached a letter of 
the pious John the archbishop written to Dioscorus 
and Chaeremon, to the effect that he did not ask for 
anything beyond the Henotikon only with no further 
addition. Do not therefore tell me that Peter wrote 
this and that to those who in earlier times occupied 
the throne of Antiochus’ city : but show that they 
ever took upon themselves to write things agreeing 
with Peter’s statements. Or, if you do not show this, 
he will be clearly convicted of having communicated 
with those who did not say and think the same as he 
did. How then did you bring yourself, and that 
though you are firm on all points, to write this 
assertion : “ We for our part have done nothing new 
or great in anathematizing the Synod of Chalcedon 
and the impious Tome of Leo ” ? 

The analogy 2 of the dead man, who defiles or does 
not defile water, and the difficulty arising from it you 
p. 290. must not take in this way, subjecting the mind to 
bodily conceptions, and restricting pollution to the 
effect of a multitude of bodies. In the mind of those 
who examine with intelligence, a mention whether one 
or many of men who have committed impiety causes 
the same abomination : which nothing else can 
extinguish except an abundance as I have said of the 
water of right faith, copiously poured upon everyone, 


Cf. Zach. Rh. vii. 10. 


1 


- OeiopLa. 


IV. 3. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


257 


and a loyal anathema of the offending things, like 
much water which covers the sea according to the 
expression of the prophet.1 Not the end. 


3. Of the same to Dioscorus archbishop of Alexandria. 516. 

( From those during episcopacy , from the 1st book 
the 1 1 5 th letter .) 

Even when the brotherly person of your love of 
God is sending an embassy to the royal among cities, 
we are not separated from you in spirit : but we lift 
up to God hands that are not holy, but are much 
paralysed by sins ; yet still we lilt them up and 
entreat Him, who holds in His hand the hearts of 
those that are held like rushing water, to incline our 
serene kings pious soul to compliance, and bestow 
grace upon your words, in order that you may obtain 
all that your mind desires, and rescue the Christ- 
loving city of the Alexandrines from the wrath that 
threatens it, while time is granted you to feed \ our p. 29!* 
flock by “ the water of stillness.” " W hen this has been 
brought to pass, we will again offer prayers ot thanks¬ 
giving to Christ the Saviour of all and God, and will 
reioice, and rejoice together with you at seeing by 
actual deeds themselves that our Lord is near and 
that He cares for us, so that even those who are out¬ 
side our communion will say when they have seen 


Is. xi. 9. 


2 Ps. xxii. 2. 


258 


SELECT LETTERS OE THE HOLY SEVERUS. IV. 3. 


these things, “Truly God is among you.’’ This fact 
also we reckon to be a part of such graciousness 
towards us, that the God-loving bishop Soteric who 
is placed at the head of the God-loving bishops of First 
Cappadocia should wish to unite with us, and should 
put forward propositions 1 by means of which we ought 
to draw those who are in the royal city also to lawful 
conjunction, and the God-loving bishops of Second 
Cappadocia also are associated with him in such a 
purpose. Accordingly I have thought right to inform 
your sanctity, in order that by common consultation 
we may decide upon what ought to be done. They 
say that we ought to receive them upon their giving 
us satisfaction 2 up to this point, I mean up to the 
point of confessing the orthodox faith and anathema¬ 
tizing the things done at Chalcedon and the impious 
Tome of Leo, who was head of the church of the 
Romans (would he had never been so !), and those 
p 292. who speak of two natures after the union and the 
energies and properties of these. W e are by no 
means unaware that Timothy of holy memory, who 
lived in toils and labours of piety, in so far as to 
dwell in exile, and reckon it a pleasure to suffer for 
Christ, on his return thence under the Encyclical 
letter which had this effect, received to communion 
those who were separated upon their anathematizing 
what was wrongfully done at Chalcedon, and the 
impious Tome of Leo ; but, since we must do all 


1 


7rpOTa<X€(,5. 


2 TrXrjpcHfiopLa. 


IV. 3- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


259 


things with deliberation, and support ourselves by 
brotherly counsels, therefore we have referred the 
consideration of this matter to your sanctity, in order 
that you may immediately inform us of your opinion. 
For it is manifest that we will do those things which 
you judge to be proper. When we also received the 
sacred letter of your holiness from Pamphylia, we 
rejoiced at learning at the same time how you had 
also in scrupulous fashion and with consideration and 
in the manner that became you joined the God-loving 
Castor bishop of the metropolis of Perga in the 
conduct of the mysterious service, and had com¬ 
municated with him in the divine mysteries, teaching 
him by what you did to keep the possession of the 
sound faith “with all observance,”1 and to hold the 
becdnnine of our stability firm unto the end, as Paul 
says in his epistle to the Hebrews.2 This will more 
especially be the case if they keep themselves free 
from association in communion with those of contrary 
opinions. Of this I for my part bore testimony to 
the Cappadocians also, reminding them moreover of 
the patristic law. For Basil of saintly memory in an 
epistle to a certain Urbicius who was a monk at that 
time wrote in the same strain: “We beg therefore 
that these things receive ecclesiastical correction, and 
that you hold aloof from communion with the heretics, 
knowing as you do that indifference in these things 
takes away from the boldness before Christ.”" In 


p. 293. 


1 Pr. iv. 23. 


2 He. iii. 14. 


3 Ep. 262. 2. 


260 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. IV. '4. 


fact, to speak the truth, if a man believe rightly, but 
reckon association with adversaries as nothing, it is 
time for him to say like Paul, “ I am become sounding 
brass or a tinkling cymbal.”1 The end. 


513-8. 4. Of the same to Dionysius bishop of Tar sits. ( From 
those during episcopacy , from the 2nd book the \th 
letter. ) 

H ow I behaved with all attention and respect towards 
you when you came here it is not mine to say, but it 
belongs to you who had the experience to declare this, if 
need demand. Of this also I think your religiousness 
is not unaware, that of your own accord and without 
p- 294. pressure from anyone you confessed everything that is 
required for a confession of the orthodox faith and a 
• renunciation of the offences that have divided the unity 
of God’s holy churches, and ratified it in writing and in 
a letter. How is it then that you have treated things 
thus done with piety and of your own accord as nothing 
and do not keep them “with all observance,” as it is 
written,2 but admit to the ministry men who do not share 
your belief, and by the expressions which you carelessly 
and lightly utter to these show that you entered into 
union with the cause of piety rather because you gave 
way before the time than because you deliberately 
chose what was right ? Perhaps it is time for me to say 


1 


1 Co. xiii. 1. 


2 Pr. iv. 23. 


V. 5- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


261 


o you the words of the Apostle also, I mean, “ Ye have 
lot yet withstood unto blood in the combat against sin, 
ind ye have forgotten the exhortation which speaketh 
.into you as unto sons.” 1 I shall in fact be very much 
ishamed, and hide myself, if we, whose duty it is to 
see “the Lord’s glory with open face”2 and with bold¬ 
ness and after the manner of apostles, have the veil of 
fear and of respect of persons laid upon our hearts. 
Therefore let that which has been neglected receive 
the required correction and care. If the deed that has 
been done had been a case of rejecting my meanness, 
I would perhaps have overlooked it : but, if it is a case 
of insulting and contemning the orthodox faith, it is 
by no means a course free from danger for us to keep 
silence in this matter, if we have any regard for the 
eternal torture that is threatened. For the holy Basil 
also in writing to a certain Urbicius a monk speaks as 
follows: [Here follows the citation given on p. 259]. 
The end. 


5. Of the same to Cosmas archimandrite of the monastery 
of the blessed Cyrus or Khurish. (From those dur¬ 
ing episcopacy , from the 2nd book the \6th letter.) 

We have readily forgiven the devout Julian the sin 
that was involuntarily committed by him. Ignorance 
and the fact that the man who has sinned confesses 
this, and in consciousness of his fault asks for forgive- 


p- 295* 


513-8. 


1 He. xii. 4. 


2 2 Co. iii. 18. 


262 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. IV. 5- 


296. 


ness, is a sufficient defence. In fact, even when the 
service of Moses’ law prevailed, a man’s ignorance, or 
rather the sin arising from this, was not forgiven him 
on any other condition except on his offering the 
sacrifice for sin : and now also, when the bloodless 
sacrifice has taken its place, and the truth has expelled 
the shadow, in place of a sin-ram, or a pair of turtle¬ 
doves or young pigeons, and in place of offering fine 
wheat flour,1 we have “ the Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sin of the world ” 2 : only if we duly confess 
the sin. For David also the speaker of divine things 
somewhere says in song, “ I said ‘ I will confess my 
transgression to the Lord against myself,’ and thou 
forgavest the iniquity of my heart.”3 This also you 
must clearly know : that the Lord has forgiven through 
our meanness not only the man who committed the 
sin, but also all who in ignorance communicated with 
him. For do not think that the sin committed by the 
brother is less. For a man to associate in communion 
with heretics is grievous, and unpardonable, when the 
sin is voluntarily committed. For how is it anything 
but shameful that, while we do not consent to eat 
common sustenance with our own enemies, we should 
eat the heavenly bread which gives life to the world 
with the enemies of God, or that we should communi¬ 
cate with those that are wrongfully presented for 
ordination by them as with holy men, when the Apostle 
cries, “ What communion hath light with darkness? or 


1 Le. v. i-ii. 2John f 29- 3ps- xxxi- 5- 


[V. 6. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


263 


what part hath a believer with an unbeliever?”,1 and 
John the son of thunder writes to the believers, “ If 
any man cometh unto you and bringeth not this 
teaching, receive him not in the house and say not to 
him ‘ Hail ’ ; for he that saith to him ‘ Hail ’ is partaker 
of his evil deeds.”?2 Therefore, these things being 
so, keep your heart “with all observance,” as it is 
written.3 For that “without faith it is impossible to 
please” is a declaration 4 of the Holy Spirit.3 The end. 


]>. 297. 

6. Of the same to John the count from Antaradjis. 513-8. 
(. From those during episcopacy , from the 3rd book 
the 390th letter.) 

Your magnificent and believing consort did not 

o o 

need a letter of recommendation. For we will say 
both to you and to her in the words of the Apostle, 

“Ye are our epistle, written in our heart, and known 
and read by all men.”6 However your actions seem 
gratifying, even those which are thought superfluous. 

As to the prelate of Area, whereas you said in your 
letter that he reckons it an intolerable thing to do 
anything that annoys us, and this though he and those 
with him who are trying to bring him to this are 
making many prayers and entreaties, what was written 
seemed to be not clearly, but obscurely expressed : 


1 1 Co. vi. 14, 15. 

4 a7ro<£acri9. 


3 Pr. iv. 23. 

6 2 Co. iii. 2. 

18 


2 2 J. 10, 1 1. 
5 He. xi. 6. 


264 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. IV. 6. 


but it informed me that he is pure in the communion 
which those men were desirous of rendering polluted 
through heretical association. And I for my part 
confess that this conduces to my pleasure. In fact the 
salvation of any man, especially of those that are loved 
like you, is fitly thought by me to be worth tens of 
thousands of talents of gold : or, to speak more justly, 
even worth all the pomp1 and theatrical display in this 
world. But that you have rather bestowed a gift 
29s. upon yourself, not upon me, by doing this is easy to 
show from the God-inspired scripture. For John the 
speaker of divine things in an epistle to certain believers 
says as follows: “If any man cometh unto you and 
bringeth not this sound teaching, receive him not in 
the house, and say not to him, ‘ Hail.’ For he that 
saith to him ‘ Hail’ is partaker of his evil deeds. 
And Paul the wise in writing to Titus expressed 
himself thus : “A man that is an heretic after one 
admonition and two avoid : knowing that such a man 
is perverted and sinneth, being self-condemned.” J And 
the words written by him to the Corinthians also lead 
to this sense : for he says, “ Therefore ‘ come out 
from among them and be separate,’ saith the Lord, 

< and approach not an unclean man. 4 However, not 
to spin out the letter by using many words, know that 
the great Basil also, the teacher of all that is under 
heaven, wrote this in his letters as a kind of rule and 
canon, in this manner : [Here follows the citation 


1 cfyavracTLa. 


" 2 J. IO, II. 


3 Tit. iii. io. 


4 2 Co. vi. 1 7. 


IV. 6. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 265 


given on p. 259]. These sacred commands therefore 

you have followed, in that you would not at all consent 

to come to the communion of those who profess opinions 

contrary to the orthodox faith. So that, if your 

firmness had slackened (as I pray may not happen), 

how great repentance would you have needed for 

transgressing the strictness of such a law! Wherefore 

keep the gift that was given you by God, I mean that 

of the pure and unadulterated communion : for truly 

this is a gift of God. In fact Paul also somewhere 

speaks thus : “ And this was not of you. For it is a 

gift of God : not of works, lest any man should boast.” 1 

The saying also of one of the wise men without seems 

to be in a way suited to the present topic ; “It is 

harder for us to keep good things than to get them.” 

This too it is a-ood to consider : if he who eats with the 

<_> 

king’s adversaries is thought to sin beyond forgiveness, 
where ought we to place him who eats the mysterious 
and heavenly bread with those who hold opinions 
adverse to God ? Let these words that we have 
written concerning your salvation which is highly re¬ 
garded by us suffice : words few compared with the 
need, but too many for the compass of the letter. But 
that the ruler of Area, whom I mentioned a short time 
ago, is exactly like a beast of burden and a pack-ass, 
and that he belongs to those who lead him rather than 
to himself, experience showed even before your words. 
You were wise and very intelligent in considering that 


p. 299. 


1 Eph. ii. 8, 9. 


266 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. IV. 7. 


that letter which exposes the false profession ought to 
be sent to those who conduct our apokmseis in the royal 
city : a thing which I have in fact done. But let it 
p. 300. not be unknown to your greatness that he spoke the 
truth when he said that he had received a letter from 
his brother which hindered him from making the 
journey to us, or rather which led him to death. 
The end. 


519-34. 7. Of the same to father John Canopites } {From 
those that were found outside the 23 books , the 
4th letter .) 

We for our part, feeble although we are, write 
everything written by your holiness upon the tablets 
of our heart, as it is written,2 and do not, as a man 
might think, read it over hastily. And we pray, as 
sinners, that your words may with God’s help be 
continued to us in the time of trial. For I am in the 
habit of mentioning Basil and Gregory, and having 
their names constantly upon my tongue : but there is 
nothing resembling their virtue in me, seeing that I 
have passed all my life in negligence. As for those 
who, as your holiness says, starting from this place, go 
to other provinces 3 and communicate indifferently, my 
conscience does not smite me as not having given this 
injunction with all my power and all my capacity for 

1 Cf. Vit. Sev. p. 23 ; Vit. Pet. Ib. p. 132. 2 2 Co. iii. 3. 

3 eVap^ias. 


IV. 7- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


267 


teaching, and said that want of carefulness in these 

O 7 

things is great wickedness ; whence I did not shrink 

o o 

from giving personal demonstration and proof even to 
women, when need called, that there is a great gulf, 
as in the passage in the Gospels,1 between the orthodox 
communion and that of the adversaries, and that we 
have no communion or association with those of p* 3QI- 
adverse opinions. But, if some men associate secretly 
in so great a number of cities and of provinces,2 your 
sanctity knows that this reflects no blame on us. So 
far was I from being satisfied with the matter that I 
even wrote an epistle to some of our brothers in 
Alexandria to say that they ought not, on the pretext 
of worshipping in the holy places, to associate in 
communion with men of other opinions. These are 
our proceedings, and this is the position in which 
they stand. However matters are placed as in a 
balance and a scale of a balance, and we do not know 
what will be the result of the things that are being 
stirred in the royal city and the things reported con¬ 
cerning the synod that is to be held,3 seeing that 
they are variously told and differently at different 
times. But of this one thing we for our part are 
assured, that, while God extends His hand, no one will 
be able to lead us away from the right faith, hrom 
places and from sees removal by force is possible : but 
from belief it is wholly impossible, unless we ourselves 


1 Lu. xvi. 26. 2 €7 rapxia?. 

3 Perhaps the conference of 532 (see Intr. p. viii). 


268 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. IV. 8. 


desire it, and the fear of God be lacking in our souls. 
For “ the Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear Him 
and in those that hope for His grace,”1 as the singing 
prophet somewhere says. But you, father, help us 
with all the power that is in you by stretching forth 
your saintly hands. The end. 


p. 302. 

519-38. 8. Of the same to the believers in Antioch. ( From 
those after banishment , from the 2nd book the 
gth letteri) 

To the holy church of God in Antioch, the devout 
clergymen and those that are among the people, 
Severus greeting in the Lord. 

Neither at an earlier time when I left your Christ- 

loving city did you omit - . And after other things. 

And to others again, showing how great are the 
benefits of sufferings for Christ’s sake, he wrote in an 
epistle, “ Unto you it was given not only to believe 
on Christ, but also to suffer for His sake,”2 calling it 
a gift given by God that they should suffer in the 
cause of piety. Fitly therefore and as beseems your 
intelligence and the earnestness of your character 
you are searching and inquiring both as to the exact 
nature ot the right faith, and as to the way to observe 
this with carefulness. For a man to be polluted by 
the communion of heretics ruins all the labours and 


1 Ps. cxlvi. 1 1. 


2 Ph. i. 29. 


IV. 8. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


269 


toils even of the solitary life, and leads to hell and 
final destruction : from which the divine John the 
Evano-elist a]so tried to hinder men, writing thus : 

o O 

[Here follows the citation given on p. 263]. The 
God-clad Basil too, the great doctor of the church, 
wrote in an epistle to a certain monk named Urbicius, 


say in 


cr 

& 


Here follows the citation given on p. 259]. 
In the letter to count Terence also he speaks thus: 
“ But, even if a man come from heaven itself, but 
is not in accord with the sound word of faith, I cannot 
reckon him a communicator in the sacraments. ’1 
And in writing to the same Terence’s daughters 
who were deaconesses he repeats the same things in 
a terrifying form, because the Arians and Fighters 
against the Spirit were disturbing the churches of God 
and were surging against them tyrannically: “But 
they who speak of either the Son or the Spirit as a 
creature, or reduce Him in any way to a subsidiary 
and servile office, are far from the truth : whose com¬ 
munion one should shun and from whose words one 
should turn away as being destructive of souls.” 2 And 

1 

to Patrophilus the bishop he wrote thus: “If these 
things seem to you a fit subject for grief, impute the 
separation to those who were the cause. But, if you 
judge them indifferent, pardon us when we do not 
consent to be of the leaven of those who teach other 
thin £s.”3 Gregory also the Theologian wrote thus 

O o y o 

about the Arians who were in power at that time, as 


p- 303- 


1 Ep. 214. 2. 


2 Ep. 105. 


3 Ep. 250. 


270 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. IV. 9. 


P- 3°4- 


Sept. 

537. 


I said, and compelled the orthodox to communicate 
with them against their will : “ Having made this 
ar& ^ only, that they did not assent to the 

impiety and were not polluted by the communion ; 
which we shun as serpent’s poison, that does not 

hurt the body but blackens the depths of the soul.”1 
Let no one therefore cause you to depart from that 
which is right. For “in a very little while He that 

cometh will come and will not tarry” :2 and “ He will 

render to every man according to his deeds.”3 For 
it is in very truth “ a fearful thing to fall into the hands 
of the living God.” 4 Not the end. 


9* Of the same to Andrew the reader and notary . 
( From those after banishment , from the gth book 
the 62 nd letter. ) 

By a wonderful chance, such as no one expects before 
it happens, the letter ol your devoutness was delivered 
to me on the fourth day of the present month of 
September, on which is celebrated the memory of 
the thrice-blessed Dioscorus, the archbishop and holy 
martyr, who is now counted amontr the heretics in 
Alexandria and anathematized by the impious. With 
this letter was also joined a letter of the holy virgins 
who were expelled from Antioch : which in us 


2 He. x. 37. 
4 He. x. 31. 


1 Or. xxxiii. 4. 
3 Ro. ii. 6. 


IV. g. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


271 


excited many sighs and tears, but for them has 
prepared right glorious heavenly blessings, such as are 
described in the book of life. And after other things. 
But you have rightly determined that the Christ-loving 
freewomen shall in no way be afraid to v isit their 
anepsios or cousin,1 who is laid in the martyrs 
chapel of the holy Peter the archbishop and martyr. 
Where the bones of holy martyrs have previously 
been laid, it is right to pray without hesitation : 
especially when the place is in silence, and the heretics 
are not unlawfully conducting services or singing in¬ 
side. In fact even Peter the bishop of holy memory 
from Iberia prayed in the house of the chapel of the 
glorious holy martyr and apostle Judas the brother of 
James, who is laid at Berytus (in the same fashion he 
prayed also at Tripolis in the house of the chapel of 
the holy victory-clad martyr Leontius). 

As to the fact which you mention that they are 
constantly busying themselves about the offering that 
they made to me, I say that here again is a timely 
act on the part of the sacred martyrs and divine 
virgins who are expected from the P^ast, and are ready 
to show forth in themselves as pious women the lo\ e 
of God. P'or my part, if I be hungry or thirsty, I will 
rend by force the mantle and tunic with which they 
are clad, if they do not generously feed me. May the 
Lord therefore in return for everything give them a 
perfect reward for their good will ! \ ou did rightly 


1 Syr. “ uncle’s son." 


272 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. IV. io 


p. 306. 


519-35. 


P* 307. 


m informing us further of the decease of the pious 
bishop Zosimus, in order that we may praise God who 
did not allow him to be wholly perverted to any of the 
deeds of the adversaries, but to depart while in some 
sort counted in the communion of the orthodox, and 
find mercy in the judgment before the awful tribunal : 
that is, unless he is perhaps stained somewhere at 
bottom with the leprosy of heresy and with impious 
belief. In the case of men of this kind I say with 
confidence that they will find no place of clemency, 
seeing that, as far as in them lies, they have given 

strength to the noose of error to destroy the souls of 
many. The end. 


10. Of the same to Cassaria the patrician. {From 

those which were found outside the 23 books , the 
15 th letter.) 

Out of piety that loves instruction you ask whether 
some of the oithodox are doing well in not communi¬ 
cating with the heretics, but listening to the reading 
of the holy Gospel, or even staying during the time of 
the mysterious prayers, but not communicating in the 
rites that are being performed. To those who are not 
ignorant of the divine laws the answer is manifest. 
John the Evangelist, the speaker of divine things, 
wrote: [Here follows the citation given on p. 263]. 
If then it is not right to offer even a bare greeting to 
those who bring another teaching and do not teach 


IV. IO. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


273 


the orthodox faith, how can one communicate in 
prayers and in lessons or in any other such things with 
such men as these? And Paul the wise commands us 
to turn away even the very face from those who are in 
servitude to heresy, writing thus to 1 itus : | Here 

follows the citation given on p. 264]. He therefore 
who joins in assembly with the guilty renders himself 
subject to the same judgment. Nay even the holy 
canons of the Church have manifestly repudiated the 
principle of a man praying with heretics. For the 
hundred and thirty-fifth canon says; “ It is not right to 
receive the blessings1 of heretics, which are rather no¬ 
blessings and not blessings.” And there immediately 
follows the hundred and thirty-sixth also, which says ; 

“ It is not right to pray with heretics or schismatics.” 2 
These statements give the strict rule. But, when I 
the mean one, as far as my mean knowledge extends, 
consider the broadness of the God-inspired scripture, I 
find that men who hold ministerial posts or high offices, 
and are obliged to accompany and attend upon rulers, 
receive an indulgence, if, when they go in with them and 

o 77 y o 

hear a lesson and prayers, they keep themselves per¬ 
fect : I mean if they do not communicate in the com¬ 
munion from which they are divided. For instance in 
the fourth Book of Kingdoms there is something like 
this written. A certain captain of the host of the p. 30S. 
King of Syria of Damascus, by name Naaman, who 
was a leper, went to the prophet Elisha, and received 


1 I.e. tvAoyicu, presents. 


2 Mansi ii. 570. 


274 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. IV. IO. 


cleansing from his affliction. And through his healing 
he recognised the one and only true God of Israel, the 
Maker and Creator of all, and spurned the falsely- 
named gods and his fathers’ worship and error. And, 
when he was about to return to his own country, he 
said to the prophet that he would no more look upon 
the strange gods and vain demons. “ But,” he says, 
“ although the King of Syria go into the temple of 
the demon in their country who is called Rimmon, 
and I also go in with him to do him honour and to 
support him with my hand, I will worship the true 
God in my heart, and I will recognise Him only, but 
I will not communicate with the kina' in the error and 
worship the demon with him. Only” (he says) “pray 
for me, that God may be gracious to me in this thino- 
also on account of necessity.” And the prophet was 
silent and did not praise or blame : but by silence he 
followed a middle line and gave him indulgence : and, 
having invoked peace upon him, he sent him away. 
But it is well that we cite also the actual words of 
the divine scripture, which Naaman spoke to the 
prophet himself, which run as follows: “‘Thy slave 
will no more perform a burnt-offering or a sacrifice 
unto other gods, but unto the Lord only. And in 
this thing the Lord will be gracious to thy slave, when 
my lord goeth into the house of Rimmon to worship 
p. 3° 9 him there, because he leaneth upon my hands. 
And, when he worshippeth in the house of Rimmon, 
I, being with him, will worship the Lord God. 
And the Lord will be gracious to thy slave in 


V. I. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


275 


this thing/ And Elisha said to Naaman, ‘Go in 
peace.’ ” 1 Therefore, seeing that your glorious 
devoutness knows these things, 1 pray that with 

pure and sincere faith you may walk in the Lord’s 
paths both in deed and in word. For besides your 
other excellencies I admire also your practice of 
reading and meditating on the divine words, the 
fruits and flowers of which are displayed in your 

God-loving letters, which gladden those before whom 

o 7 o 

they come. The e7id. 


V. Fifth section.2 About clergymen or laymen who 
are converted from heresies. 


[. Of the same to John the tribune , in the name ^ 489-508. 
father Leontius. ( From those before episcopacy, 
from the \th book the 2nd letter .) 

For my part I thought that the negligence and sloth 

that has grown old with me, and the sleep of sins from 

which up to the present day I have not been roused, 

were unknown to the majority of men, but known to 

God only, “ who knoweth the hearts,” and makes “ light 

the hidden things of darkness,” and reveals the 

thoughts that are in the mind.3 But you by naming 

& , p- 310. 

me a city set upon a height have caused me an 
increase of tears, if I not only injure myself by my 


1 4 R. v. 17-19. 


- rtrXos. 


3 Ac. xv. 8 ; 1 Co. iv. 5. 


276 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


V. I. 


forgetfulness, but also make myself a bad example to 
others who know me. The holy scripture knows of 
such cities also and evil powers, and men who regard 
impiety, whose memory the Lord destroyed with 
tumult. However, I considered that you were led by 
love and your faith towards Christ to write thus, though 
you distressed my wretchedness. But, concerning the 
other part of your letter, I was much grieved : and I 
prayed that the earth might open for me, seeing that 
you have dared to open a blaspheming mouth against 
the saint and archbishop Timothy, the preserver of 
the orthodox faith, who was left as a remnant and a 
root for Israel, enduring long exiles,1 and bearing 
Christ’s marks in him. What cause of blame is 
there, tell me, in the fact of his receiving canonic¬ 
ally upon repentance those who were ordained by 
heretics, when they anathematized their heresy in 
writing ? Are you not in the habit of hearing that 
P. 31 1. Melitus,2 the archbishop of Antioch, was ordained 
by Arians, and that he afterwards showed himself an 
approved champion of orthodoxy, insomuch that he 
was thought worthy to suffer many things, and put on 
the crown of confession? What then? Did those who 
received this man at that time and honoured him with 
tens of thousands of praises, one of whom was the great 
Basil, also praise or receive the man who ordained 
him, holding as he did Arian opinions? Nay, him 
they justly repudiated as having remained in the nets 


1 * > / 

1 egopt as. 


2 Meletius is meant. 


V. I. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


277 


of Arius, while they admired Melitus as having by 
repentance purged away the dregs of heresy and 
combated on behalf of orthodoxy. But you say that 
the holy Timothy contradicted himself, seeing that at 
first he said that those who had been ordained should 
not be received, but at a later time received them. 

Being an old man and without learning and un- 
instructed 1 acquiesce in what you say. However, we 
find that the holy apostles also showed similar self-con¬ 
tradiction. For instance Peter, though he was in the 
habit of preaching the gospel to those of the circum¬ 
cision only, and did not go on to preach to those of the 
nations also, because he thought it to be “ unlawful to 
approach or join himself to anyone of another race,” 
afterwards, when he had received a revelation from 
God, said, “ God hath showed me also not to call any p. 312 
man common and unclean”: and again, “God also 
who knoweth the hearts bare them witness, giving 
them the Holy Spirit even as unto us, and put no 
difference between us and them.”1 In such cases the 
purpose is approved though the things done are 
thought to appear in some way contradictory. But, 
that you may learn that it is not 1 only the un¬ 
instructed who say these things, I remember to have 
heard a discourse of the holy John, bishop of Con¬ 
stantinople, read : and 1 have now again looked for the 
book, and have copied some sentences from it for your 
affection, which give us an example bearing upon this 


1 Ac. x. 28, xv. 8. 


278 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


V. I. 


present subject, that we are not to be scandalized 
without reason. The discourse in which the holy man 
writes these things is the encomium on Paul the 
Apostle : and he speaks thus : “So neither would 
Paul have been known to imitate his Lord, except 
that he became now a Jew, now as one not under the 
law. For now he would keep the law : now he would 
neelect the law. And at one time he would cleave to the 
life here ; at another again he would despise it. And 
now he would ask for money : now he would refuse 
it even when given. And he would sacrifice, and 
shave : and arain he would anathematize the doers 

O 

of these things. And now he would circumcize : 
now he would reject circumcision. And the things 
done were contradictory : but the thought and inten¬ 
tion from which these proceeded was very consistent 
p. 3I3- and consonant with itself. For he sought one thing, 
the salvation of those who saw and heard these things. 
For this reason now he would keep the law : now he 
would subvert it. For it was not only in what he did, 
but also in what he said that he was versatile and rich 
in expedients : not being changed in his mind, nor 
passing from one disposition to another, but remaining 
that which he was, and treating each of the said matters 
in accordance with the need of the time. Do not there¬ 
fore speak evil of him on account of these things, but 
celebrate and crown him the more on account of these 
things. For in fact in the case of a physician also, 
when you see him now burning now feeding ; and using 
now iron now medicine ; and now prohibiting foods 


V. I. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


279 


and drinks, now allowing the patient to enjoy these 
without stint ; and at one time restricting him on all 
sides, at another ordering the man who has been seized 
with fever to drink a glass full of cold water, you do 
not blame him for the variation, nor because of the 
perpetual change : but you will then praise the tech¬ 
nical skill the more, because you see it boldly applying 
methods that seem to us contradictory and hurtful, 
and pledging itself for a safe result. For such is the 
man of technical skill. But, if we accept a physician 
when he does these contradictory things, much more 
must we celebrate the soul of Paul, which approached 
those in trouble in this way.”1 So far the holy John : 
but I wish to say one other thing which also springs 
from rusticity and an uninstructed mind. I consider 
that all the bishops throughout the earth who are 
bound together with one another in the orthodox faith 
and combined in union are one. P'or all follow the 
model of one, of the great God and our Saviour Jesus 
Christ. Therefore, as, when Cyprian in Africa with 
the synod under him said that all who had been bap¬ 
tized by heresy ought to receive the laver of regener- 
tion, as if they had never originally been baptized at 
all, but at last the opinion of Sixtus of Rome, and of 
Dionysius of Alexandria and of the others prevailed, 
so that those who had been baptized by heretics in the 
name of the three substances, the Father, the Son, and 
the Holy Spirit, were not re-baptized, no one of sound 


• 3H- 


1 P. G. xlix. 498. 


19 


280 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


V. I. 


intelligence said that those saintly bishops contradicted 
themselves, but that upon later consideration they 
chose a better and more canonical course, so also the 
holy Timothy too at first, owing to the blasphemy and 
the impenitent heart of the Proterians as it was at the 
beginning, and the zeal of the orthodox people of the 
city of the Alexandrines, said that he would not accept 
those who had been ordained by the opposite party : 
but at last, when they canonically repented and he 
lawfully accepted them, he did not show himself self¬ 
contradictory, but rather very consistent, since he said 
those things on account of the zeal of the believers, 
but allowed the canons to prevail, and accepted those 
who repented in accordance with the final conclusions 
of the fathers, and further by signing the Encyclical 
united himself to all the bishops in the world.1 Though 
these things seem contradictory to many, yet neverthe¬ 
less their one purpose was the salvation of those who 
had perished, and that those who stood upright mi ght 
not under the influence of immoderate zeal leave the 
royal road, and turn away to that which is rather on 
the right side. Therefore, you that are beloved on 
account of our Lord Jesus, do not out of ignorance 
injure your soul : but hear me the unlearned and unin¬ 
structed, and do not revile the man of God, with 
whom all the fathers were satisfied at that time, not 
having received the satisfaction J that is from men, but 
that which is from God : and I the mean and sinful 


1 Cf. p. 181. 


- Tr\r/po(f)OpLa. 


V. I. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


281 


am, as I persuade myself, no false witness of this. 

We did not love Timothy as having been crucified for 
us, as you say, but as having been a true bondservant 
of Him who was of His own accord crucified for the 
race of men, and a faithful and wise steward of God’s 
mysteries:1 who also contended against the heresy 
of the Diphysites or Nestorians, and the impious p- 3 *6. 
phantasy2 of the Eutychianists, proclaiming Emmanuel 
to be one nature out of two, the Godhead that is and 
the manhood, and the same of one essence with the 
Father in the Godhead, and of one essence with us 
men in the manhood. For He took of the seed of 
Abraham and was made like us His brethren in all 
things except sin,3 in order that He might redeem those 
who were under sin, and might save us by His blood, 
and we might thenceforth be called a holy people, 
inasmuch as we were created by the blood of God, 
who suffered for us in the flesh and remained impass¬ 
ible. Let your beloved person know that to all who 
came to my pitifulness of the holy fathers in Pam- 
phylia, and of the Christ-loving laymen, I read what was 
written to me by you : and each of them urged me to 
write to you many things taken from the doctors who 
were eminent at various times in the church. For 
some of them actually knew you at the time when 
Promotus the count, whose soul is at rest, was living 

o 

in the royal city : with whom you perhaps in fact 
discussed these things. But for my part, seeing that 


1 Lu. xii. 42 ; 1 Co. iv. 1. 


2 c f>avTa(Tia . 


J He. ii. 16, 17, iv. 15. 


p. 317- 

513-8 


282 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. 2. 


as an uninstructed and unlearned man I avoid many 
words, I have sent you in an epistle the fruit of my 
rusticity : having besought the merciful God to place 
in you the wisdom which is gentle and obedient, in 
respect of the things that have been written by me. 
May the Lord of peace and of tranquillity grant us 
peace and tranquillity at all times and in all ways ! 
The end. 


2. Of the same to Nicias the bishop. ( From those 
during episcopacy , from the yrd book the 32 y'd 
letter. ) 

We were surprised when your sanctity’s letter came 
before us, by which we learned that Gennadius the 
devout presbyter of the village called Minidus had any 
doubt whether those who have received and undergone 
the spurious ordination, and have purged themselves 
of these dregs by petitions of confession which they 
presented to you, and have once put off by a written 
leofal renunciation the strange and foreign clothing-1 in 
which they thought themselves to have been clothed 
by the heretics, ought to return to their former grade 
in the ministry. Therefore they must show this in 
deed by returning to the former grade, and in it per¬ 
forming their sacred ministrations, if we are not sinning 
in using this same expression, and mentioning “ the 


1 Zeph. i. 8. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


283 


V. 3- 


former,” as if there were a second : whereas, since the 
second has no validity and is unknown to God, it is 
more fitting to say that they ought to minister in the 
true and only grade, which they have legally received, 
there being- no other at all. For no one who has been 
legally ordained a deacon maybe shall be able to think 
of himself that he is a presbyter, whether by fraud or 
by some disowned and illegal hand. Therefore as I p. 3l8- 
said, the devout Gennadius must know clearly that it is 
by deeds that they ought to unite to themselves those 
who have cast from them in writing the strange and 
accursed laying on of a heretical hand, if “ the kingdom 
of God is not in word but in power,”1 and not he that 
says “ Lord, Lord ! ” but he that does the will of the 
heavenly Father enters into the kingdom of heaven.2 
The end. 


3. Of the same to the monastery at Tagais. ( From 513-8. 
those during episcopacy , fro?n the 4th book the 
24 Sth letter.') 

When we asked the God-loving presbyter and 
archimandrite Neon how your honourable cloister is 
faring and what its condition2 is (if one were to call 
that cloister a dwelling-place of the orthodox faith the 
expression would be appropriate), he told me that some 
among you out of fervent zeal are divided in a matter 
of names, and are passing to questions outside the 

1 I Co. IV. 20. 2 Mt. Vli. 2 1. " KaTacrracris. 


284 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


v. 3- 


boundaries. But for my part I wish to remind you, 
who are disciples and hearers of Stephen who is among 
P. 319. the saints, that the royal road both of the faith and of 
the active virtues is in danger not only from things that 
lie on the left side, but also much more from things that 
lie on the right and are not recognised, and from prin¬ 
ciples and causes that appear just and are able to 
deceive. You remember that, when the man re¬ 
membered for sanctity made a union with the holy 
fathers in Palestine and in Alexandria, he found 
certain men to be deceived by considerations that lay 
rather on the right side, and to be passing to scruples 
self-created 1 and uncanonical, of which you have a 
clearer knowledge : and beina- moved with zeal he in- 
quired into the affair, and subjected it to very careful 
examination : and the diataxeis or commands of the 
fathers who at various times fed the churches were 
scrutinized, and the truth was made manifest and 
judgment given in its favour by everyone, and it was 
decided to be rioht. I also when I came here found 

o 

certain men saying that converts from the evil Chalce- 
donian faith to the orthodox faith ought to be re¬ 
baptized, on the ground that the holy bishops who met 
at Laodicea 2 and effected the deprivation of Flavian of 
evil name call those who confess two natures after the 
union Paulianists : and on the ground that Julius also, 
who was bishop of the city of the Romans, so termed 


1 I.e. iOeXoOpr]crK€La (Col. ii. 23). 

- Ephesus must be meant, but cf. p. 316. 


SELECT LETTERS OF TIIE HOLY SEVERUS. 


285 


V. 3- 


them, as they said, in his letter to Dionysius the bishop p. 320 
of Corinth :T and I had a discussion with them, insomuch 
that I cited a certain enactment and showed that such 
must not be re-baptized, nor yet be re-anointed. Con¬ 
cerning names also, we must distinguish between times 
and look into them, and consider what ought to be 
required in the case of general unions, and not be 
confused by chance occurrences and mingle things that 
are not to be mingled, and excite disturbances against 
ourselves, and give others also, as is written, turbid 
filth to drink.2 I should have wished to deal with 
these matters in this letter also : but, since various 
things have been written by me in epistles to dif¬ 
ferent men upon this same subject/5 I have now* made 
isa or copies of these compositions, and have given 
them to the God-loving presbyter Neon, in order that 
they may be read to the God-loving intelligence and 
devoutness of your sacred company and spiritual fellow¬ 
ship : and I am well assured that you will place them 
in the ears of your hearts, and will write them on the 
tablets of the inner man, and will be delivered from 
disturbance, and with all readiness will make prayers 
on behalf of us, who are daily incurring dangers for 
the sake of the sound word of faith, and are able to 
say with Paul, “ I swear by my boast of you, my 
brethren, which I have in Christ Jesus, that I die p- 32 
daily,” 4 it being understood that the Apostle endured 


1 P. L. viii. 929. 2 Eze. xxxiv. 19 (?). 

■' V7r6@€cris. 4 1 Co. xv. 31. 


286 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


V. 4. 


such things as a test of his virtue, while we are 
chastised as a recompense for our sins, seeing that we 
have nothing else to set to the credit account, except 
that we show boldness on behalf of the orthodox faith. 
The end. 

515-8. 4* Of the same to Theotecnus the presbyter and 
archiatros. i^From those during episcopacy, from 
the 6th book the 161^/ letter.) 

With regard to the case 1 of Mark the devout monk 
and presbyter you have written throughout wisely and 
with the religious feeling and the intelligence that 
belongs to you. Know however that, even if we had 
not the instance of the saintly bishop Eleusinius, we 
have many other examples provided by the holy 
fathers in the times of the Arians, which charge us not 
to repel those who have been often perverted, and 
recurred to the evil thing as before, but, as far as is 
possible, to allow them the last repentance. It is 
related in church histories that Asterius, who was 
a sophist and author among the Arians,2 was often 
received and often returned to his vomit,3 insomuch 
that this expression of his is cited in histories. He 
cried out lying on his face before everyone and 
p.322. saying, “Trample upon me, the salt which has 
lost its savour.” Hosius also, the bishop of 

1 V7rO#€<Xl9. 

Of. Socr. i. 36, Theod. Hist. Rel. p. 1321. I cannot find this 

story. 3 2 pe. ii. 2 2 . 


V. 4- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 287 

Corduba, the old man, whom Athanasius who is amone 
the saints often called “a man of goodly old age,”1 2 
was often perverted and overcome by the times and 
again received, and many others. Therefore with 
Mark also this same principle should hold good, and 
he should be received on the basis of a written 
document, upon his anathematizing the heresies of the 
Diphysites and of the Massalians, together with the 
impious men themselves and their impiety. For 
indeed “ both the impious man and his impiety are 
equally hated before God,”" as a wise man said; 
although the fathers as pilots :l from motives of policy 
received some men upon the impiety alone being 
anathematized (I refer to the pepragmena or things 
done at Chalcedon), thinking that those who did them 
were also anathematized at the same time in silence. 
When this is done it is absolutely necessary that the 
office of superintendent should also be entrusted to 
Mark, seeing that the majority of the brethren and, if 
one may so say, all are asking for him as you write. 
Indeed after considering the matter from many points 
of view I have come to this conclusion, that it is better 
that he should be canonically received now while he is 
humbled, than that, desired as he is by many persons, 
he should betake himself perhaps to the royal among 
cities, and do things that many are wont to do, and 
with money buy independence, and get the monastery 


1 Ap. c. Ar. 44 (?); cf. p. 207, note 1. 

2 W. xiv. 9. Kv/Sepi'rjrai. 


288 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


V. 4. 


under his control with liberty to follow the impiety 
with head bare and unashamed. I have also received 
p- 323- the letter that you wrote about the hateful opinions of 
Romanus, in which you state that you have read the 
tome written by me cursorily. But I wish you to read 
it yet again and pay attention to the contents, and to 
condemn more strongly the impious man, and induce 
the saintly bishops also to do the same, and repudi¬ 
ate that wicked man by a common synodical letter 
addressed by them to my meanness. There is yet 
another thing that I had almost forgotten to make 
known to your religiousness, viz., that the devout 
Mark in what he said displayed an appearance of 
shrinking from the superintendence of the monastery, 
and seeking only to live at peace, and besides this 
asserted further that a roval letter had assigned 
the monastery to the apostolic see of the city of the 
Antiochenes, and that the clergymen in Tarsus had a 
spite against them, and prevented them from lesson¬ 
reading and the offering of oblations if they were in 
need, the holy remnants of the bloodless sacrifice being 
often lacking to them. And I said to him and to the 

o 

man who was with him, “ You cannot raise these 
matters now : but for the present you Mark must 
certainly show true repentance by a form of satisfaction1 
and by a change in your deeds, and then, if you have 
the witness of time to the blamelessness of your future 
conduct, we will also go on to settle the said points,2 if 


1 7r\rjpo<f)opia. 


2 K€0aAaia. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


289 


anyone try to act perversely towards you, and to 
do any spiteful and injurious action to your holy 
monastery.” Therefore, in order that the questions 
raised upon these subjects too may not be unknown 
to you, I have added these few words in the letter. 
Moreover on second thoughts I have determined to 
warn your religiousness of this further point also : that, 
when I was composing the letter to the metropolitan,1 
and I thought that the number of brethren living- 
in the monastery was large, I came to the following 
decision : that is that the entrusting of the super¬ 
intendence to the devout Mark should depend on the 
opinion of the majority. But I learn that there are 
not more than fifteen : and distinct information has 
been sent me that one or two only are thought to be 
opposed to him, and that it is certainly he who ought 
to receive the post of superintendent, upon giving 
complete satisfaction with sincerity and with his whole 
heart, so far as men can see. We have also sent an 
ison or copy of the form of satisfaction" which our 
notaries have drawn up, having compiled it from other 
forms 3 that were previously composed by me in the 
cases of various persons. 

The God-loving Basil bishop of Pompeiupolis has 
informed us that he has been compelled by the God- 
loving Dionysius bishop of the metropolis to under¬ 
take an unlawful laying on of hands or ordination. If 
this is really so, it is also proper that your love of 


v- 5* 


P- 324. 


i 


2 7r\r]po(f)opia. 


7r\rjpo^>opia^ 


290 


SELECT LETTERS OE THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


P- 325- 

515-8. 


V. 5. 


God and the religious presbyter and logothete John 
should take care that it too receive correction. 
The end. 


5. Of the same to Dionysius bishop of Tar sits. ( From 
those during episcopacy , the 6th booh the ijSth letter .) 

H aving by many circuitous and roundabout methods 
succeeded in mastering the various aspects of the 
case 1 of the devout monk and presbyter Mark, and 
having considered all the circumstances that had come 
to my knowledge, and finding that he is repeatedly 
changing, I remembered Him who speaks through Jere¬ 
miah the prophet and says to Israel who had sinned, 
“Behold ! I will enter into judgment with thee when thou 
sayest, ‘ I have not sinned ? ; because thou hast been 
very scornful so as to repeat thy ways ’’ ; and again, 
“ if a man put away his wife, and she go from him and 
become another man’s, shall she return to him aeain ? ” : 
and again, “ Lift up thine eyes to uprightness and see 
where thou hast not been defiled.”'2 But the same 
may be seen holding forth the broad path of repentance 
and saying through Isaiah the gracious words, “ I held 
forth my hands all the day unto a disobedient and gain¬ 
saying people, who walk in a way that is not good but 
after their sins ” ; 3 and the day is the whole of this 
life according to Paul the Apostle who says, “ Exhort 
yourselves daily while it is called to-day, that none of 


1 VTToO (.CTLS . 


2 Jer. ii. 35, 36, iii. 1, 2. 


3 Is. lxv. 2. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


291 


V. 5- 


you may be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin.”1 
Therefore my conclusion and judgment is that an p. 326 
opportunity for penitence be given to the said devout 
presbyter and monk Mark, in order that he may 
anathematize in writing the heresies in which he has 
shared, viz., that of those who divide our one Lord and 
God Jesus Christ into two natures after the union, and 
that also of the Massalians with the persons themselves 
and the doctrines, as we also here caused him to 
draw up a form of satisfaction " here in writing. For 
indeed we find certain men in the times of the Arians 
who removed themselves from the communion of the 
holy fathers and fell away to the error of the heretics, 
and were again converted and were not repelled. How¬ 
ever the devout Mark must henceforth be cautious 
and know clearly that it is not possible for him to 
retain our communion and that of those who do not 
think the same as we do, seeing that Paul who had 
Christ speaking in him warns us to shun even com¬ 
munications with such men, saying, | Here follows the 
citation given on p. 264]. And John the speaker of 
divine things writing an epistle and holding the same 
opinion speaks thus ; [Here follows the citation given 
on p. 263]. And Basil, who was moved by the same 
Spirit as these, and is an accurate teacher of the sacred 
laws, wrote in the letter to Urbicius the monk as 
follows; [Here follows the citation given on p. 259]. p.327 

If the circumstances of the present case 3 concerned 


1 He. iii. 13. 


- 7rXrjpo(f)opLa. 


3 vvoOeo-LS. 


292 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


V- 5- 


only the person of the devout presbyter and monk 
Mark, I would perhaps have closed the letter with these 
texts. But, since it is a habitation of many brethren, 
and a headship of rational souls that have taken upon 
them the philosophic life, in singing of the comeliness 
of which and the pleasure that it gives to God and in 
chanting those harmonious spiritual songs the prophet 
David sang crying, “ Behold ! what is good and what 
beautiful except that brethren should dwell together, 
as ointment upon the head that runs down upon the 
beard, the beard of Aaron ? ”,x it is your sanctity’s duty 
to look at the number of the brethren dwelling in the 
monastery, and to comply with the opinion of those 
who are the majority, provided firstly that the often- 
mentioned devout Mark did not intrude himself bv 
force and violence, and secondly that he is not by his 
association disturbing and dissolving the bond of unity, 
to speak in the language of the Apostle,2 and the concord 
of those who are living a life that has no association 
with the world’s confusions, and is beautiful and lovely 
328. and resembles ointment. Repentance is not a thing 
of the same kind as the spiritual headship and super¬ 
intendence of a monastery. Such men must be of 
approved character, and men who have walked in all 
virtue, according to the utterance of the Lord which 
says in the Gospels, “Who then is the faithful and wise 
bondman, whom his lord set over his house to give 
them the food in due season ? blessed is the bondman 


1 Ps. cxxxi. 1, 2. 


2 Eph. iv. 3 (?). 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


293 


V. 5- 


whom his lord shall come and find so doing.”1 I 
therefore upon the devout monk and presbyter Mark 
showing penitence in canonical form and confessing 
his sin have opened to him the door of repentance. 

But it rests with you, as I said, to determine the 
question of the headship and superintendence of the 
monastery, according to the opinion of the brothers 
who form the majority : because in such cases it is the 
more fitting course to acquiesce in the wish of the 
greater number. This I say because I have received 
a written petition pleading for the devout presbvter 
and monk Mark, and containing signatures given by 
the devout clergymen and monks of the same said 
monastery, which are in number ten only. Therefore, p. 329. 
since it was not my part, being at a distance, to give a 
judgment upon the details of such a question, I have 
of necessity committed to your holiness the duty of 
making a detailed investigation of the matter. Con¬ 
sidering therefore both points, I mean the superin¬ 
tendence of the cloister, and the gain or loss in regard 
to the brothers themselves, give a proper decision upon 
the disputed questions with help and inspiration and 
grace from above, without which it is impossible for 
any right action to be done. 

As to the devout presbyter Julian, the brother of 
the God-loving bishop Serenus,2 I forbear to say 
anything, being convinced that after such an ex¬ 
perience he would never have dared to convey false 


1 Mt. xxiv. 45, 46. 


2 Cf p. 1 14. 


294 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


P- 33°- 

513-8. 


P- 33i* 


V. 6 


information to the pious ears of our serene Christ- 
loving king. If in addition to what has already been 
done he have presumed to do this also, he falls by 
divine and human laws, from which there is no 
possibility of escape. The end . 


6. Of the same against those who say that men who 
have communicated with the Synod of Chalcedon , 
and are penitent and anathematize those who call 
our one Lord and God Jesus Christ two natures 
after the ineffable union and come over to the 
orthodox faith must be re-anointed. ( From those 
during episcopacy , from the gth book the 1st 
letter. ) 

I for my part am not conscious in myself of any 
quality such as that to which you bear witness, when 
you say that the fame of our meanness has gone out 
over all the earth, and that we are one competent to 
teach and to heal the afflictions of the soul : but I 
know clearly that, if I utter anything that is on the 
right side and is capable of profiting, it is out of the 
writings and labours of the God-clad educators 1 of the 
church that I utter and speak this : and I think that 
I hear plainly from God what is said by the wise 
Paul, “ And what hast thou that thou didst not 
receive ? but if thou didst indeed receive it why 


i Mciithyai raze = /AucrTaywyoi. 


I 


V. 6. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


295 


boastest thou as if thou didst not receive it ? ” 1 For 
I for my part am not competent to break the bread of 
knowledge for those that are hungry : on the contrary 
I gather the food of learning by picking up the crumbs 
of the orthodox shepherds, and so I seem to give this 
to others also. Wherefore it is from their labours 
that I make answer to your affection also, and it is 
by adducing their utterances that I find a solution of 
the doubts that have been raised. 

Whereas you say that those who assembled at 
Chalcedon, and divided our one Lord and God and 
Saviour Jesus Christ by calling Him two natures 
after the union fell under the anathema laid down 
against abominable godless heresies, and that men 
coming from them are not to be received, but their 
‘‘end is to be burned,” - because they are devoid of 
the grace of the Holy Spirit, know that you have 
missed the truth. That by denial of the faith they 
are stripped of every spiritual heavenly gift it is 
impossible for me to gainsay ; but that when they 
repudiate and renounce the heresy and condemn it 
by anathema, and come over to the church, they are 
according to the ordinances of the fathers to be p 
received, I will try to show in what I am about to 
say (by the church I too mean the confession which 
is founded on the true faith, since Peter also heard 
the words, “Thou art Cephas and upon this rock 
will I build my church, and the gates of Hades shall 


1 i Co. iv. 7. 2 He. vi# 8 

20 


• 332 


296 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


V. 6. 


not prevail against it ” : 1 and I find that Gregory the 
Theologian also says of the Arians who formerly held 
the temples of God, “ They have the house, we the 
dweller in it : they the temples, we the privilege of 
becoming temples of the living God ” 2). Now, 
when Cyprian held a prominent position at Carthage 
in Africa, and God-loving bishops assembled there, 
who were in number eighty-seven, some from the 
same Africa itself, some from Mauretania and Numidia, 
p. 333- they determined that those who come from all 
heresies should be perfected by the true baptism of 
the church,3 as if they had not been baptized at all, 
not distineuishinor the character of each ol the heresies, 
but bringing all under one pronouncement.4 It was 
from God-loving zeal that these adopted this resolu¬ 
tion : as is clearly shown by the words which the 
holy Cyprian who has been mentioned wrote in 
epistles to Juvian and Ouintus and Magnus, where 
he also includes a reference to those who are baptized 
on their beds during sickness.5 And soon afterwards 
Dionysius to whom it fell at that time to feed the 
church of the city of the Alexandrines, writing to 
Dionysius his namesake and Stephen, who presided 
over the holy church of the city of the Romans, made 
a distinction, saying that those who had been baptized 
in the name of the three substances, the Father, the 
Son, and the Holy Spirit, even though it were by heretics 


1 Mt. xvi. 1 8. 2 Or. xxxiii. 15. 3 Cf p. 212. 

4 a7roc£a<T/.s. 5 Ep. 69, 7 1, 73- 


V. 6. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


297 


that they were baptized, but still such as confess the 
three substances, should not be re-baptized : but 
converts from the other heresies should certainly be 
perfected by the baptism of the church. This opinion 
the three hundred and eighteen fathers who assembled 
at Nicaea also followed, and those who led the churches 
after them. I hose who assembled in Africa in the 
days of Cyprian, looking at the common name of the 
heresies only, applied a single method of cure. But 
the contemporaries of the great Dionysius and those 
who came alter him distinguished the varieties of 
diseases, and so applied to each of them the cure 
suited for it. Just as in bodily troubles everv 
infirmity is termed disease, and they are ex¬ 
pressed by this general name, which however covers 
many different diseases, fever for instance and dropsy 
and elephantiasis, so also in the weaknesses of the 
faith every aberration from the sound word is named 
generally heresy, but every one ol the diseases that 
ai e included in this term is not ol the same character .* 
for neither do they hold an equal eminence in impiety. 
But, as a skilful physician heals a man with fever in 
one way, and in another a man who has ague maybe 
or dropsy, or is troubled by a swelling of the spleen, 
in the same way those also who healed and fed the 
churches with more than ordinary spirituality and 
sagacity judged it right to distinguish the nature of 
each heresy, and did not think the same cure fit to 
be applied to those who shared in the sickness of 
Novatus and ol Photinus, and to those who had 


P- 334- 


• 335- 


p. 336. 


298 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. 6. 


been stained with the corruption and mire of Paul 
of Samosata. The nineteenth canon of the three 
hundred and eighteen fathers requires those who come 
from Paul of Samosata to be re-baptized r1 but in the 
case of converts from Photinus and Novatus to the 
orthodox church the hundred and tenth canon, which 
was enacted by the synod that assembled at Laodicea 
in Phrygia, decided that they should be perfected by 
chrism : 2 although much the same folly gives birth to 
the miserable heresy of Paul of Samosata and of 
Photinus, and they do not differ from one another 
except to a slight extent. And yet we for our part 
follow the regulations of the fathers and do not make 
ingenious investigations, nor have recourse to that 
which in former times pleased Cyprian and those who 
assembled in Africa, whom we mentioned shortly 
before. For we must follow the common conclusions 
made at different times by the God-loving orthodox 
rulers of the churches, and not adduce the private 
conclusions of different men, or opinions which seem 
to contain self-created scrupulosity 3 or strict teaching, 
and lay down a contrary law, and presumptuously 
contend against the holy fathers. Indeed the holy 
Cyprian himself, as if laying down a general canon in 
his letter to Ouintus, enjoins that we ought to follow 
later principles adopted as a matter of expediency and 
for the sake of the union of the church, and not be 


1 Mansi ii. 676. 2 Ibid. 566. 

3 Sebyanayuth debit ha = iOeXoOprjo-Keia (Col. ii. 23). 


V. 6. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


299 


shackled by prejudices held at an earlier time : and I 
am convinced that he was moved by the Holy Spirit 
to say this beforehand : and that though he was then 
insisting that converts from all heresies should be p. 337. 
perfected by the baptism of the church. This is what 
he says : “ Moreover also Paul the Apostle, being 
himsell also concerned for peace and concord, entreats 
and teaches in his letter in such words as these : ‘ Let 
two or three prophets speak : and let the rest discern. 

But, if a revelation be made to another while sitting, 
let the first keep silence.’ By this he clearly taught 
and showed that many things are revealed to each 
man for the better : and therefore each man oueht not 
to be constantly and at all times contending for the 
opinions which once won his approval and prevailed : 
but, if anything better and more beneficial show itself, 
gladly accept it. For, when better things are brought 
before us, we are not conquered, but are instructed : 
especially in things that conduce to the unity of the 
church, and to the hope and assurance of our salva¬ 
tion.”1 1 herefore it is right to consider what was 
determined by those who assembled at Ephesus to 
depose the impious Nestorius and anathematize his 
doctrines. Now after the examination of the heresy 
and its refutation, and the deprivation of that wicked 
man, Charisius a presbyter from Philadelphia (this is 
a city of the province2 of the Lydians) came through 
into the midst, and laid before everyone a silly p. 33 8. 


1 Ep. 71- 3- 2 eVap^ta. 


300 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


V. 6. 


symbol composed by Theodore of Mopsuestia the 
teacher of the folly ol Nestorius, and showed that 
there were many from that country who had denied 
the accurate faith of the three hundred and eighteen 
fathers, and had fallen away to this alien and spurious 
symbol. And they were moreover brought in and 
anathematized the hateful heresy of Nestorius;1 and 
they did not put forward any such canon declaring 
that converts from his perdition to the bright light of 
orthodoxy must be perfected by baptism or by chrism ; 
nor has anyone been shown to have been anointed at 
that time : and this though the schism lasted a long 
time, and the bishops of the East supported Nestorius, 
and separated themselves from the Catholic synod, 
and afterwards joined themselves to the same and 
were reconciled at the time when Paul bishop of the 
p. 339. city of the Emesenes went to Alexander’s city and 
acted as mediator ol the union between the churches 
in Egypt and in the East. As it seemed necessary 
to the men of earlier days that converts from 
heresies should be perfected through baptism, but 
afterwards a sagacious discrimination regarding the 
matter introduced the principle that some must 
be re-baptized, others re-anointed, so concerning the 
Nestorian heresy the fathers after examining the 
character of the heresy decided that the impious 
doctrine should only be anathematized by those who 
repent. Paul of Samosata and Photinus sinned 


Mansi iv. 1344. 


V. 6. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


301 


against the very substance of God the Word, and 
assert the Lord born of Mary to be a mere man. 

But Nestorius says that He is the Word which ex¬ 
isted before the ages, but divides the mystery of the 
dispensation into two by saying that it was not in 
substance but by brotherly conjunction that God the 
Word was united to the flesh containing the intellectual 
soul. Therefore we embrace the conclusion adopted 
by the fathers, and the cure that was introduced by 
them with reference to converts from the Nestorian 
heresy we hold as a law that cannot be shaken, 
and we do not have recourse to the conclusions p. 340. 
that were adopted and introduced by the men of 
earlier days with reference to other heresies : but 
we decide that each conclusion has its own validity 
in the case of those with reference to whom it 
was introduced : for everything whatever that Gods 
priests decide, this is a law. As the men of earlier 
times gave the gift of the Holy Spirit to the 
heretics who were devoid of His grace by means 
of the true baptism of the church, and those who 
came later filled up what was lacking in those 
that repented by means of chrism, so in the case 
of converts from the evil belief of Nestorius also 
the fathers thought that an anathema of the heresy 
ought to be sufficient to fill up what is lacking in 
them ; and, whatever was determined by them to be 
sufficient, this we, as I said, observe as a law. For it 
is written ; “ the lips of a priest shall keep knowledge : 
and they shall ask law at his mouth, because he is an 


302 


SELECT LETTERS OE THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


V. 6. 


angel of the Lord the All-ruler.”1 And, since this 
course was approved by them, we believe that it was 
rightly approved, in accordance with the apostolic 
statute that savs, “ With the heart man believeth unto 
righteousness, and with the mouth man confesseth 
unto salvation,”" according to the Lord’s utterance 
that does not lie which says, “ By thy words thou 
p-34i. shalt be justified.”3 This same principle one may see 
in the case of ordinations also. For the statute is 
that converts should be re-ordained, or should be 
ordained, when they come from those same heresies 
from which when men come over to piety after having 
received a spurious baptism from them they are per¬ 
fected by the true baptism.4 And I will show you 
clearly that ordinations also that were performed by 
the Arians were accepted by those who then presided 
over orthodoxv. Now in the times of the Arians 

j 

there were two sections among- our brothers who 
confessed the orthodox faith in this great Christ-loving 

o o 

city of Antiochus, because of the wrongful expulsion 
of Eustace ; and each of the same sections had an 
orthodox bishop, one having Paulinus and the other 
Melitus : and, Paulinus having left the life here and 
uncanonically appointed Evagrius his successor (for 
he ordained him alone without having two or three 
p. 342. bishops with him as the ordinance of the church com¬ 
mands), after Melitus’ decease and his departure to 
God the other section lawfullv and according to the 

J O 


1 Mai. ii. 7. 


2 Ro. x. 10. 


:i Mt. xii. 37. 


4 Cf p. 181. 


V. 6. 


SELECT LETTERS OE THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


303 


canons nominated Flavian, by the psephisma of a 
large number of bishops, and Evagrius and Flavian 
disputed the throne;1 and, the ordination of Evagrius 
(who had also departed from the life here) having 
been repudiated as unsound, Theophilus who was 
bishop of the city of the Alexandrines writes to 
Flavian to accept the clergymen who had been 
ordained by Evagrius, speaking thus: “ Therefore in 
your days allow those also who assemble apart by 
themselves to be united to the clergy under your 
religiousness, and to the whole people. If we are in 
communion with the devout Anastasius, bishop of the 
church of the Romans, and he gives the communion 
of clergymen to those who assemble by themselves, 
and communicates with them all, you understand to 
what the conclusion points. Therefore, seeing that 
the reverend Anastasius our fellow - minister has 
communicated with them, I think it henceforth 
necessary that a concession on the ground of policy 
should be made to them, in order that the peace with 
our beloved fellow-ministers in the West mav not 
be disturbed on account of anything that is wanting. 
Therefore I pray you to assume a salutary courage for 
a good end, in no point yielding to those who maintain 
the principles of strictness. Being an old man, you 
are well aware that our holy fathers cured more 
difficult matters than these, and that, adopting intelli¬ 
gent counsels, they became ‘ to those not under the 


P- 343- 


1 Cf p. 223. 


304 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


V. 6. 


law as not under the law,’1 and checked things 
difficult to cure, and did not disturb the whole body 
ol the church. Wherefore Ambrose also of blessed 
memory | received those who had received ordination 
from Auxentius his predecessor in Milan : and they 
received many others in the East who had not been 
ordained by the orthodox, lest, if these remained out¬ 
side, the heresy of the Arians should strike root, and 
the flocks perish, and the greater portion of the body 
of the nations be lost. In this way they treated both 
those of Palestine and Phoenice and many others ; 
properly relaxing the strict rules of ordination for the 
sake of the salvation of the nations, so that after these 
things the universal concord might remain firm and 
p. 344 unshaken. Accordingly, since things that are serious 
and are incurable were by making a great concession as 
far as was possible healed without turning to evil, it is 
not difficult, but very easy, for these things to be now 
managed ; since we have chosen by comparison the 
faults of the orthodox rather than the virtues of the 
Arians.” Bearing these things in mind, show us that 
men who come from the heresy of Diphysitism, that 
is of the Nestorians, ought to be re-baptized, in order 
that we may be compelled to insist upon re-ordination 
also ; or, if you do not show this, respect the laws laid 
down by the fathers, and orderly administration. 
For neither has Timothy of holy memory, who fed 
the church of the Alexandrines in apostolic fashion, 


1 i Co. ix. 21. 


V. 6. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 305 


been shown to have been inconsistent with himself, 
as you vainly suppose.1 When the people under 
the influence of ardent enthusiasm were unwillino- 
even to look at those who had received ordination 
from Proterius, he, wishing to soften their sternness 
and to follow a course opposed to them, spoke to 
them in such words as these, “ Regard them just as 
if they had received ordination from me ” ; or, as 
you say, “ I have determined to give them ordina¬ 
tion ” (for we will allow it to be thus) : and, after 
seeing that by the application of this remedy the 
sternness of the zeal was softened, he did not in the 
matter of the reception of those who derived ordina¬ 
tion from Proterius transgress against the moderation of 
the canons, nor was he carried away by the violence 
of zeal ; but he restrained enthusiasm by the cords 
of politic action ; and he induced them to acquiesce in 
the established canons. And, when he accepted the 
repentance of the converts, he did not give them 
ordination at all, a thing contrary to the intention 
of the canons ; nor did he recur to the strictness 
of the men of early days and their stern method. 
As to the principle that these things are rather 
matters of politic administration, and not inconsistent, 
the divine Paul also signifies it to be so in that he 
circumcised Timothy by reason of the policy which he 
adopted towards certain persons, as the Book of the 
Acts clearly states, saying : “ And he took and circum- 


p- 345- 


. 346. 


1 Of' PP- I^I> 276. 


306 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


V. 6. 


cised him, because of the Jews who were there in the 
country. For all these knew that his father was a 
Gentile. ” 1 But to the Galatians, who had turned to 
the observances of Judaism, he writes as for the 
general profit, and as if laying down a law for the 
whole church, and says : “ Behold I Paul say unto you 
that, if ye are circumcised, Christ will profit you 
nothing.” 2 And that this is so the saintly John will 
bear witness, who with wisdom fed the holy church at 
Constantinople, in that in the fifth book of his Praises 
of the apostle Paul he speaks thus : “For he desires 
those things only which bring him advantages in God, 
even though it happened that these were contrary to 
the previous actions. For he was something versatile, 
and rich in expedients ; not that he acted hypocriti¬ 
cally (far be it !) ; but he became everything which 
the necessity of the preaching and the salvation of 
men required : and in this also he imitated his Lord. 
For God too would appear as a man also when it was 
necessary for Him so to appear ; and again in fire when 
the time required this ; and at one time in the form of 
an armed man and a soldier ; and at another in the 
p. 347. guise of an old man ; and at another in the breeze ; 
and at another as a wayfarer ; and at another He 
becomes human, and did not refuse even to die so. 
But, when I said that this was necessary, let no one 
think that there is reference to compulsion ; but to 
His mercifulness only. And He sits sometimes upon 


1 Ac. xvi. 3. 


2 Ga. v. 2. 


V. 6. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


307 


a throne ; sometimes again upon the cherubim. But 
all these things He did in accordance with the sub¬ 
servient dispensations. For this reason He said 
through the prophet also, ‘ I have multiplied visions ; 
and through prophets I have made myself like/ 

[Here follows the citation given at p. 278 ff. I give 
such variations only as are nearer to the original, 

* o 

which are as follows : 1. 5 ‘ Paul, who imitated his 
Lord, have been condemned. He becomes now a 
Jew, now as one not under the law ; now one who 
keeps ’ ; 1. 12 om. ‘ again’ ; 1. 19 ‘ For this reason he now 
supports the law, now subverts’ ; p. 279 1. 9 ‘ For this 
the man of professional skill does ’. ] For those that 
are diseased in soul require treatment and cure no less 
than those that are sick in body : and, if you simply 
offer them everything, the cause of their salvation 
will be ruined.'1 Holding this same opinion, the 
holy Theophilus also in the letter to Flavian, which we 
mentioned shortly before, speaks thus : “ Therefore 

carry out this policy boldly. If the Apostle ‘ became to 
them that were without law as without law, being not 
without law to God, but under the law ot Christ/ and 
‘ became everything to every man that he might by all 
means save some,’ ~ the reception of those who assemble 
apart according to the rank which they hold does not 
steal away your reputation,3 but rather indeed in- p. 348. 
creases it ; nor yet are you acting inconsistently when 
the urgency of the case compels the adoption of a 


3 VTToXrjlf/lS. 


1 P. G. xlix. 498, 499. 


2 1 Co. ix. 21, 22. 


308 


SELECT LETTERS OF TIIE HOLY SEVERUS. 


V. 6. 


policy of concession for the sake of profit. You know 
that the blessed Paul also, looking to what was of 
advantage, circumcised Timothy; but puts the Gala¬ 
tians, who were circumcised, to shame, in that he 
writes, ‘ If ye are circumcised, Christ will profit you 
nothing.’1 And, among wise men, he does not appear 
to be inconsistent, but to be acting in a politic manner 
towards living men, while healing troubles that occur 
with great profit.” 

But perhaps when you hear these things you will 
say, “ Who is there among orthodox bishops who 
received those who assembled at Chalcedon, or rather 
those who succeeded to their sees, upon repentance ? ” 
But I as against this will bring before you a scriptural 
law which shows how the God of repentance accepts 
and justifies a sudden conversion to virtue, such as has 
now taken place in the countries of the East, where 
all by the divine counsel under behest from above 
have cast forth and banned the heresy of the duality of 
the natures with definite anathemas, and have in pure 
fashion confessed the faith of the fathers, which is pure 
from all corrupt mixture and alien addition. When in 
old times the Jews had lapsed, and had fallen into the 
pits of idolatry, and had so much neglected the law of 
their fathers that even the places for the performance 
of the priestly service that was commanded by Moses 
were no longer maintained, then Hezekiah was 
established as king, and, his mind having been en- 


1 Ga. v. 2. 


V. 6. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


309 


lightened by God, he wished to sacrifice the passover 
according to the law, and according to the law he P- 349- 
commanded that Aaron’s sons only should offer the 
sacrifices, as is said in the Book of the Priests : “ And 
they shall kill the calf before the Lord, and the priests 
Aaron’s sons shall bring the blood near, and pour it 
out all round by the side of the altar that is before the 
doors of the tent of witness. And they shall flay the 
burnt-offering, and cut his limbs in pieces.” 1 But at 
that time, since the priests were too few,2 contrary to 
the intention of the law, Levites also were brought 
forward together with Aaron’s sons to perform the 
service : and the passover was celebrated without the 
purification of the whole people having been strictly 
carried out. And God accepted the pleasant savour, 
having had regard to the completeness of the repent¬ 
ance of their hearts, though it was thought to be de- 
fective in the matter of lack of faith. But it is well 
also to recite to you the actual words of the Holy 
Spirit, which are written as follows, in the second part 
of the Book of Chronicles : “ And the priests received 
the blood from the hand of the Levites, by reason of the 
numbers of the congregation, and they were not sancti¬ 
fied. And the Levites had the charge of sacrificing P. 350. 
the passover, for everyone who could not be sanctified 
to the Lord, by reason of the multitude of people from 
Ephraim and from Manasseh, and from Issachar and 


1 Le. i. 5, 6. 

2 12,168 “ But, since the priests were at that time too few.” 


310 


SELECT LETTERS OE THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


V. t 


from Zebulon, and they were not sanctified ; but the] 
even ate this passover contrary to the scripture. Anc 
Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, ‘ The good Lore 
God be propitious toward every heart that has turnec 
in sincerity to seek the Lord God of their fathers, anc 
not according to the purification of the holy things. 
And the Lord hearkened to the voice of Hezekiah 
and healed the people.”1 Observe clearly the reasor 
for which God accepted such repentance, as stated ir 
the divine scriptures ; because they had preparec 
their hearts to seek the Lord God of their fathers 
And even after the coming of Christ in the flesh one 
may see that this happened in the church also 
Socrates, who wrote the Church History, related c 
similar thing in the seventh book and the seconc 
chapter; and he writes thus: “At Synada, a city o: 
Phrygia Pacatiana, a certain Theodosius was bishop 
who vigorously persecuted the heretics of the religious 
party of the Macedonians, of whom it contained many 
expelling them not only from the city, but from the 
country-districts also. And this he did although it is 
not the practice of the church of the orthodox tc 
persecute ; and not out of zeal for the right faith, bul 
because he ministered to the passion of avarice, and 
was desirous of amassing gold from the heretics. For 
this reason he set everything in motion against those 
p. 351. who held the opinions of Macedonius, putting arms 
into the hands of the clergymen who were subject tc 


1 2 Pa. xxx. 16-20. 


V. 6. SELECT LETTERS OF THE IIOLY SEVERUS. 


311 


him, and using countless tricks against them ; and he 
did not even refrain from putting them in bonds in 
law-courts : and especially their bishop, whose name 
was Agapetus, he harassed in various ways. But, since 
the governors of the country seemed insufficient for 
his purpose in the infliction of punishment, he betook 
himself to Constantinople, and asked for orders from 
'the prefects.1 And, while Theodosius was for this 
same reason spending time in Constantinople, Agapetus, 
the leader as I said of the religious party of Mace- 
donius, came to a good resolution. For he consulted 
with the whole of his clergy, and summoned the 
people who were under subjection to him, and per¬ 
suaded them to accept the faith]2 of the co-essentiality. 
And, having arranged this, he ran immediately to the 
church as fast as he could with a great multitude or 
rather with the whole people. And alter conducting 
prayer he occupies the throne on which I heodosius 
was wont to sit. And, having united the people, and 
preaching from that time the faith of the co-essentiality, 
he took possession of the churches under Synada. 
And, these things having happened in this way, not 
Hong afterwards Theodosius arrives, bringing with him 
assistance from the prefect/' But, not knowing any¬ 
thing of what had happened, he made his way to the 
best of his ability towards the church. But, being 
driven from it by all alike, he again made his way to 

1 virap'xoi. 

2 The bracketed portion is supplied from another \ersion . see 

text, p. 343, note 7. 3 Z™pX0<;- 


p. 352. 


312 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


V. 6. 


Constantinople. And, when he was there in the 
presence of bishop Atticus, he bewailed his fortune 
as having been without reason driven from the 
bishopric. But Atticus, since he knew that the affair 
had turned out for the benefit of the church, consoled 
Theodosius in words, persuading him to embrace a 
retired life without anger, and taught him to prefer the 
common crood to his own, while he writes to Agapetus 
to keep the bishopric without imagining that any 
annoyance would result from Theodosius anger. 
Tell us therefore in this case, my excellent man, what 
chrism or what laying on of hands, or what ordination, 
confirmed these proceedings. Or is it matter of 
previous knowledge that the uprightness of their heart, 
to use the words of the divine scripture/ made these 
also genuine instead of spurious,3 and this though they 
had been converted from the stinking heresy of 
Macedonius which blasphemes against the Holy 
p. 353- Spirit, in the case of which the perfecting rite of chrism 
is in fact laid down as necessary for those who repent 
from it ? But perhaps under the influence of a mis¬ 
taken feeling you will further bring up against us that 
you do not accept the testimony of Socrates who is a 
Novatian in heresy. But know plainly that especially 
in historical narratives even the statements of those 
that are such are accepted. Bor instance the holy 
Basil in his letter to Amphilochius cited the testimony 

i Socr. vii. 3. 2 Ps. cxviii. 7. 

3 The word is corrupt : the other version shows this to be the 


meaning. 


V. 6. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


313 


both of Eusebius known by the name of Pamphilus 
and of Origen, who in doctrines are faulty, saying that 
they are trustworthy owing to their great experience. 
And Basil cited the testimony of those men to support 
doctrines : but we do so only for a statement of bare 
historical fact. But it is well that we quote to you the 
actual testimony of the holy doctor, which is as follows : 
“ But, if Eusebius the Palestinian also is trustworthy 
in any man’s eyes on account of much experience, we 
produce the same expressions from him too in the 
‘ Difficulties concerning the polygamy of the ancients.’ 
For he speaks thus, encouraging himself to deal with 
the subject : ‘ Inviting as a guide the holy God of the 
prophets through our Saviour Jesus with the Holy 
Spirit.”’1 Upon Origen also, a man who has not 
much that is sound in him in all his tenets concerning 
the Spirit, we now find that under the Spirit’s direction 
he bestows praise in many of his comments on the 
Psalms. Follow therefore the statutes of the divine 
scripture, and the dispensations of the fathers of which 
they made use from time to time, under the influence 
of more subtle consideration and being much concerned 
for the abolition of the divisions and for church unity. 
There is in fact no one who denies that heretics are 
base and split coin, and in need of the grace of the 
Spirit. But the educators2 of the church supplied this 
want in many ways ; in some cases by liesh baptism, 
in others by chrism, in others by those who repent 


P- 354- 


1 De Sp. S. 72. 


2 Maithyai raze = {awt ay my ol. 


314 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


V. 6- 


merely condemning the impious belief by anathema, 
and renouncing the stain of heresy, and attaching 
p- 355- themselves to orthodox opinions. If you have recourse 
to what was approved by the men of earlier days, and 
say that the Holy Spirit must be given through chrism 
to converts from heresies, inasmuch as the heretics 
cannot give what they have not, it is time for you to 
have recourse to the other rule too and say that it is 
also absolutely necessary for them to be re-baptized, 
according to the opinion held by Cyprian. But it is 
very plain that we must follow the more recent precepts 
of the fathers, and the methods of cure which they 
introduced for each disease, and not issue commands 
out of presumption and pride, and lay down a law 
going beyond what seemed to them to be good. For 
“ the Spirit bloweth where it listeth ”/ as it is written, 
and it determines the regulations of the high-priests, 
and accompanies their sacred utterances. I am con¬ 
vinced that it was for this reason that in the Acts of 
the Apostles also, when Cornelius the centurion and 
those with him had with all their heart believed in the 
preaching of Peter the chief of the apostles, the Holy 
Spirit went in advance of the water, so that Peter 
said, “Can any man forbid water to these that they 
should not be baptized, which have received the Holy 
Spirit even as we ? ” 2 

p.356. If you think Theodotus3 a man of strict practice 


1 John iii. 6. 2 Ac. x. 47. 

3 Cf. Zach. Rh. v. 4 ; Evag. iii. 6 ; and see p. 185. 


V. 6. 


315 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


because he recently introduced chrism in the case of 
the heresy of the Diphysites, know clearly that others 
also among those who were zealous against this heresy 
were afflicted with a madness that surpassed his in 
strictness. For instance a certain Cassian, who was a 
disciple of father Romanus who is among the saints, 
who after an approved fashion was distinguished in 
Palestine for ascetic life and excelled at that time in tens 
of thousands of gifts of the Spirit, caused many of the 
disciples to secede : and he betook himself to Skan- 
thin (P),1 and used audaciously and illegally to baptize 
converts from the Chalcedonian evil belief. About this 
same Theodotus, who went through tens of thousands 
of changes, and contradicted himself, and is led in 
different directions at different times like the teachers 
of the adverse party, I might have said much, which I 
pass over. For he further also adhered to the fatuities 
of John the Rhetor,2 who said that it was in His 
essence that the Word of God endured the saving 
cross and took upon Himself the passion on our behalf, 
and would not consent to call the one Lord and our p. 357- 
God and Saviour Jesus Christ of one essence with us 
in the flesh : a point which you also omitted in the 
preface 3 of the document that was published in which 
you make confession of faith, and thereby dealt us no 
small blow and gave cause of offence. Nevertheless, 
just as I said, it becomes us to pass his affairs by in 


1 14,601 “ Skthys ” (Scythopolis ?). 

2 Cf Zach. Rh. iii. 10. 3 irpootfua. 


316 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. 6. 


silence: for we do not draw a defence from the sins 
of others for propositions advanced by ourselves, nor 
do we take the weakness of others as a support to 
strengthen our own position, but we establish our own 
case by the good and invincible arguments that we 
have, adducing the ordinances of the church and the 
dispensations of the fathers. 

As to this other statement of yours, i.e . that diffi¬ 
culty has been caused to your mind by the fact that 
the God-loving bishops who assembled at Laodicea 
call those who cleave Emmanuel into two natures 
Paulianists,1 you must on no account be alarmed by 
this. It is in fact a custom of the fathers to refer 
heresies to the roots from which they sprang by way 
of reducing them to something shameful. Hence they 
p. 358. called the corruption of Arius idolatry, inasmuch as it 
exhorts us to worship a creature, and the witlessness 
of Sabellius they termed Judaism, inasmuch as it 
includes the three substances in one person after the 
Jewish fashion. But they did not on this account 
receive those who repented from these heresies as 
Gentiles or Jews, and men who have never been 
initiated. In consonance with this principle which I 
have just stated they also term those who are infected 
with the phantasmal tenet of Eutyches Manichees : 
not because they are in all respects enveloped in the 
nets of the Manichees, but because the fatuous idea of 
a phantasy is part of the vitiated conception of Mani, 


1 Cf. p. 284. 


V. 6. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


317 


and is derived from him. After this manner the holy 
Cyril also in writing against Theodore of Mopsuestia 
said, “‘Sodom has been justified more than you’; 
you have surpassed the babblings of the heathen which 
they uttered against Christ, ‘ reckoning the cross 
foolishness ’ ; you have shown that the charges against 
Jewish arrogance are nothing.” 1 I herefore neither is 
anything shameful said by the saintly bishops who 
assembled at Laodicea, who called those who cleave 
the one Christ into a duality of natures after the in- p. 359- 
effable and incomprehensible union Paulianists : nor 
ouerht we on this account to re-baptize those who repent 
from them like converts from Paul of Samosata. 

Thus much we have written to your affection as in 
a few words, lying as we are under a mass of many 
affairs, and not able, as we wished, to extend the 
refutation of your propositions,'2 so as to cover a wider 
field of examination : but, since you have a right dis¬ 
position, and are not subject to prejudice, even what 
has been written is enough. We have in fact dealt 
with each of them in no defective manner in accord¬ 
ance with our ability, quoting the testimonies of the 
God-clad doctors of the church. 77 te end. 


Mansi ix. 235. 


1 


“ 7rporacr€l9. 


318 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


V. 7. 


515-8. 7. Of the same to Dionysius bishop of Tarsus. ( From 

those during episcopacy , from the 10 th book the 6 1st 
letter. ) 

I hat they who preside over Christ’s rational flocks 
must look in front as much as they can, and must lead 
the sheep to a “place of grass,” and pasture them by 
“ the waters of stillness,1” and must watch lest anywhere 
P. 360. any hurtful root and muddy perturbed drink corrupt 
the healthy conscience of those that are fed is already 
known to your love ol God also. How is it therefore 
that those in Isauria and in the other provinces2 are 
very justly blaming you for having incautiously 
received Indacus, who presides over Corycus, when 
he has not agreed in confessing the same faith as we, 
nor acquiesced in the common resolutions of the whole 
holy Synod of the God-loving bishops in the East?3 
First, such a man ought not to have been received to 
communion without the judgment of the apostolic 
see : and, even if by reason of the pressure of the days 
of the saving Passion and of the Resurrection it had 
been right for him to be received, the rule as to the 
lawful mode of reception ought on no account to have 
been neglected. This is that all who hold to the 
same communion should think and say the same things. 
Hasten accordingly to bring the matter that you have 
neglected to correction : for you see that, if for a little 

1 Ps. xxii. 2. 2 cVapxwr. 

3 The Synod of Tyre in 514-5 (Assem. B. O. ii. 18). 


V. 8. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE IIOLY SEVERUS. 


319 


moment we close the eye of watchfulness, we kindle 
by this small spark a great flame of separation. But 
the course of healing is not difficult for you. In fact 
we hear that the whole honourable clergy of the holy 
church of God in Corycus have already with one accord p- 361. 
removed the offences by a certain written renunciation 
and anathema, and that they readily hold to the 
orthodox faith and confession. Or, if you like, only 
make him satisfy the proper requirements and come 
according to custom to greet us, and leave the course 
of cure to us and to God. For we are able to bring 
him near to us by healing words. “Is there no balm 
in Gilead?” as Jeremiah says, or is it troubled by 
absence of physicians ? 1 The end. 


8. Of the sa?ne to the orthodox clergymen and laymen 519-20. 
in Antioch. ( From those after banishment , from 
the 2nd book the 24 th letter.) 

In everything the consideration of your vigour, 
church in Antiochus’ city, causes me wonder, and the 
fact that you not only hold yourself readily and 
courageously against disturbing elements coming from 
without, but also manage your internal government 
wisely, and are guided in the right way by the gospel 
law. There has only just now come to the hearing 
of our meanness, far distant as we are in geographical 
situation, the epistle that was canonically addressed to 

Jer. viii. 22. 


1 


320 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


V. 8. 


you by the saintly bishops, who followed Christ who 
362, said to His disciples, ‘‘If they persecuted me they 
will also persecute you,”1 and chose instead of their 
sees the sojourn in a strange land, and are settled in 
the great Christ-loving city of the Alexandrines, about 
those who have erred and fallen away to heretical 
communion, and have repented and wish to come 
back to the truth by the path of legal penitence, and 
to take thought for their salvation ;2 and that, after you 
who are in the city among the holy clergy and the 
believing people, who confirm the fact that you are 
clergy and people by keeping the orthodox faith, and 
are taught to “prove all things” and to “hold fast 
that which is good,” as Paul says,3 had read the 
letter of the said holy bishops, you accepted the 
purport of the epistle, the contents of which are 
corroborated by the fatherly precepts of Timothy4 
of apostolic and combatant memory, who died, 
if one may so say, or to speak more correctly came 
to life, amid the toils of exile. Wherefore also I have 
praised and gladly accepted the unanimity and concord 
of you all in this matter too, and have cried in ad¬ 
miration over your city that which is really said by 
Micah the prophet, “The Lord’s voice shall be named 
over the city, and He shall save them that fear His 
name r> for one will not fall outside the limits of what 
is seemly if one call you the Lord’s voice. For what 

1 John xv. 2 0. 

2 Cf. p. 339. As to the bearing of this upon the date see p. 341, note 3. 

3 1 Th. v. 21. 4 Cf. pp. 326, 339. 5 Mi. vi. 6. 


V. 8. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


321 


is the Lord s voice but assuredly that which is made p- 363- 
known by the laws of the Spirit, and confirmed by 
works, and in everything sets forth what is lawful, 
which also saves us? For it is seemly that you who 
have shown courage in the contests on behalf of piety 
should also not be without the virtues that are akin 
to this. Courage is then shown to be courage and 
not ferocity, when it stands boldly against the man 
who opposes, but towards the man who is bent bends 
itself pitifully. This is to “ become everything to every 
man ” 1 and from all sides to gain the power of assigning 
the proper treatment to different times and persons, 
and measuring out to each man that which suits him. 

Hold therefore to the words canonically addressed 
to you, and walk in them without turning aside to the 
right or to the left as it is written,2 but opening the 
door of penitence to every man, according to the 
different methods of healing and the character of the 
sins committed. Whereas some, as I learn, of those 
who are said to have been re-ordained, a thing 
horrible even to hear, assert that this mockery was 
not performed over them, and in some cases no witness 
of such presumption is now forthcoming, I have come 
to the conclusion that there is no violation of right 
principle in the discreet and practical course proposed p. 36 4- 
by the religious presbyter Philip of letting them assert 
this by oaths in writing. But in cases where there is 
confession, and an anathema of the man who ordained 


1 i Co. ix. 22. 


2 Pr. iv. 27. 


322 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


V. 8. 


them has been put forward by them, and a hateful and 
unlawful prayer has followed, such men everyone must 
regard in no other way than as men who have been 
re-ordained, and, as has been resolved, await a common 
inquiry by the saintly bishops at the proper time. 

After these rules have been thus observed, we 
ought not as I have said to block the lawful path 
ot penitence. How shall we be able to block this, 
when the Lord cries from heaven and from above 
and says, “ Knock and it shall be opened unto 
you”?1 It lies with us therefore in brotherly love to 
admonish those that are remiss to knock vigorously 
and wait : but to open lies with Him, not with us. 
Let us not usurp the Lord’s authority. Let us leave 
Him His part: but let us perform ours with earnest¬ 
ness. Let us show ourselves mild to our fellow-slaves, 
not harsh exactors of what is owing, inasmuch as we 
also are in need of mildness at the day of judgment. 
If you do this, and practise the exercise of each virtue 
in due season and in accordance with right, you will 
be, as is said by Micah the prophet who was mentioned 
shortly before, “a marvellous remnant of Jacob among 
the kindreds amidst many peoples, as dew that falleth 
p- 365- from before the Lord,” 2 and cools those that have 
undergone the assault of the devil’s “ fiery darts ” : 3 and 
all who see and hear that you are guided by God in 
your actions “will say, ‘This great people is a wise 
and understanding people.’ And what great people 


1 Mt. vii. 7. 


2 Mi. v. 7. 


3 Eph. vi. 16. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


323 


V. 9. 


is there who hath God nigh unto them, as the Lord 
God in all things wherein we call upon Him?”1 
Now that this has been begun let it also be carried 
further and brought to a conclusion, through the 
prayers of all saints. The end. 


9. Of the same to Simeon the presbyter and arclnman- 521-31. 
drite of the monastery at Teleda. ( From those 
after banishment, from the 2nd book the 2 8th 
letter. ) 

Joyfully I have received the greeting of your love 
of God, which refreshed me greatly even before 
reading it because even in its mere superscription 
only it bore your honoured name. And after other 
things. Since therefore the sacred text says of kings 
who act in this spiritual mind that “by patience kings 
prosper, ” J it beseems your statesmanship,3 and is very 
consonant to it, with patience and in very great 
humility readily to receive those who wish to come to 
the orthodox faith and share with you in the same 
struggles, and to go forward to meet them and em- p. 366. 
brace and welcome them readily, so that the word of 
truth also may go on in the right way and make 
progress. It has in fact come to the hearing of our 
meanness that the dock of Simeon who has the lot of 
the saints have repudiated the impiety in writing, and 


2 Pr. xxv. 15. 


1 De. iv. 6, 7 


2 7ToAlT€ia. 


324 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. lO. 


have stripped themselves for the same stadium as you,1 
and that your sanctity used some strict words that are 
not suited to the present time : and I am astonished 
and cannot believe that this mind is yours. It was in 
fact you that they imitated because they are settled in 
your neighbourhood, and it was you who brought 
about this change for the better in them. Not the end. 


519-38. io. Of the same to the monastery of Isaac of blessed 

memory. ( From those after banishment , from the 
2nd book the 29 th letter.) 

I have been informed that Samuel of saintly and 
holy memory and presbyter and archimandrite of 
your holy cloister has departed from the life here, and 
gone to God. 

And after other things. Only I beg that he will 
not on the repentance of those who have fallen and 
wish to come to the orthodox faith put forward the 
untempered cup of strictness, but besides this will take 
the cup of merciful discretion, and show the mercy of 
pity towards those who share our weakness, and are 
p. 367. bought with the same blood of Christ, and have re¬ 
ceived the same “ Spirit of adoption,” 2 and will imitate 

1 Hence this letter seems to have been written during the banish¬ 
ment of the monks, which began according to Jo. Eph. in 521 (Land 
Anec. Syr ii. 512), according to the so-called Zacharias (viii. 5) in 
525, and ended according to both authors in 531. 

2 Ro. viii. 15. 


V. II. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


325 


the Father in heaven, who does not pour out His wrath 
according to our sins, but tempers it with mercy. 
Not the end. 


ii. Of the same to John and John the presbyters and 520-34. 
the rest. ( From those after banishment , from the 
2nd book the j\st letter .) 

I owe thanks to God that after the winter-season 
I have again through your letter heard your sweet and 
cheerful voice. For to me to hold communication with 
you seems more cheerful and joyful than any spring. 

To delight and adorn ourselves with flowers from the 
meadows that quickly bloom and wither is not like 
weaving together blossoms of spiritual words. The 
first blossom, one very well adapted for giving joy, 
was contained in your letter in the fact that the 
celebration of the saintly Theodore the presbyter 1 pro¬ 
vided a crowded festival and feast to those who 
assembled, so that the believers are confirmed in future 
hope even by what is seen now. For the departure 
hence of holy men and the remembrance of them on 
the occasion of this is a means of instruction and of 
meditation on the blessed life : the life which Christ 
promised when He revealed to us by actual experience 
the mystery of the Resurrection. 36S> 

As to events in the East we also have certain know- 

1 The first Saturday in Lent (Sachau Verz. d. syr. Hdschr. zu 
Berlin, p. 486). 


326 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. II. 


ledge of the same things that were also stated in your 
letter : and nothing beyond. Nevertheless the pangs 
caused by the impiety compel us to bring the foul birth 
out. It rests therefore with you, saintly men, and with 
all who love God to make supplication and to stir up 
your fervent prayers like a censer, and cast upon them 
“fine composite incense”1 which is earnest and laborious 
supplication, supplication that at the same time reminds 
the divine ears ot their wonders from eternity and is 
able to stop the corruption so that the Lord’s congrega¬ 
tion may not utterly perish, and the peoples say, 
“ Where is their God ? ” 2 

As to Silvanus who is of heretical ordination, but 
begs to be received, you ought not to be in difficulty 
seeing that the regulations of the holy Timothy3 have 
marked out the proper course for you, and have laid 
down for you the method to be followed in this case : 
so that everything that goes beyond and surpasses him 
falls outside the limits of what is proper. However it 
will rest with you who are at hand and know the man 
p. 369. to shorten or lengthen his time according to the 
character of his repentance. If possible therefore, 
the God-loving Isidore bishop of the city of the 
Chalcidians will release this man. But, if it is 
thought that this will stir up affliction to his bonds, as 
the Apostle says,4 it is easy for him to go with a letter 
from you to the God-loving Epimachus bishop of 
Rhinocorura, and receive forgiveness. Only beware 


1 Ex. xxx. 7. 


2 Ps. lxxxviii. 10. 3 Cf. pp. 320, 339. 


4 Ph. i. 16. 


V. II. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


327 


lest, when the man is forgiven, he use the freedom as 
an assistance in causing disturbance in various places, 
since such is the character that you ascribe to him in 
your letter. 

As to John of blessed memory the reader and our 
scribe, I should perhaps have been sorry that he did 
not come to see me and was prevented from under¬ 
taking the daring journey which would have been in 
the winter and is full of dangers, had it not been that he 
met with such an end of life, and a gathering-place for 
which one might well pray and a holy tabernacle (I 
will not say grave), it being one that foreshadowed for 
him rest in the eternal mansions. We pray also that 
through your holy prayers he may receive the lot of 
the saints in all its fulness. However both he and the 
devout Sergius the reader when they came here in¬ 
jured many persons more than they edified them. 

One might hear them relating certain dreams and 
prophecies, on account of which, as they said, they 
hesitated to communicate with the holy churches in 
Egypt. From whom he heard these things I do not 
wish to say, lest I even seem to certain persons to be 
a hard man. Who is there who will not (and very P. 370. 
rightly) pronounce against us as senseless, if we set our¬ 
selves against such prophecies and dreams, and while 
occupying ecclesiastical thrones forget these things, 
but, when we are outside^and are expelled and driven 
out, again attend to dreams and repeat dreamy 
prophecy? However, since it is not my pleasure to 
make accusations, but to declare and explain to those 


328 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. IT. 


P- 371- 


who love me what my position is, and proclaim it also 
to the adversaries, the communion that now prevails 
in the persecuted church of the East and in all the 
Egyptian church, and is pure in the proclamation of 
the faith, and in the rejection of the evil Chalcedonian 
impiety, and in purging itself of heretics and holding 
no association with them, this communion I so hold 
and to it I so draw near, as 1 drew near in it with 
the highest assurance1 and a fixed mind, when our 
holy father Peter the bishop from Iberia was offering, 
and was performing the rational sacrifice. We did 
not by our concession give anything like what we 
received. We waived the strict observance of names 
accordine to the fathers’ ordinances for the sake of the 
salvation of so many cities, and instead of it we 
obtained besides the East the whole of Egypt also 
supporting us and ranging itself on our side with a 
pure heart, and not bound in a yoke with unbelievers, 
to speak in the words of the Apostle." Having cast 
this seed, we gained for fruits banishment of bishops : 
confession on the part of cities : martyr-like contests, 
such that men reckon every kind of torture small. 
This is to be seen not only in men, but also in women 
and in every sex, and every age : insomuch that the 
inhabitants of the whole of Egypt are ready to strip 
themselves for like contests, if the time summon. 
What manner of man then were we when we had 
these things granted us, a man deprived of bishops 


1 7 rXrjpocfiopLa. 


2 2 Co. vi. 14. 


V. II. SELECT LETTERS OF THE 


HOLY SEVERUS. 


329 


and sitting in a corner, and resembling a pelican of 
the wilderness as the prophet sings,1 and possessing a 
fruitless accuracy, insomuch that some were eager to 
proceed to new and different divisions ? But God 
knowing clearly that our holy fathers and His true 
servants always endeavoured to walk in the royal 
road, cut away these things and made them cease as 
if they had never begun at all, and instead of them 
by invisible means bestowed upon us riches that we 
had never desired or been able to conceive in our 
mind. He exposed the feebleness of human thoughts 
and efforts, but by means of facts themselves said, 

“ For what the holy God hath purposed who shall 
annul? and His high hand who shall turn away ? ” 2 
How then shall we be found speaking in a contrary 
sense, we whose duty it is to exhort those who com- p. 372 
mumcate w ith us to show freedom of speech regarding 
these things? Indeed according to my information 
the wonderful Mitras showed himself more irrational 
even than irrational things by continually saying that 
he is not in communion with the holy churches here, 
and gave ground for laughter to those who have no 
soundness of their own, but apply themselves to find 
for themselves lines of defence and discoveries of 
methods of support from the weaker brethren among 
us, because he could not give a reason for this irration¬ 
ality (I will not say “doubt ”). Who is there who will 
not be disgusted with men who like Abimelech the 

o 


1 Ps. ci. 7. 


2 Is. xiv. 27. 


330 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. II. 


P- 373 


offspring of Gideon’s concubine, who illegally became 
king in Shechem by gathering round him depraved 
and profligate men, as the God-inspired scripture 
somewhere narrates,1 illegally receive bishops who 
have been canonically repudiated and received de¬ 
privation, and make prayers over them, and crucify 
Christ afresh, as it is said,2 and think that they are 
practising religion : men whom God has rendered 
more naked than a pebble as the text of Proverbs 
says, as their evil disposition deserves : men who have 
fallen so far into conflict with God as to presume to 
anathematize the Edict, under which, as those men say 
in so many words, the followers of Julian the presbyter,3 
whose soul is at rest, continued joined in communion 
with Peter, who became bishop of the city of the 
Alexandrines after Timothy, unto this day, and went 
into the church with him ; not knowing that they are 
laying under an anathema men whom, as they think, 
they ascribe to themselves as their fathers. For how 
is it that, the right confession being contained in the 
Edict, they sought to have that which is wanting 
added, i.e . a rejection of the Synod of Chalcedon, and 
when this was not added withdrew from communion ? 
If the Edict deserved an anathema, they ought never 
to have assented to this at the beginning : but have 
demanded that it also be repudiated, like one of the 
repudiated doctrines. So great is the lack of in¬ 
struction and the desire of amassing money : an object 

1 Judg. ix. i-6. 2 He. vi. 6. 

3 Cf. Zach. Rh. vi. i, 2, 4. 


V. II. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


331 


that “ blinds ” even “ the eyes of the wise/’ as the sacred 
text says/ not to speak of men who turn their attention 
to their belly only : which they fatten every day and 
carry about like some honoured sister, making their 
cheeks red by constant feastings, and presenting them 
swollen with fat to those that meet them, and not 
hiding- themselves at all. The good Anatolius also 
is one of these, who foretold death to some men who 
had in full assurance 2 communicated with the holy 
church in Alexandria, claiming to draw prophecies 
from that fat belly of his : but, when the prophecy 
failed to be fulfilled, he changed his tack and acted as 
a suppliant to those who had received his menaces. 
Having fallen in with them on the road, he knelt 
down and kept begging those who had been threatened 
to give him forgiveness, and only to return to com¬ 
munion with him. But they after laughing for a long 
time left him lying on the ground his prophecies and 
all. I pray your sanctities to be assured that a certain 
quiet man who had received such a threat from him, 
after communicating the knowledge to the holy church 
and accepting its help in considering what was best 
to do, by God’s permission was smitten with bright 
tumours on the side, which many are in the habit of 
naming carbuncles. He, coming up to me (for he 
was one of those who know our affairs), begged me to 
touch the afflicted part : and I, beginning to weep, 
applied to it the chrism of the holy cross, and its 


P- 374- 


1 De. xvi. 19. 


2 Tr\rjpo(f>opia. 


332 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. I I. 


venerated sign ; and I sent this man away expecting 
to die. And on the next day the Lord of hosts made 
the swelling caused by the tumours to disappear, and 
he did not keep his bed for one single hour : but, 
going about and following his usual pursuits, he was 
delivered from the affliction, “ walking and leaping and 
praising God ” ; 1 for the sacred scripture will again 
express this also. But, if I have become a fool by 
relating this, Anatolius the false prophet compelled 
p- 375- me, even as the false apostles did Paul ; 2 though I am 
not Paul, and am a sinner, yet not a breaker of the law 
or the canons, but an observer of the law of Christ.3 

Many other things also might have been related, 
which expose the foolishness of those men, but confirm 
the power of the truth : but the limits of a letter are 
not suited for such stories, seeing that they need the 
extended range of oral conversation. For the same 
Anatolius thought fit to say to certain men, “ Hosius 
an old man, in whom alone I had confidence, who 
also” (he says) “gave me the monastic garb, used to 
urge me, when I came to Palestine, to communicate 
with the bishop of the city of the Antiochenes, saying 
that he placed confidence in him. But, when ” (he 
says) “ I for my part went on to ask him whether I 
ought also to communicate with the bishop of the 
city of the Alexandrines, he answered that I ought 
not to do this. But I” (he says), “laughing at the 
contrariety and inconsistency of the words, declined 


3 i Co. ix. 21. 


1 Ac. iii. 8. 


2 2 Co. xii. 1 1 . 


V. II. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


333 


to follow the advice.” And many other falsehoods 
he tells. To women too he was to be seen prophesy¬ 
ing, and presumptuously laying threats upon them, 
while not getting anything else from such practices 
but laughter only. However he does not perceive 
thino-s that are of a nature to cause shame, because 
he takes his pleasure in loaves of bread and cooked 
dishes and various drinks that are offered him, and 
feeds his belly only. For this has in fact been his p. 376. 
object for a long time. To such an extent did the 
o-ood and excellent Mitras (for to him I return) use 

■C) ' 

words without sense, that I almost even forgot my 
caution, and even asked to meet and speak with him, 
and prevent him from being shaken : but I have not 
been able to find a way of doing so, since the necessity 
that surrounds me hinders the accomplishment of my 
wish. For he put forward one and another counter¬ 
argument of contemptible character, swimming and 
tossing (?) in his own fatuities and driven hither and 
thither at random. Among these one is this. They 
used in fact to say of us that we communicated with 
Simeon who stood on the pillar : and against those 
who laid down this counter-argument some of our 
supporters brought forward the truth and said, 

“ Accordingly on your principle Timothy also of 
holy memory will rightly incur blame in this matter, 
if one does not take into account considerations of 
expediency concerning the holy churches and the 
necessity of joining and binding them together. For 
indeed he also is shown to have sent clergymen to 


334 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. II. 


the East : who communicated with Peter who at that 
time held the prelacy of the city of the Antiochenes, 
bringing with them a synodical letter. And, after all 
the names had been read, the bearers of this com¬ 
municated in the oblation : one amonof whom was 
the man called Achillas.” Then they out of con- 
p- 37/- tentiousness falsely disputed and said that Achillas 
had orders to remove the names, and he did not do 
as he was ordered, and after his return to Alexandria 
was visited with punishment and separation. But 
the fiction was refuted by the fact that Antiochene 
clergymen had come at that time to the city of 
the Alexandrines to buy wheat, Syria being afflicted 
with lack of wheat, and exercised the ministry here 
and communicated in the sacred oblation. And again 
those audacious men said, “ why did I pronounce 
a laudatory discourse about him, when I ought to 
have held my peace, and to have given effect to the 
considerations of expediency by silence?” In answer 
to this I said to those who spoke, “ The prooimion or 
preface of the discourse shows the whole truth. 
Because the unholy Nestorians, whose leader was 
Theodoret, wished to snatch for themselves the 
splendour of the man’s character, and to attach this 
to the heresy, I in composing the discourse made the 
true statement that he actually drove away Theodoret 
and said that he did not even know the Synod : but 
that he believed in the Father and the Son and the 
Holy Spirit. I added this argument also, which is 
very true, that a man who did not know letters did not 


V. II. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


335 


sign : and those who have grown old in the flock p- 378. 
and yet survive showed this by many proofs. And 
in order to exclude the impiety I made this manifest 
in the discourse, and prevented the deception of the 
believing peoples who by this plea were being brought 
to what the heretics desired, and were spurning the 
substance1 of the sound faith.” So far said 1. But I 
find that the holy fathers also defend conspicuous men 
who are capable of attracting many by their reputation,2 
and this while knowing that those men did not keep 
the accuracy of the faith, whom they enthusiastically 
and with many praises defended. Such was the 
conduct of Athanasius when he wrote on behalf of 
Dionysius against the Arians,3 who wished to snatch 
for themselves the reputation2 of the man in support of 
their heresy. The purpose of Athanasius that made 
him compose the defence and the encomium was very 
plain : and this was, not to give the adversaries a 
chance of priding themselves upon him, and of putting 
forward the glory of Dionysius as a covering for their 
evil belief. 

Basil the great, as you know, in writing to Maxi¬ 
mus the philosopher utters a pronouncement about 
Dionysius, in which he says these words : “Wherefore 
also he is many-coloured in his writings : now taking 
away the co-essentiality, on account of him who uses p. 379. 
it in an evil way for the destruction of the substances, 
now accepting it and making a defence to his name- 


Ke<f)d\aiov. 


2 v7rd\Y]iffLS. 


3 P. G. xxv. 480. 


336 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. II. 


sake. In addition to these things he has regarding 
the Holy Spirit also left utterances that do not at all 
beseem a spiritual man, exiling Him from the ador¬ 
able Godhead, and reckoning Him with created and 
ministering nature in some lower place.’' 1 What then ? 
When we hear these things, shall we bring a just 
accusation against Athanasius on the ground that bv 
his defence he extolled and praised a man who thus 
fell Irom the right standard of accuracy ? or shall we 
accept him the more on account of this high spiritual 
service of his and the skilful policy by which he did 
not allow the Arians to pride themselves in such a 
man and thereby hurl the more simple down into the 
pit? In all things the methods and actions of the 
fathers were directed to the end that the orthodox 
faith might be spread abroad and that this might 
prevail in the churches, and to the end that they might 
hinder the plots of the heretics, and might bar every 
opening for deceit against them, and that they might 
remove the stones from the royal road that no one 
might go astray. 

I have given vent to these utterances, because I 
have grieved in my spirit as it is somewhere written 2 
over the wonderful Mitras, who, as was said by the 
wise Paul to the Corinthians, suffers fools though he 
is wise." For this reason I saici like Job, ‘‘Wherefore 
neither will I refrain my mouth ; I will speak in the 
anguish of my spirit ; I will open my mouth being 


1 Ep. 9. 2. 


2 Ps. cvi. 7 (?). 


3 2 Co. xi. 19. 


V. 12. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. . 337 


constrained by the bitterness ol my soul.” 1 I beg and P* 33o. 
entreat your holinesses, since still even now I have 
not had an opportunity of speaking with him (it I shall 
find an opportunity, I will not neglect it), yourselves 
to fill my place, and suggest to his smallness of soul 
not only these few things which I have said, but all 
that it is in the power of your understandings to say. 

But, if I too “have erred” (I will again quote the words 
of Job), “ and a deceiver dwells with me,” 2 “ teach me : 
and I will be dumb ” ; 3 4 and “ I will lay mine hand 
upon my mouth : and, having once spoken, I will not 
go on to speak a second time.” 4 The end. 


\2. Of the same to John and John the brethren, pres- 519-20. 
byters and archimandrites. ( From those after 
banishment , f7'om the 2nd book the *]2nd tetter.) 

Truly I say, and you ought certainly to believe me 
when I say, that it is not as the result of effort or of 
cogitation that I proceed to utter praises of you when¬ 
ever I write an epistle to you, but out of the abund¬ 
ance of my heart according to the Lord’s saying that 
does not lie my mouth is opened to speak.5 Where¬ 
fore, as soon as I reflect upon your actions, I find it 
hard to draw myself away from them and I continue 
to think of them, and I cannot bear to keep silence. 

I am in the same state as men who happen upon the P- 3Sl- 

1 Job vii. ii. - Id. xix. 4. 3 Id. vi. 24. 

4 Id. xxxix. 34, 35. 5 Lu. vi. 45. 


338 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. 12. 


sight of a lovely body, and then, before they have 
sated themselves with the beauty or sufficiently gazed 
at are separated from it by force by someone. 

In order to explain to you the astringent and in¬ 
structive character of the salt that is in you, I will say 
this much only. \ ou are honoured men and capable 
alter the manner of great stars that shine and give 
light, such as were our Peter and Isaiah 1 the renowned 
men, seeing that you do not remain hid, but with them 
gi\e lorth ra\ s that are like theirs, or else in a small 
degiee interior, and give light to “them that sit in 
darkness and in the shadow of death ~ as it is written i 
but now the scarceness and lack of such men makes 
you more honoured and causes you to be more highly 
reputed than they. Do not therefore behave haughtily 
to us in our hunger. It is your actions that we want, 
not you. Remain in the flesh. In fact not only when 
writing an epistle, but also when engaged in anv 

o o J 

ordinary conversation, if I ever do converse with any¬ 
one, I bring forward the mention of you like some 
pleasant odour, and I please both myself and those 
that hear. Do not therefore think that the words 
written are as you say the words of a scribe who has 
scattered things old and things new/ ° but the words 
ot love and ot need only : since neither am I among 
those who praise at random, nor are you among those 
who delight in praises, and the subject 4 of the letter 
itself is not concerned with praises. 


1 Cf. Land, Anec. Syr. iii. 346 ff. ; Zach. Rh. v. 9, 
- Lu. i. 79. 3 Mt. xiii. 52. 


vi. 3. 

4 V7 ToOeCTLS. 


V. 12. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


339 


I incurred a great debt of gratitude to our God and 
Saviour Christ when I learned that you the saintly 
presbyter had been restored to health after the deadly 
sickness, and that you are in tangible reality officiating 
in the rational sacrifices. 

I am much surprised that you say that you were in 
doubt about the letter that was written by the saintly 
bishops who are settled here.1 It was in fact free from 
all misunderstanding: especially in the matter of giving 
authority to the believers there and in particular to the 
solitary order to receive or not receive those who wish 
truly to repent : and, what is very important, that the 
forgiveness should await the assent of everyone, so 
that it should also require the unanimous opinion of the 
bishops who are absent. When all these things are 
put together, they both make those who made answer 
to the question blameless, and, when the precepts 
contained in the letter have been carried out, the 
reconciliation of all remains to be accomplished. I do 
not mention that the authors of the epistle followed 
the regulations of Timothy ” of holy memory in all 
points. I do not say these things as if I had myself 
given counsel upon the matter. No man has known 
our place of abode at all or where we are, except only p. 383. 
those whom we informed for the sake of the necessary 
requirements of our life. However the devout pres¬ 
byter Thomas, having been invited by the bishops, 
in order that he might not be thought to be a haughty 


1 Cf. p. 320. 


2 Cf. pp. 320, 326. 


340 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. 12. 


and unsociable man, heard and answered them, and in 
proportion to the power that is in him often sowed 
the seed of caution in those that were willinor. 

As to the sign that was seen in the sky, it was seen 
here also in the same way and for many days. Among 
wise men outside an appearance of this kind consisting 
in the rising of an unusual star is called a dokias or 
kt mt hiyci \ 1 and, as thought even by those who have 
attained knowledge in such things, it betokens a 
change in affairs. In accordance with the purport of 
the divine words, the aforesaid star presented the shape 
of a rod : thus leading us, so to speak, to remember 
Him who says, “ If they profane my statutes and keep 
not my commandments, I will visit their lawlessnesses 
with a rod, and their iniquities with stripes.” Pray 
therefore that the other statement may be also added 
and applied upon our repentance, “ But my grace will 
I not remove from them, nor will I do iniquity in my 
truth.” 2 Let your sanctities know that there was 
also an earthquake here on the fourteenth of October : 
a thing which in general rarely happens in the regions 
ol Egypt ; and no ordinary earthquake, but violent 
enough to shake buildings and cause them to tremble 
384. for a long space of time, passing over the small ones 
only, while everyone so to speak felt it. In certain 
cities of Egypt, especially in Athrib, a pestilence and 
plague has also been reported to have occurred. 

The books that were sent me by the presbyter 


1 Corruption of xpivLTrjs (?). 


2 Ps. lxxxviii. 32-34. 


V. 12. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


341 


Stephen of God-loving memory I have not been able 
to look through, by reason of the shifting of the places in 
which necessity causes me to be. Indeed, as soon as 
I read some part, and think that I have collected some 
part towards the dissertation against the heretics at 
which I am working, often some report reaches me 
and makes me remove elsewhere, and what has been 
collected is annihilated. I am in the same state as 
Israel, when it was once under the hand of Midian : 
and as soon as they had sown warriors used to come 
up against them and encamp against them, as is 
written, and destroy the produce of the earth.1 There¬ 
fore it is necessary for me like Gideon to collect a few 
grains of wheat now and a few later, and pound these 
because I do not dare to thresh, since I flee from before 
the face of Midian ; for this also I will add from the 
same scripture.2 

As to what you say has happened in the city of 
Cyrrhus, this news has come to us too ; indeed the 
minute3 has also been sent in which he who in a 
Jewish spirit holds the presidency of that city 4 made 
a confession to the effect that Diodorus and Theodore 
and the detestable gang of Nestorius differ in no way p. 385- 
from the Chalcedonian synod, which like a seed is 
justly and truly traced to those who sowed tares upon 

1 Judg. vi. 3, 4. 2 Ibid. 11. 3 7rpafi5. 

4 Sergius (Mansi ix. 349, 364, 365). If the reference is to 
Hypatius’ inquiry, it follows that this letter as well as v. 8, in which 
also the letter of the bishops in Egypt is mentioned, was written 
in 520. 


342 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. I 3. 


the good seed. And this the minister of falsehood 
rightly confessed. 

Whereas, when you wrote before about Ascalon, 
I did not write any reply, being interrupted by 
constant anxieties, do not think to yourselves that 
any action taken by you is displeasing to me : for I 
am glad that there also you have again begun to plant 
a good plantation of faith. Even though the Philis¬ 
tines when they see us say, “Behold! the Hebrews 
come forth out of their holes where they hid them¬ 
selves,” we like Jonathan will say, “Come up because 
the Lord hath delivered them into the hands of Israel.” 1 
If therefore it shall at any time happen that we remain 
silent upon receiving anything written by you, do not 
think that it is because it is displeasing to us that 
we have remained silent. All things done by you are 
pleasing, and very pleasing. The end. 


519-37. 13. Of the same to Proclus and Eusebnna the bishops .2 

(From those after banishment, from the $rd book 
the 35 th letter.} 

It was not without sorrow nor with a mind free from 
affliction that I read the letter of your love of God : 
p. 386. but, as is sung in the Psalms, “ My heart was dis¬ 
turbed within me.”3 And after other things. But 
what ? If, even after taking all these offences that are 
so manifest into account we allow him to be purified by 
association only as Cyrus said, he will reckon this a 

Ps. liv. 5. 


1 1 R. xiv. 11, 12. 


9 


3 Cf. p. 167. 


V. 13. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


343 


small thing, and a thing that does not injure the soul 
on the most important points, and in the matter of its 
very salvation. Let him therefore, if he likes, ask the 
Theologian Gregory, and he will answer clearly: for I 
do not know how it is that, when besides the holy 
scripture you pride yourselves in the teachings of your 
countrymen, and can obtain from them instruction in 
what is right, you have had recourse to my poverty. 

What therefore says the mouth of Christ, the mouth 
that at all times instructs the church, and catches souls 
out of the pit of destruction, upon the principle that we 
must not associate in any way whatever with the 
adversaries who make an accusation and a charge out 
of the fact that those who stand upright are not perish¬ 
ing with them? | Here follows the citation from Greg. 

Naz. given on p. 270 with the variation “we” for 
“they”.] How is it therefore that the excellent Cyrus 
asks for association only as he says to be permitted 
him like a man innocent on the other matters ? And 
how is it that after confirming the impiety in writing 
he wishes to become an orthodox man not enrolled in 
writing and in a corner ? Or do we not hear the great p. 387. 
Basil saying in his letters, “ But, if they say that they 
have repented, let them show their written form of 
repentance and an anathema of the faith of Constanti¬ 
nople, and separation from the heretics, and let them 
not deceive those that are simple ” ? Look therefore, 

I beg, to these columns of the church and your pro¬ 
genitors, and emulate their glory. For they are your 
progenitors, after the true and spiritual family : and 


344 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. 1 3. 


for you to put their glory to shame is in truth a deed 
of great shame, and worthy of the final and endless fire. 
Cappadocia is in danger of becoming a tale of laughter 
in our age. hor indeed, if, as I pray may not happen, 
you be caught in those sophistical traps, the enemies 
of the truth will count the latter as added to the former 
and will laugh and say, “Cyrus has lapsed: Soteric 
has fallen : Proclus and Eusebuna after many circuitous 
courses and useless movements have been cast down 
into the same ditch : and the whole trap has been spread 
abroad. Great champions1 of the faith Cappadocia 
displays to us.’' Therefore, even though there were 
nothing grievous to expect in the world to come, are 
th ese things tolerable to the ears of the pious? Will 
they not seem fraught with lamentations and tears to 
388. those that hope in Christ? Will they not mourn and 
instead of their garments rend their hearts, as the 
prophetic text says ? L> Be not, I beg and pray you, be 
not the cause of such lamentation. Short is our time : 
and “yet a very little while and He that cometh will 
come and will not tarry,” 3 and “will reward every man 
according to his works ” : 4 and, while we are now gaping 
after the shadowy things of this world, He will come 
upon us and seize us in the midst of our pleasures : 
whereas we ought to have gone while watching. For, 
as the end of the life here finds us, so will He that shall 
judge us see us on the great effulgent day of the last 
judgment. May it come about that we are ready when 


1 aytoVMTTCLL. 2 Joel ii. 12, 13. 3 He. x. 37. 4 Mt. xvi. 27. 


V. 14- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


345 


we appear before Him, and that we find Him gentle, and 
not pronouncing the sentence that condemns, but that 
which acquits, and giving us a share in the good things 
that are prepared for those that have hoped in Him ! 

I have committed these things to writing in fear 
and trembling, and with caution lest anywhere I should 
think or utter anything contrary to the divine laws, and 
be found with those that are accused by the prophet 
as perverting justice,1 or as possessing two weights 
contrary to the law,2 and to be weighing the words of 
the Spirit not worthily nor intelligently, but inclining 
the balances of truth like a huckster, and making my¬ 
self liable to the divine sentence. Pray therefore, 
saintly men, that I may receive forgiveness from L hrist p. 389. 
the great God and our Saviour, both for what has been 
written and for what has been omitted. The end. 


14. Of the same to John and Philoxenus and I homas 521-7. 
the bishops , confessors on the hill of Marde. 

(. From those after banishment , from the \th book 
the 2 1 st letter. ) 

On reading your sanctities’ letter 1 thought of 
Elijah the Tishbite prophet, who when persecuted by 
impiety betook himself to the hill of Horeb, and as a 
reward for his tribulation gained the privilege of 
seeing and conversing with God, so far as is possible 


1 Mi. iii. 9. 


2 De. xxv. 13 (?); Pr. xx. 17 (?). 


346 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. 14. 


for men. When He that knows all things before they 
are as it is written 1 approached him like a father, and 
assumed the appearance of ignorance in order to 
comfort him, like a father who comforts his beloved 
son by playing with him, and in order to lighten the 
weariness and distress that he had incurred from the 
long journey, and said to him, “What doest thou here, 
Elijah ?”, he stirred up the zeal that was blazing in him 
and answered very hotly (and that though speaking 
to Him who knows all things and whom nothing 
escapes), “ I have been zealous for the Lord the All- 
Ruler, because the sons of Israel have forsaken thee. 
Thine altars they have thrown down : and thy 
. 390. prophets they have slain with the sword. And I only 
am left: and they seek my life to take it away.”2 
And He put fresh heart in him by revealing Himself 
to him in mightier fashion and initiating him in more 
perfect knowledge. Therefore 1 am convinced and 
assured that your love of God also, who have imitated 
the same pattern of zeal, and walk in the footsteps of 
a like mode of life,3 who engage as combatants not 
only in the contest of confession after the manner of 
martyrs, but also in the patient labours of the ascetic 
life, will also be gratified with the conversation and 
sight of God, and that you will render the hill called 
in the tongue of the country Marde no meaner than 
the hill of Horeb, but even more glorious than that. 
For by drawing to you companies of holy monks, and 


1 .Sir. xxiii. 20. 


2 3 R- xix- J3> M- 


3 TTo\lT€LCL. 


V. 14- 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


347 


of men who are living the ccenobitic life1 2 while cleav¬ 
ing to orthodoxy, and by recalling and healing like 
shepherds and fathers at the same time those who 
have transgressed or otherwise become remiss and 
been swept away to follow the violence of the time you 
have also appropriated to your hill the glory of another 
higher and holier hill that is situated in Jerusalem, I 
mean on the corner-stone of Zion, the watch-house 
that is higher than all the earth, which you have 
surpassed by making more peculiar to yourselves in a 
higher sense the grace and title of the episcopate also, 
which were given you already by the Spirit, but are 
confirmed by works every day, as the Apostle says. 
Indeed I see many running and hastening to the 
summit of your hill also, even as to that hill, and 
saying the words of the prophecy that have been 
carried out in actual deeds, “ Come let us go up to the 
hill of the Lord and to the house ot the God ol Jacob, 
and He will show us His way and we will walk in it. 
And 1 have confidence in saying that they will not be 
disappointed of their hope, bor you teach those who 
stand to keep the orthodox faith, and to practise a 
devout and just life : while to those who ha\ e been 
led away to error you teach the way of repentance by 
crivino* them forgiveness canonical and legal. Where- 
fore also, showing humility in this point too, you ask 

1 The letter therefore seems to have been written after the 

expulsion of the monks ( cj . p. 324 n. 1). 1 he terminus cut quem is 

fixed by the date of v. 15 : see p. 352 and p. 35 ^ note. 

2 Is. ii. 3. 


348 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. 14. 


our meanness how those who have been baptized by 
this heresy that now prevails ought to be received. 
To this 1 made answer in writing at an earlier time 
also when I was living in the city of the Antiochenes,1 
because certain persons in unthinking fervour had 
supposed that these ought to be perfected by chrism, 
just as the custom is for Arians and Fighters against 
the Spirit to be received. 1 think that the religious 
presbyter and archimandrite John also, who sent me 
your revered letter, has with him the treatise that was 
written by me on this point. But I will now also in 
the same way tell your sanctities in a few words a 
thino* of which you too are not unaware : that at the 
holy oecumenical synod that assembled at Ephesus 
p- 392. anc| effected the deposition of Nestorius, who raised 
the heresy of this Diphysite man-worship to a higher 
position, when Charisius a presbyter who came from 
the province 2 of the Lydians, and registered his 
fathers’ house at Philadelphia, with many others who 
had been swept into the error of that heresy, presented 
petitions to it and exposed the creed previously con¬ 
cocted by the impious I heodore of Mopsuestia, it both 
received him and admitted him to clemency, not 
making any canonical pronouncement in their case about 
chrism or about anything else of this kind: 3 but it 
lawfully decided that they were to renounce the heresy 
itself in writing and condemn it by anathema, and so 
be received and become members of Christ s flock. 


1 v. 6. 2 hzapyia. 3 Mansi iv. 1344; cf. p. 299. 


V. 14- SELECT LETTERS OK THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


349 


And all from that time to the present clay have been 
received on these terms by the orthodox bishops who 
lived at different times ; who did not do anything 
further with regard to them, nor abrogate the 
covenant 1 confirmed by the fathers, or lay down any 
additional commandment beyond what were laid down, 
as Paul somewhere says in writing to the Galatians. “ 
Whence also a certain Theodotus, one of the bishops 
of Palestine,3 because he presumed to anoint certain 
persons, was repudiated and expelled, both by I imothy 
of holy memory, archbishop of the city ol the p* 393- 
Alexandrines, and by all who shared his opinions and 
were zealous with zeal that is “according to know¬ 
ledge ” 4 and is pleasing to God. I o remove in any 
matter whatsoever the landmarks that our fathers set 
up is wholly unlawful,5 even il a man is deceived by 
considerations that seem to be rather on the right side. 

Upon this point these things are sufficient for your 
perfection in Christ. But I beg you also to extend 
your diligent watchfulness which becomes shepherds 
to the God-loving archimandrites and devout solitaries, 
those that are near you and those that are geographi¬ 
cally far from you, and not allow anyone to disturb 
those that are more simple, in the matter of the 
question about the incorruptibility of the body of our 
Lord and God and Saviour Jesus Christ, which was 
stirred up among us by Julian who wantonly became 
impious, and has departed from the life here, but 


1 aOrjKrj. 

4 Ro. X. 2. 


aey. p. i85. 


2 Ga. i. 8, 9. 

5 Pr. xxii. 28. 


350 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. 1 5. 


shall answer for his blasphemy and evil belief to the 
Judge of all, and shall then regret that he was not 
converted to a right state of mind by the warnings 
that he received, and this though he was admonished 
in a gentle and brotherly manner, as your sanctities 
also who saw what was written will bear witness.1 It 
has come to my knowledge that certain men who do 
not perform any service as is written except things 
p- 394. that are vain 2 have torn away an occasional line or 
two from what I wrote, and have tried to lead astray 
those that are easily cheated. And no wonder, when 
even about the wise Paul’s epistles Peter the divine, 
who was instigated by the same Spirit of concord and 
apostleship, wrote, “ which the unlearned and unstable 
wrest to their destruction, as they do also the other 
scriptures.”" Therefore you will do an act worthy 
of you if you write a common letter to all who have 
been driven from the holy cloisters, condemning the 
unlawful statements, and warning them to adhere to 

o 

the teachings of the holy fathers which our meanness 
has cited. The end. 


522-7. 15. Of the same to Sergius , bishop of Cyrrhus , and 
Marion , bishop of Sura. ( From those after 
banishment, from the l \th book the 81 st letter.) 

I have read your sanctities’ letter in no negligent 
way but very carefully indeed : for it was such as to 


1 Zach. Rh. ix. 9-1 3. 


2 Ja. i. 26. 


3 2 Pe. iii. 16. 


V. 15- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


351 


attract even those whose mind wanders and who 
stare vacantly at the stage-play of the life here and 
cleave to it. And after other things. As to the sub¬ 
deacon who has fallen under a decree ol separation 
from the miserable wicked Cyriac, it he repent of the p. 395. 
sins that he has committed, the merciful sentence of 
God will absolve him through your holinesses. And, 
if anyone else also has committed or shall commit any 
such sin, as we pray may not be the case, he shall in 
an exactly similar way attain absolution according to 
your legal judgment, on account of Him who does “ not 
wish the death of the sinner so much as that he be 
converted and live. ’1 In fact even in the ordinance 
regarding Cyriac we have mixed with the severity the 
mild drug of penitence by inviting him also to recog¬ 
nise the sin that has been committed. hor we hear 
Paul saying in his epistle to the Romans as follows : 

“ Behold therefore the mildness and severity of God ; 
on them which fell severity, but upon thee the mildness 
of God if thou continue in mildness.”" Por by every¬ 
thing this is what we are taught, to look to Him who 
sought the sheep that was lost, and bore it on His 
shoulders and carried it up and counted it in the flock 
of those that are beincr saved. 

Greatly did I rejoice in the Lord, as the wise Paul 
somewhere said,3 that the religious presbyter and 
archimandrite John, trained as he is to do all things 
with understanding and guided by the divine Spirit, 


1 Eze, xxxiii. 1 1. 


2 Ro. xi. 22. 


3 Ph. iv. 10. 


352 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. 1 5. 


brought first to your sanctities the letter written by me 
to the saintly bishops Philoxenus, Thomas, and John, 
who were then living on the hill called that of Marcle.1 
p. 396. p"or my part I say that your ears and your tranquil 
and thoughtful mind, which is built up with all 
devoutness, are like a furnace of fire, in that they have 
the capacity of distinguishing what is alloyed from 
what is sound. Wherefore also 1 have gladly accepted 
your action in keeping with you the letter written by 
me to them, and first giving me the benefit of your 
advice. If therefore it is in order to cause fear and 
trembling in those who have turned their eyes towards 
penitence that your sanctities are making the delay in 
the matter of the reception of the children who were 
baptized by heretics, I concur with your purpose : only 
unless perhaps the long delay cause those who have 
turned their eyes towards penitence to become inert, 
and despair of being received by you, and return to 
their first vomit as it is written, and wallow again in 
the same mire.2 Nevertheless the form of penitence 
that was once approved by the holy oecumenical 
synod that assembled at Ephesus in the case of those 
who have been baptized by men who hold the hateful 
profane doctrines of Nestorius3 must be maintained in 
full force, and there must be no thought either of 
p- 397- second baptism or of chrism. Indeed those who did 
this when the impiety introduced as an innovation at 
Chalcedon first prevailed were repudiated both by the 


i 


v. 14. 


2 2 Pe. ii. 22. 


3 Cf. p. 299. 


V. 15. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


353 


holy Timothy who fed the great Christ-loving city of 
the Alexandrines in saintly fashion and by all the 
orthodox bishops, as having walked outside the royal 
and lawful road. But, if we are now going to discuss 
the question in what way those who are baptized by 
men who divide the one Christ into two natures alter 
the ineffable union ought to be received, those who 
observe our actions carefully will say to us, and very 
rightly, “ Why did you repudiate such an inquiry at 
the time when the impious wicked Flavian was driven 
from the see of the city of the Antiochenes, and 
all the bishops who deposed him were assembled 
together ? ’ They will also blame us for receiving 
those who were ordained by him in the orders which 
they then held on merely anathematizing and re¬ 
nouncing the heresy. No one is so devoid of the p* 398, 
sacred teachings of orthodoxy as not to call baptism 
given by any heresy imperfect and spurious : but 
those who know this look at the regulations of the 
holy fathers, and reflect that according to the character 
of the heresy treatment also must be applied, and the 
stain must be purged and expiated either by another 
baptism or by chrism, or by an anathema of the 
heresy, and the judgment of the orthodox priests and 
reception by them. The utterance of those who 
officiate with orthodox mind, whatever it may be, is 
accompanied also by the curative treatment and grace 
of the Spirit : since the word of the baptizer perfects 
baptism also and causes the Spirit to come down upon 
the water, on account of Him who graciously allowed 


354 


SELECT LETTERS OE THE IIOLY SEVERUS. V. 15. 


P- 399- 


p. 400. 


us who creep upon earth to share in this power. For 
He cleanses the washing of water by His word, as 
Paul says in his epistle to the Ephesians.1 So also the 
word of the anointer is mingled with the chrism, and 
applies curative treatment and brings the grace of 
the Spirit into play. After the same fashion also an 
anathema of the heresy, when enjoined upon those 
who utter the condemnation by order of orthodox high- 
priests, and proffered by the mouth of those, as well as 
entrance into the holy of holies performed in accordance 
with the judgment of those who receive them brings 
healing to the sore, and causes the pure and sincere 
grace of the Spirit to flash invisibly upon those who 
have been accepted. With these things the sanction 
from above is also identified in the giving of the de¬ 
cision, according to the commandment plainly laid 
down in the Gospels of Him who said to Peter, “ I 
will give thee the keys ol the kingdom of heaven, and 
whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in 
heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall 
be loosed in heaven,” 2 and repeated the same again to 
all the disciples and said, “ All things that ye shall 
bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and all things 
that ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.”3 
For there is nothing lawlully said by the orthodox 
high -priests, and performed in accordance with the 
divine commandments and canons, that is not full ol 
the Holy Spirit, as David also the spiritual singer said, 


1 Eph. v. 26. 


2 Mt. xvi. 19. 


3 Id. xviii. 18. 


V. 15. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


355 


“ I opened my mouth and breathed in spirit because I 
longed for thy commandments.” 1 I beg your sancti¬ 
ties also to consult carefully the words written by me 
in Antiochus’ city against those who dare to re-anoint 
contrary to the law,2 and to reflect what unhallowed 
objections we met on their part, and that we have not 
held different opinions at different times, but always 
have the same thoughts, endeavouring as we do all the 
days of our life to guide our short-sighted mind by the 
writings of our holy fathers and their lawful regulations. 
If you like, assign a certain time for converts from 
heresy to the orthodox faith, in order that they may 
expiate their sin by tears and weeping, being admitted, 
that is, to expiation through your holy prayers and 
entreaties, and the outstretching of your saintly hands. 
Wherefore like Jacob the divine patriarch show them 
the rod of orthodox teaching, which is white and 
shines with sound doctrines, and is cleared of every 
green and dead hue of heresy :3 in order that these 
rational sheep, fired by your teachings, may cast from 
them. all the murkiness and darkness of heresy, and in 
its stead put on the white and full light of the orthodox 
faith : and may clothe themselves in the many colours 
of virtues, and may cease to be counted among the 
heretics’ unknown 4 sheep, and may mix with those 
that are known, making up the one Hock of the one 
Shepherd and God and our Saviour Christ. 


p. 401. 


1 Ps. cxviii. 13 1. 

3 Ge. xxx. 37 ff. 


2 v. 6. 

4 Marg. “ late ”. 


356 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. 1 5. 


p. 402. 


I for my part have written these things to you the 
ministers of Christ, and careful stewards of God’s 
mysteries. But it will rest with your discriminations 
at the present time to take what steps you like in the 
existing circumstances. Only please communicate 
what we have written to our brothers and fellow- 
ministers who brought before us the question concern¬ 
ing this present matter, in order that it may not be 
thought that we did not deign to answer your sanctities: 
and, after you have examined all the circumstances 
conjointly, take the right course. 

As to the mad dogs who have followed the witless 
Romanus and the stony Julian we have not a word 
to say, seeing that, while we walk according to the 
law in all respects, both in doctrines and in canonical 
actions, they are absurdly spreading these contrary 
opinions concerning us. For neither will we for our 
part by reason of rivalry with those filthy men 
abandon the middle of the royal road and walk upon 
the rocks on the other side. We must listen to Him 
who cries with a loud voice through Isaiah the 
prophet to those who keep His laws, “ Hearken unto 
me, ye that know judgment, my people in whose heart 
is my law ; fear not the reproach of men, and be not 
overcome by their derision ; lor like a garment shall it 
be consumed by lapse ol time, and like wool shall it be 
eaten by a moth ; but my righteousness shall be for 
ever, and my salvation to generations.” 1 


1 Is. li. 7, 8. 


V. 15. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 357 


This point also I have thought necessary to bring to 
the knowledge of your perfections in Christ our God : 
that the religious presbyter and archimandrite of the 
holy cloister of the blessed Bassus has sent two of his 
devout monks to the great Christ-loving city of Alex¬ 
ander, bearing a letter which states that they are 
in straits with regard to the sacred ministry, and in 
want of presbyters and deacons.1 Wherefore also he 
beo-p-ed me to write to vour holinesses, or else to some 
other of the saintly bishops who share the same per¬ 
secution with us, in order that you may satisfy this 
their need by your saintly and lawful hand. And, 
since it was then the winter season, the letter remained, 
as 1 have been informed, in the same great city of the 
Alexandrines, because it was no longer possible for 
voyagers to cross the sea. Therefore I beg your 
sanctities not to be remiss in supplying such a need. 
In all o-oocl things it beseems you to show courage as 
well as to give comfort, and to be first in every action 
that is on the right side. For I intend, if Ciod pleases, 
to write about this through you also, in order that 
either you or others with your sanction may carry out 
the duty which thus presents itsell and is urgent : that 
is upon the archimandrites presenting with their testi¬ 
mony those who ought to be duly advanced to the 
ministry of the sacraments, lest any take necessity as 
an excuse for being appointed deacons and pi iests with¬ 
out discrimination and casually, without having any 


403. 


p. 404- 


1 Cf i. 59- 


358 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. V. 1 5- 


virtue to qualify them for this, except that they desire 
the priesthood and diaconate. I herefore, now that 
you know these things, speaking with God’s permission, 

I beg you, when the winter has passed, as soon as 
sailing’ begins, to write us a careful answer, saying 

o o 

what your opinion is on all the matters mentioned in 
the epistle, and to put our meanness in a safer position 
through your understanding in the Lord. 

For the safety of the learned and Christ-loving 
scholastic Maximin we offer prayers of thanksgiving 
as sacrifices at all times, as we also stated in the 
previous letter : and we moreover give him loving 
greeting through your sanctities. 

Against the last fatuous work of the wickedly im- 
pious J Lilian, which promulgates the same arguments 
upon the same subjects, I have not up to to-day 
beoun to write,1 although it is refuted beforehand by 
what has been already written by me before, so that 
everyone who meets with it will know its feebleness 
and the futility of the erroneous phantasy which he 
confessed. During the whole time of the summer, and 
that though I have been hiding in corners, I have 
never ceased being worried by constant letters from 
men who in various ways ask different questions at 
different times, and beg to have now scriptural expres- 


1 The last work of Julian must be the Appendices ; and, as the 
answer of Severus to this is contained in the translation of Paul of 
Callinicus published in Apr. 528 (Assem. B. O. ii. 46), this letter 
cannot be placed later than 527. 


V I. I. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


359 


sions, now doctrinal theories 1 explained to them, p- 4°5- 
Also the loneliness of solitude, and the fact that I 
have not men at hand to serve as scribes when I want 
it in addition to the other things hinder me from 
writings But I think that 1 shall be strengthened 
through your saintly prayers, and that I shall be 
sufficient for everything, if Christ our God grant me 
life and grace from above. The end. 

o 


VI. Sixth section." That one must not take account 
of anathemas or separations pronounced by 
heretics. 


i. Of the same to Eleusinius the bishop. ( From those 518. 
during episcopacy , from the 1st book the 121st 
letter. ) 

Many men after gazing on the likenesses of those 
whom they love are refreshed and comforted, and 
think that by this they satisfy their affection. But I, 
not having fashioned a likeness of your sanctity for 
myself, but having joined it to myself, am the more 
attracted to the picture, and every hour, if I may so 
say, am smitten in my soul and yearn in thirst for 
your delightful and spiritual conversation, and wish to 


1 Oewpij/xaTa. 


- rtVAos. 


24 


360 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VI. I. 


p. 406. 


be immediately gratified by speaking with you, and to 
have again the former joy. But this I am well assured 
the Giver of all good things will give me and at no 
distant time. 

However I rejoiced excessively at the contents of 
your holiness’ epistle, and that the affair of the trial 
concerning the presbyters in the country did not come 
upon you as a snare. For it is manifest that, seeing 
they are still of this disposition, if you meet with them, 
you will envelop and catch these also in your spiritual 

nets. 

You have also described very well and like men who 
are wise in all things the character of the many-footed 
Isidore, the unphilosophic and deceitful solitary, who 
for the destruction of the holy churches, as he thought, 
emulated the character of the cunning fox, and who 
composes his outward appearance only to an expression 
pleasing to everyone, but within carries a smoking 
firebrand according to the prophetic saying i1 by which 
we believe that he will be utterly consumed, and will 
become fuel for it like faggot-material, and will not be 
changed into another man but reduced to ashes. 

As to the man who has just been instituted and 
holds the prelacy of the royal city, we have learned 
that he is John called by the name of Florentinus,2 
who held the post of syncellus to him who is dead ; 
who is thought to be inclined to the right opinions, 

1 Is. vii. 4. 

2 Lit. “ John of Florentinus,” i.e. ’Iwdvv^s 6 ‘FAwpeimvov, not 
necessarily “son of Florentinus.” 


VI. I. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 361 


and holds out some pleasing hopes to the orthodox, 
but is more desirous of adopting a deceitful middle 
course, and of walking himself also according to that 
model which Timothy his predecessor adopted in his 
synodical letter. There are therefore two ways ; for 
we must say briefly what ought to be done as it occurs 
to my feeble mind. Either you must accept the 
synodical letter, though it does not contain the same 
sense as the document of the ten bishops or anathema¬ 
tize the transactions 1 of Chalcedon and the Tome of 
Leo and those who called and call our one Lord and 
God Jesus Christ two natures after the union ; or you 
must write what is repugnant to you and say that if 
he show himself such and such you will accept com¬ 
munion with him. But I am wondering- whether a 
man who accepts a synodical letter is not obliged to 
communicate with those who bring this to him. But 
the advice which I have given you is that which I 
also am endeavouring to carry out, God supporting 
my feebleness. 

Know that the God-loving bishop Soteric also is 
going up to the royal among cities with a similar 
purpose to that which you too declare in your letter. 
For the saintly bishop Entrechius has done him much 
good since the time that he has been more thoroughly 
on our side. Now however, now that he also has 
learned that Timothy is dead and his successor has 
been appointed, he wishes to put oft the journey, and 


7T€7rpay/x€Va. 


p. 407 


r. 40S 


362 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VI. 1* 


see by events themselves what position the man who 
now presides over the royal city is inclined to take up, 
and so prepare himself for the questions that will 
arise. But he too intends, if he stay where he is, 
not to accept the synodical letter, unless it contain 
something that tends to heal the division of the holy 
churches. But keep this to yourself and tell no man 
whatever. 

But know this too : that the anathema which has 
been reported to have been pronounced against us by 
him who has now been instituted is quite untrue. 
Certain men, in number very few, tried to make use 
of such rumours, and they were exposed and it became 
known by whom they were employed to do this : and 
the bishop who has now been instituted never con¬ 
sented to turn his attention to the rumours put about 
by those men : but on the next day we hear that some 
of them were actually arrested. However on New 
Sunday1 so great an assembly of orthodox was pur¬ 
posely collected that those who were collected by a 
gleaning process by the heretics did not dare even to 
appear, but only to slink away and hide, and they were 
p 409- in great fear, and by flight gained freedom from all 
harm. 

The magnificent and believing silentiary Conon, 
when in conversation with him who now ranks before 
me, found that with regard to unity and with regard to 
our meanness he said such things as those who are 


1 Apr. 22, 518. 


VI. 2. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


363 


exceedingly orthodox would say. But I am wonder¬ 
ing, as I also said before, whether he will withdraw 
from the middle position which inclines to both sides. 

My reason for writing about the anathema that has 
been reported was that I wish merely to inform you ol 
the sequence of events ; otherwise I take no account 
whatever of such things. Anathemas by men who 
are not united in communion with those who hold 
right opinions, but walk contrary to us, are similar to 
what one would consider those to be that were pro¬ 
nounced by the Arians against the holy Athanasius 
and decreed his complete deposition without touching 
his faith at all. He who on account of his sound faith 
was able to hear from Christ the words, “ 1 hou art 
Cephas and upon this rock I will build my church, 
has consequently also the power of binding and loosing, 
inasmuch as the heavenly mandate also sanctions such 
things. But, if he is carried beyond this rock, it is 
manifest that such a man does not escape detection as 
beating the air, as the Apostle says.2 1 he end. 


p. 410 

2. Of the same to Archelaus the reader of Tyre. 513-8 
{From those during episcopacy , from the 1 st book 
the 14.1st letter.) 

Our Christ-loving brothers the lord Menas and 
Isidore informed us that some of the readers, moved 


1 Mt. xvi. 18. 


2 1 Co. ix. 26. 


364 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VII I. 


by divine zeal, recoiled from communion with that 
wicked rnan,1 and he laid upon them, as he thought, 
a ban of excommunication ; and that it is necessary for 
this to be removed by us. For my part I was surprised 
if they considered a ban laid upon them by a man 
repudiated for his faith to be a ban at all. Indeed the 
holy Cyril also in writing to Nestorius says this ; 
“Those who spoke against you on account of the 
faith and have been separated by you are in com¬ 
munion with us. For it is not right that such men 
should be injured by your sentences.” - If therefore 
it is on account of the orthodox faith only, and not for 
any other sin, that these too have received such a ban 
and have seceded from him, they are released. How 
could men who, as we said before, were never even 
placed under a ban at the beginning be under a ban ? 
The end. 


p.411. VII. Seventh section." About monks and nuns. 


513-8. 1 . Of the same to Valieriana 4 the deaconess and archi- 

mandntess. {From those during episcopacy , from 
the 3rd book the 10th, 15 th letter.) 

I rejoiced greatly on learning that your religiousness 
had by God’s decree received the headship of those 


1 Epiphanius; cf. p. 97. 2 3 Ep. 17 (P. G. lxxvii. 108). 

3 rtVAos. 4 Sic. 


VII. I. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


365 


sacred virgins. And after other things. Wherefore 
gird up the loins of your understanding, and with watch- 
ino- and strenuousness guide the rational souls over 
which you have been appointed to be head to every 
good action. Require from them not only asceticism 
of body, but also purity of mind. Make the virgins 
holy convent inaccessible to every male, and let none 
whatever set foot within their sacred precincts : neither 
if he be a boy in his time of life, nor if he has reached 
advanced old age, except the priest who performs 
divine service for you. Neither let the virgins look 
freely at one another, but with eyes turned downwards 
let them say what is needed. 1 he lust ot the flesh 
obtains occasions from the lust of the eyes, as the 
divine John the Evangelist says in his epistle.1 haul 
the wise also writes to the Ephesians, “ Let no loul 
speech proceed out of your mouth : but that which is 
good for needful edification, in order that it may give 
grace to them that hear.’ 2 To this also your religious- 
ness must carefully see : i.e. that all the virgins do not 
take their food separately, lest one be hungry and 
another drunken : 3 but be at one and the same table, 
as it is written in the Acts of the Apostles concerning 
those who in the beginning believed on the name of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, that they were all together, 
and they broke bread in a house and “took food, with 
gladness and singleness of their heart praising God ; 
and that “ the heart and soul of the whole number ol 


1 i J. ii. 16. 


2 Eph. iv. 29. 


3 1 Co. xi. 21. 


366 SELECT LETTERS OE THE HOLY SEVERUS. VII. I. 

those who had believed was one, and none said of any 
of the things that he possessed that it was his own, 
but everything that they had was common.”1 But 
neither let any of them keep a bondwoman within to 
minister to her: but let those that are young minister 
to those that have crown old. It is not lawful for a 
virgin or a solitary, who have promised to imitate 
Christ, to keep a bondman or bondwoman. “ The 
Son of man,” He says, “ came not to be ministered 
unto but to minister, and to give His life a ransom 
for many.” 2 If therefore the bondwomen are willing 
to be bound with the yoke of virginity, after due 
p- 413* examination receive these, and let them live with the 
rest as freewomen ; and let them have no liberty of 
intercourse with their former mistresses, nor for the 
future perform service for them. “He that was called 
as a bondman in the Lord is the Lord’s freedman,”3 
as the divine Apostle says. But, if they desire to 
minister to their mistresses in the monastery while yet 
bondwomen and living a secular life, use all your 
power to expel these women. If “ evil communications 
corrupt gentle dispositions,” 4 much more does the 
servile character cause corruption in the characters of 
the freeborn when it lives with them. But do not 
exert yourself to apply correction to all these things 
immediately, lest you grow weary of labours, and load 
yourself with an excessive burden : but cut away the 


1 Ac. ii. 44, 47, iv. 32. 
3 i Co. vii. 22. 


2 Mt. xx. 28. 
4 Id . xv. 33. 


VII. I. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


367 


evil practices little by little, and provide the proper 
remedy for every disorder, like the most skilled 
physicians : and, when you have healed one disorder 
according to the method proper for it, then bestir 
yourself to cure another also ; and thus you will make 
the whole body sound by gradual corrections, and will 
win the reward of wise stewards.1 hnforce Gods 
laws : but slanders against you or contumelies despise ; 
and thus you will be a good example of humility of 
mind to those under your headship. 1 hose that are 
ill comfort : before those that are well hold out readi- p- 4*4- 
ness for ascetic exercises. Those that are harassed by 
cares help and sympathize with them, inasmuch as you 
also are clad in bodily infirmity, and strengthen them 
with hopes for the future : teaching them that “ the 
fashion of this world passeth away.”~ Warn them 
not to despise the work of their hands. In fact even 
the wise Paul used to work : and he would say, 

“ These hands ministered to my necessities and to 
them that were with me. And 1 have showed you all 
things, how that ye ought so to labour and work and 
help the weak.”'5 Warn them to have ever in their 
mouth meditation upon the divine scriptures, and to 
sing night and day the songs that the Holy Spirit 
delivered to us through David’s mouth, not men s 
hymns, which are made to give pleasure, and which 
weaken the soul and relax the vigour of asceticism. 

“ Meditate upon these things : think upon these things : 


1 Lu. xii. 42-44. 


2 1 Co. vii. 31. 


3 Ac. xx. 34, 35. 


368 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS, VII. 2. 


in order that thy progress may be manifest to every¬ 
one ” i1 and you may be as a ship that is engaged in 
commerce and gathers the spiritual profit from every 
quarter, in Christ Jesus our Lord. The end. 


p. 415- 

489-512. 2. Of the same to Jannia the deaconess and archiman¬ 
drite ss. ( From those before episcopacy , from the 
\th book the 11 8th, \2\st letter.) 

The religious deacon, father Theodore, has asked 
me about the commands which he received from your 
devoutness. But I, being poor in knowledge and 
having no right even to open my mouth, seeing that I 
am doin^ no o*ood service that odves me freedom to 
speak, have been under the necessity of writing these 
things, since I yielded to his entreaties accompanied 
by adjurations, and I also shrink from distressing you 
by silence. Therefore I wish your religiousness to 
know that she who is entrusted with the governance 
and headship of rational souls must possess unlimited 
fear, and a heart of mercy : fear, lest she neglect any 
of God s judgments or commandments, and do not 
teach them to the sisters or enforce them upon them : 
goodness of heart, lest in enforcing strict discipline she 
harshly and without sympathy make the Lord’s gentle 
yoke heavy, and render His light burden grievous 
to be borne, though He Himself says in the Gospels, 
“For my yoke is gentle and my burden is light ”. 2 


1 i Ti. iv. 15. 


2 Mt. xi. 30. 


VII. 2. SFLECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


369 


You did well therefore in showing condescension 
towards her who has been weak and has been tempted 
by the evil one, and in restoring her to repentance by 
displaying the mercy of pity towards her. I )o not 
cease bearing with her as long as she displays peni¬ 
tence by works of asceticism that is worthy the name 
and able to wash away the pollution of sin. However, 
if her faults are such as to injure and stain the others 
also and inflict her leprosy upon them, like the stains 
of men of corrupt mind mentioned in the Apostle,1 cut 
her off and cast her from you : “ for it is good for 
thee that one of thy members should perish, and not 
that thy whole body should fall into hell. 2 Only so 
long must you bear with her as the detriment is con¬ 
fined to her, and does not pass to the others also like 
some grievous flood. Expel from the company of the 
sisters all license and idle speech, unrestrained and 
unseemly laughter, and adornment of the body or of 
clothes, from which spring fornication and foul and 
filthy thoughts. For one may wear the lowly and 
dark tunic itself or cloak in no modest or chaste 
fashion, but wantonly and immodestly, and walk un¬ 
becomingly, and turn one’s eyes about in a disorderly 
way, and use dissolute language, and place one’s limbs 
in a languishing posture, and so satisfy the passion of 
elegance, and excite the lascivious desires. Command 
them therefore to keep their heart “ with all careful¬ 
ness,”3 and with David to cry, “ My flesh trembled for 


. 416. 


p. 417. 


1 1 Ti. vi. 5. 


2 Mt. v. 29. 


3 Pr. iv. 23. 


370 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VII. 2. 


fear of thee : for I was afraid of thy judgments.” 1 
II the fear of God reach our mind, and we persuade 
ourselves that to-morrow we shall be dust and ashes, 
and that the fire of hell that is not quenched will 
receive us, we shall slay all carnal pleasure. For he 
that trembles for fear of God is dead to deeds of sin : 
but he is alive to works of righteousness : and he takes 
no account of the labour of watching : but he rejoices 
and delights in the consolation of song ; and at work¬ 
ing with his hands he is ready and cheerful, seeing 
that, having fled from the greed and covetousness of 
the world, he gains by his own toil his daily bread to 
eat, and often also to give of it to a poor man, and to 
feed Christ when hungry. To all kinds of obedience 
also such a one is prompt, and carries out what is 
commanded without cause for blame and immediately, 
saying according to the Lord’s commandment, “ That 
which is my duty to do I have done,”2 and fears to 
open his mouth and speak idle and inexpedient words, 
and lose his toil. 

Let us pray therefore that the fear of God may be 
bestowed upon us, which is itself the beginning of good 
works and their preservation and completion. For 
“the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom ” :3 
p.418. and “let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest 
he fall.” 4 

Besides all other things I wish you to know this : 


1 Ps. cxviii. 1 20. 
3 Ps. cx. 10. 


2 Lu. xvii. 10. 
4 1 Co. x. 12. 


VII. 3- SELECT LETTERS OF T1IE HOLY SEVERUS. 


371 


that, if you do not through your honourable demeanour 
offer yourself as a model of good works to those who 
are being taught, and by your actual conduct show 
them uncorruptness and modesty, as the Apostle says,1 
during your teaching, though you perish ten thousand 
times every day, you will profit nothing : but you will 
be “ as sounding brass,” and as “ a tinkling cymbal ” :2 
since our teacher and God Jesus Himself first began 
to do, and then to teach, thereby giving us a model of 
virtue. The prophet David also shows that a man 
cannot otherwise open his mouth and speak spiritual 
words, unless he has first loved and served God’s 
commandments : for he says, “ 1 opened my mouth 
and breathed in spirit, because 1 loved thy command¬ 
ments.’ 1 

I have out of affection reminded your religiousness 
of these things as in a few words : but do you in your 
deeds show better things than these. The end. 


3. Of the same to Simeon archimandrite of the girat 
monastery . ( From those during episcopacy , from 

the $rd book the 35 th letter.)' 

A report has reached us that your religiousness in 
the pursuit of quietude and the desire ol remaining 
constantly in prayer and holding intercourse with God 
wishes to ne°*lect the rational fiock ot brethren that 


p. 419 

513-8 


1 Fit. ii. 7. 


2 1 Co. xiii. 1. 


3 Ps. cxviii. 131. 


372 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VII. 3. 


has been entrusted to you by our God and Saviour 
Jesus Christ, and that your mind is not much set upon 
the charge of them : but that for this reason you are 
desirous of nominating an administrator of the govern- 
ment of the monastery. When we heard this, we 
were astonished : and we did not, and still even now 
do not think it true : for this is alien to your perfection. 
You know well the apostolic statute that says, “Let 
every man wherein he was called therein abide,” and 
that “ we were bought with a price,” 1 and that we must 
with all our might fulfil the will of the Lord who bought 
us the captives with His own blood. But what is God’s 
will, except that a man seek not his own profit, but 
his neighbour’s?2 That the retention of the charge 
of the rational sheep who have been committed to you 
brings you nearer to God than quietude our Lord and 
Saviour is witness, who in the Gospels said thrice 
to Peter, “Peter, lovest thou me?”, and said that 
this is the token of love towards Him, “ Feed my 
sheep” and “Feed my lambs.”3 Therefore retain 
p. 420. the spiritual headship with all devotion, and do not, 
while you are on a path that is higher than all paths, 
turn your mind to another which cannot make God so 
near to you : I forbear to say that it actually grieves 
His Holy Spirit. The alleg ation that you have also 
cut yourself off from the sacred ministry I am ashamed 
even to write. It was this especially which made me 
not think the statements true : so that, even if some 


1 1 Co. vii. 23, 24. 


2 Id. x. 24. 


3 John xxi. 15-17. 


VII. 4- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


373 


verbal bond or oaths have been put forward by your 
sanctity without consideration, we reckon this as a 
thine that is not right. Wherefore we release you 
from such a ban, if we ought to call this a ban at all, 
and we also urge you to preside over your flock 
entirely, not with half your mind, and to officiate at 
the bloodless sacrifice. I he end. 


4. Of the same to Naunus 1 bishop of Seleucia. ( From 
those during episcopacy , from the 1 oth book the 
384 th, 385M letter .) 

Be it known to your love of God that Pelagius, 
havin0* been afflicted with disdain of the divine laws 
of the Spirit, and having disobeyed our summons 
which very gently summoned him, because he was not 
conscious in himself of any soundness, and could not 
make a defence to the accusations against him, derived 
so much benefit from his great presumption that he 
obtained many further witnesses to his own audacity 
and impiety. He was in fact required to give account 
or be tried for what he had done before the glorious 
count of the East, who was present in the honourable 
bishop’s house,2 and he did not need the expressions of 
his accusers, or any witnesses : but by his own words 
he was convicted of trying to make a defence in a 
crooked and crafty manner. I' or truly speaks the 


1 Sic 2 i 7T L(T K07T CiOl' . 


513-8. 


p. 421 


374 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VII. 4. 


sacred text which says, “ He that is incautious with 
his lips being perverse shall be tripped up”:1 and 
again, “A fool’s lips lead him to evil things, and his 
presumptuous mouth calleth down death upon him.”2 
Our Lord and God and Saviour Jesus Christ Himself 
also, who uttered these words and words like them in 
those that said them, says in the Gospels, ‘‘Out of the 
abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh,” and, 
“ The evil man out of the evil treasure brino-eth forth 

o 

and putteth out evil things.”3 Not to make many 
words, he was shown to be liable to many punish¬ 
ments : but by reason of the clemency to which the 
aforesaid glorious count of the East also as well as 
my meanness was by inclination disposed, he was 
adjudged indeed to be wholly unworthy to reside in 
P. 422. the holy monastery situated by the chapel-house of the 
glorious apostle Thomas in the city of the Seleucenes, 
because he sows disturbances among the brethren : but 
for the present as a discipline for his sins to live for a 
short time in any monastery that we please. For he has 
not ceased sinning against the brethren as the Apostle 
says 4 and wounding their consciences, and so injuring 
Christ, to whom every sin that is sinned reaches, since 
in graciousness He makes our afflictions His own. 
How was it anything but shameful that he should 
bring his brother into the monastery, who is a 
Nestorian and will not consent5 to set foot even in the 


1 Pr. x. 8. 

4 1 Co. viii. 12. 


2 Id. xviii. 9. 3 Mt. xii. 34, 35. 

5 We rather require “ is not fit ”. 


VII. 4- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


375 


outer court of the holy church or on the path to it, and 
admit him to be received by him ; and further in the 
case of a man who was formerly a solitary, who is 
stained with the hateful belief of Nestorius, and calls 
our one Lord and God Jesus Christ two natures after 
the divine and ineffable union, and was reproved and 
after the reproof said, “ It is the same thing for us to 
speak of two natures and of one incarnate nature of 
God the Word,” not only admitted him to entrance 
into the monastery, but even to give the divine com¬ 
munion to the brethren ? And how could it be tolerable 
to those who know how to give right judgments that, 
while the commemoration of Epiphanius is allowed as P- 423- 
an indulgence by me, he should take this man as a 
support for his own wickedness, and should in psalms 
and hymns of praise call one who has been admitted to 
indulgence a theologian, insomuch as to put down a 
certain small jug or flask and say, “ It is a relic of the 
holy Epiphanius,” and use this turbid filth, as the 
prophetic text says,1 to give drink to the rational 
sheep? Not to prolong the letter by citing every one 
of the facts established by examination, by committing 
these and like sins he was shown to be drawing into 
his own impiety those of the brethren also who are 
specially simple and have specially rustic minds. I he 
archimandrite also of the monastery that has been 
often mentioned fell under great blame for keeping 
silent on these matters, and closing his eyes, as the 


1 Eze. xxxix. 19. 


25 


376 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VII. 4. 


saying is : and, had it not been that I and the glorious 
count of the East yielded to his white hairs and 
advanced old age, and he received forgiveness, he 
would perhaps have been taught to be watchful in the 
case of sins directed against God. For it is written, 
“ If a man sin against a man, they shall pray for him : 
but, if he sin against God, who shall pray for him?”1 
For this reason we also, being concerned for the con¬ 
science of the brethren, and desiring to give no entrance 
to impiety, have disallowed what was previously per¬ 
mitted as an indulgence, I mean the commemoration or 
p. 424- mention of Epiphanius. It was also resolved that the 
programma or superscription of the faith should be 
put up before the gate, after the model of the other 
monasteries of the orthodox, on account of Him who 
said “What I tell you in the darkness speak in the 
light ; and what ye hear in the ear preach upon the 
housetops.” 2 For that which He when He had become 
man for reasons of expediency delivered in quiet, and 
to few in number, speaking to His disciples, this He 
ordered to be clearly preached throughout the world. 
The reason that a man obtains an indulgence and a 
concession is not that he may by means of it rebuild 
the impiety, but that he may by gradual ascent in¬ 
crease the strictness of his practice. In this way, 
after God had allowed the sons of Israel, who had 
been brought from heathen denseness, the sacrifices 
through “the blood of bulls and goats,” as the Apostle 


1 1 R. ii. 25. 


2 Mt. x. 27. 


VII. 4- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


377 


says,1 men like David the prophet, advancing towards 
knowledge, said, “ In burnt-offerings thou delightedst 
not; a sacrifice unto God is a broken spirit. ’" The 
apostles also, after having allowed circumcision to 
those who believed from among the Jews, after these 
things, when the preaching of religion had advanced 
further, said and taught and wrote in their epistles, 
“ Ye who are justified by law have fallen from grace” : 
and, “If I yet preach circumcision, why am I again 
persecuted?”3: and, “Now therefore why tempt ye 
God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples 
which neither we nor our fathers were able to bear ? ’’ 4 
These things were carried into effect ; and those who 
received the concession that was allowed on account 
of imperfection forgot this, and pressed on to per¬ 
fection : and neither did the true Israelites lapse into 
demon-worship because of the indulgence of sacrifices, 
nor did those who believed among the Jews in the 
beginning and were circumcised recur to the shadowy 
worship. 

Therefore, these things being so, the matter of the 
superintendence of the monastery too was ordered 
and settled in writing, the magnificent count of the 
East also being present, in order that the seeds of 
all disunion may be removed from before the feet : 
against which we urge your holiness also to keep a 
watchful mind, and not suffer anything of the kind to 


p. 425. 


1 He. x. 4. 

3 Ga. v. 4,11. 


2 Ps. 1. 18, 19. 
4 Ac. xv. ic. 


378 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VII. 5. 


happen henceforth in the same holy monastery. All 
the devout brethren were charged with threats both 
by me and by the glorious count of the East not to 
bring forward any matter tending to disturbance or 
confusion unsuited to solitaries, but to be subject to 
their religious archimandrite, and in all things to 
p. 426. think, say, and do what is in harmony with the 
orthodox faith and with the solitary life. But, if they 
do anything contrary to these things, they must no 
longer expect the castigation suited to monks, but that 
which is suited to men living the unregulated and 
undisciplined life in the world. 

But these things your love of God ought to have 
first arranged and settled yourself, and not have 
thrown such labours upon me, who am harassed by the 
great turmoil of affairs. The end. 


513-8. 5. Of the same to V ictoir bishop of Philadelphia. 

( From those during episcopacy , from the \th book 
the 156th letter .) 

That the thing which holds Christianity together is 
love we are all assured. But what is the peculiarity 
of love except to regard a neighbour as itself? There¬ 
fore, since we have heard a report that is not good 
about the devout John, who formerly ministered to the 
presbyter /Elian who is among the saints, to the effect 
that he has lapsed into love of money and the vileness 
of filthy lucre, and the other vices that are akin to 


VII. 5. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


379 


these (if the text is not false which said that “the love 
of money is the root of all evil things ” '), we urge your 
holiness, who besides your other good qualities are rich 
also in the virtue of obedience, to send this man to 
his own monastery in order that he may keep quiet : p- 4=7. 
especially since he came to us in an improper way and 
as one may say self-invited, and not by invitation and as 
one who is carrying out an order so that he might also 
receive a reward. For 1 have learned that his evil 
repute has also reached our holy fathers of the house 
of the saintly John and Theodore. In what way 1 do 
not intend to say : but that those who related these 
things are not liars, and that they have “the fear of God 
before their eyes,” 2 and that they are greatly devoted 
to your love of God I know and am assured, and 
1 have o-ained this knowledge from actual experience. 

I remember also that the devout John often showed a 
lucre-lovine character in affairs, in the neighbourhood 
of the holy monasteries where I and your love ol God 
lived, and that he did not edify us much (for we must 
speak thus moderately). The occasion of this hunting 
after lucre in him was that old man, and the attend¬ 
ance on that invalid, and the disguise thence derived, 
coloured with Melian earth : of this kind. I heretore 
I beg your holiness to purge away this blot also 
and reflect that nothing is likely to impair the whole 
administration of those who preside over a people (not 


1 i Ti. vi. 10. 2 Ps. xxxv. i. 

3 A substance used by painters ; see Liddell & Scott s.v. XLjAios. 


380 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VII. 6. 


only spiritual administration but also political or any 
other kind whatever) so much as intercourse with those 
p. 428. who are constantly with them and serve them and are 
entrusted by them with things that cannot be entrusted 
to those without. For this reason the prophet David, 
leaving us a rule and a statute for an illustrious life, 
sang to the God of all, “ When the wicked man turned 
aside from me I did not know ” : and, “ Mine eyes are 
upon the faithful of the land that they may sit with 
me : and he that walked in a blameless way he 
ministered to me ” : 1 and the passages that agree with 
and resemble these, words which everyone sings and 
takes into his mouth, but few, and those such as you, 
display in act. 

These things have been written by us with the love 
of Christ going in advance and filling up the measure 
ol the letter. Though we are sinners, we are in the 
habit of endeavouring to do what is good not for the 
sake of anything else, but for the sake of goodness 
itself only. The end. 


513-7. 6. Of the same to Stephen bishop of Apamea. ( From 

those during episcopacy , from the 7th book the 
10 6th letter . ) 

I have thought it necessary to commend to your 
love of God the man who brings you this letter, and to 


1 Ps. c. 4, 6. 


VII. 6. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


381 


state the reason for which he has come to you. The 
magnificent and Christ-loving Marinus wrote to me to P 
say that the man is his kinsman, and that he is in need 
of some assistance, as many say ; and that by reason 
of his retiring character he would not consent to throw 
himself into political affairs and obtain relief from that 
source : but he thought it suited to his habits to be 
included among the clergy of the city of the Apamenes . 
for he is in fact also from that same country. There¬ 
fore he asked in his letter that this might be 
carried out for him in actual fact. And I after in\ es- 
tigating the man’s mode of life found, as far as was 
possible for men, that he had not neglected modesty 
of conduct. But do you also with men fitted lor this 
purpose examine the man lurther, and you will know 
that he is not one unworthy of such a favour. I his 
presupposed, we shall be paying a very just debt to 
the magnificent and Christ-loving Marinus, who con- 
cerns himself much about our affairs, it we include the 
man among the clergy of the holy church of the 
Apamenes, and admit him to the order of the diaconate. 
So much for this matter. 

As to the circumstances of the time, I beg you to 
remember our humble admonitions, and do all things 
with discretion, and reckon all other things second to 
the integrity of the orthodox faith, in order that you may 
appear perfect and say like Paul, “ I can do all things, 
in Christ which strengthened! me. 


. 429* 


p. 430. 


1 Ph. iv. 13. 


382 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VII. 7. 


The men of the blessed Akiba have written to me 
about John the monk, who has betaken himself to a 
temporary retirement with you, to the effect that it was 
not by their counsel that he removed from their monas¬ 
tery, but also that here too he sought to be ordained on 
his own authority 1 (I must use their words) ; and this 
they explained not only by their letter, but also by 
sending devout monks here. Accordingly I beg you 
not to lay a daring hand upon him until his archi¬ 
mandrite gives his consent ; lest we be found to be 
incurring blame, as breaking the holy ordinances of 
the churches and of the monasteries. The end. 


513-8. 7- Of the same to the wife of Calliopius the patrician* 

on a diptych. ( From those during episcopacy , from 
the Zth book the i^Jth letter.') 

Being engaged in hearing a certain cause, I had not 
time to attend to what was written by your highness 
immediately. But, now that I have read it, I have 
this much to say : that concerning the confession of 
faith it is necessary for me to give you an admonition. 
For in such things as these it is not riodit to be 
p. 431- negligent. hor we hear the Apostle saying, “For 
necessity is laid upon me : and woe unto me if I 
preach not the gospel.” ' Indeed, even when such a 


1 a vOevTca. 

? i Co. ix. 1 6. 


2 Cf* Jo. Mai. p. 401, and Wright, C.B.M. 335. 


VII. 7. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


383 


thing is said in simplicity as you say, it is foreign and 
alien to the rieht confession, I mean that Christ should 

o 

be reckoned as an addition to the Holy Trinity, or, 
vice versa , that we should place Him before and in 
this way confess the Trinity. Having positive know¬ 
ledge that you 1 are sound 1 in the faith, and that you 
rejoice at such an admonition, I have written to you, 
and that with very just confidence. Hut, since the 
same apostle says in writing in another place, “ Let 
your speech be always seasoned with grace as with 
salt,”2 with grace that does not fall outside the limits 
of devoutness I have added also the case of that 
woman : and that though it is certainly in no way alien 
to believing women to help one another, especially in 
such urgent matters. 1 he practice of women teaching 
in public and giving expositions to men the wise Paul 
disallowed, saying, “ I suffer not a woman to teach, 
nor to usurp authority over a man : but let her be in 
silence.” 3 But that they should correct their sisters 
in their assemblies and conversations he properly 
permitted, especially those who are advanced in age, 
calling them “ teachers of good things,” 1 in order that 
they may give an example to the others also in every - 
thino-. Also the women who were taught at that time 
by the Lord show that instruction in religion is not 
foreign even to the female sex. For this reason too 
he accepted Mary who was industrious in this matter, 
saying, “ Mary hath chosen for herself the good part, 


p. 432. 


1 Masc. pi. 


2 Col. iv. 6. 


3 1 Ti. ii. 12. 


4 Tit. ii. 3. 


384 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VII. 


which shall not be taken from her.”1 According] 
both to learn and to teach such things, in a propt 
manner and according to the character of each persoi 
belongs to every sex and is praiseworthy and blesse( 
I forbear to go on to refer to Paul who says in hi 
epistle to the Philippians about certain women, “ Whic 
combated with me in the gospel with Clement an 
my other helpers,” 2 in order not to be thought to b 
prolonging the argument, and doing detriment to th 
brevity of an admonitory letter. The end. 


519-38. 8. Of the same to Eustace a young monk. iyFrom thos 
after banishment from the fh book the 3 Sth letter. 

Your devoutness acted rightly and lawfully i 
informing both that saintly old man at an earlier tim 
and our meanness now of the thought that troubles yoi 
And after other things. Know therefore that ou 
Lord and God Jesus Christ, by way of making th 
road that leads to salvation broad for us (for Hi 
p. 433- “ commandment is exceeding broad,”3 as the singin 

prophet says, although it seems narrow to many b 
reason of the hardness and difficulty of works c 
virtue), when in the Gospels urging us to bear th 
cross and follow Him, and to despise the worldl 
matter that draws our mind away from heavenl 
things, and press on to perfection, in one place says 


Ph. 


iv. 3. 


1 Lu. x. 42. 


3 Ps. cxviii. 96. 


VII. 8. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


385 


“If thou wilt be perfect, go sell that thou hast and 
give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in 
heaven, and come follow me ” : while in another place 
He laid down a principle saying, “ Everyone that hath 
forsaken house or brethren or sisters or mother or 
father, or wife or children, or lands, for my name’s sake 
shall receive an hundredfold, and shall inherit eternal 

life.’’1 

Since therefore you also have by God s grace chosen 
for yourself and completed one of the said roads by 
forsaking all for His name, do not let your thoughts 
distress you and think that you ought in all points and 
under all circumstances to carry the other method into 
effect also, I mean that of selling what you have 
forsaken and giving to the poor. Indeed basil the 
great in divine teaching, when drawing up the ascetic 
canons for us, ordered us to testify to a charge ot 
sacrilege only against men who hold property that 
belongs to us, saying that the voice ot religion does 
not permit us to go to law about it. If therefore you 
be able to do so out of a superfluity (for neither is 
there any need for you to do even this as a matter ot 
necessity and compulsion), I mean to take a part also 
of your father’s or mother’s inheritance to help the 
poor, without relaxing the lav/s of the Spirit and being 
involved in the confusions of courts, the action is good 
and not to be disallowed, and it ought not to be 
despised. For the same doctor said, ‘ But every- 


P- 434- 


1 Mt. xix. 21, 29. 


386 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VII. 5 


where let us take care lest by reason of one command 
ment we be seen to be breaking another.”1 You are 
therefore in need of a believing man, one who is 
powerful in the state," and able to receive instructions 
and commissions from your devoutness as to the 
claims which it is proper to make, in order that he 
may hold the fear of law-courts 3 only before those who 
hold your property, and when they have given way 
demand from them some of the things that can be 
demanded. For you do not require him to be led 
into suits in the courts,3 if those men be very unjust, 
and to be further found to be yourself going to law 
through the instrumentality of the man who has 
received the instructions and do violence to the laws 
and rules of the Spirit, which prohibit you from going 
to law. This I say, because among the things written 
by you you stated that, if you do not at once remind 
those who hold the things that belong to you, you will 
be barred by the time that has elapsed from any claim 
or indictment. Not the end. 


P- 435- 

519-38. 9. Of the same to the Christ- loving Isidora. {From 

those after banishment , from the gth book the 
13th letter .) 

I he fact that I learned from your Christ-loving 
modesty’s letter (to speak with God’s permission) that 


*8l 


1 Reg. Fus. Tract, ix. 2. 


2 7ToXtT€ta. 


KaaTypia. 


VII. 9- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS- 


387 


both you and our common children are sound both in 
soul and in body was a cause of great joy to me. 

And after other things. And she is blessed because 
of her departure : but you are more blessed in that 
you did not see her in the body, for the sake of the 
law of the Spirit and the future eternal hope. You 
will assuredly see her there, since by enduring not 
to see her here you have consecrated your endurance 
as a sacrifice to God. This principle is also stated 
in the sayings of the holy old men who after an 
approved fashion gained distinction in the solitary and 
immaterial life. Once indeed, when father Pcemen 
was following the life of philosophic quietude with his 
brothers, and the door of his cell was shut, his mother 
stood outside the house, and he spoke to her thus in so 
many words, “ Do you wish to see us here, or to see us 
in that country ? ” ; and the old woman said to him : “ If 
I do not see you here shall 1 certainly see you there, 
my son ? ” ; and he answered her, “ If you force yourself 
not to see us here, you will see us there.” And she 
went away rejoicing and saying, “ Shall I certainly 
see you there ? I do not seek to see you here.”1 These 
things were said and done by those understanding old 
men, and fathers of the holy and solitary life, not be¬ 
cause they were cruel and unkind men in respect ot 
the claims of nature, but because they were taught 
by the God-inspired scripture that those who have 
been set apart and consecrated to God have no 


p. 436- 


1 Apoph. Pat. Poem. 76 (P. G. lxv. 340). 


388 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VII. 9. 


family on earth, but among angelic hosts and the 
heavenly spirits. For this reason Moses in his 
blessings said of the tribe of Levi that was set 
apart to perform priestly functions, from which was 
Aaron the first high-priest, and those who after him 
wore the robe of judgment and the revelation and 
truth upon their breast (these were bright stones, 
which signified the fact that all things that are true 
and are not revealed to most men are revealed by 
God to the high-priests), “ Give to Levi his revelations, 
and his truth to the saintly man.” Then also he 
adduces the cause of such honour, saying, “ Who saith 
to his father and to his mother, ‘ I have not seen 
thee ’ : and acknowledged not his brethren and his 
sons.” 1 For this reason Elisha also, who was work¬ 
ing at the tilling of the earth, and was looking after 
twelve yoke of oxen ploughing, when he suddenly 
received the heavenly calling from Elijah the prophet, 
p. 437. was not allowed to see his parents and bid them fare¬ 
well : but, when he said, “ Let me kiss my father and 
my mother and I will follow after thee,” he heard the 
prophet indignantly commanding him and saying, “Go 
and turn back, what have 1 done to thee?”2 Jesus 
Himself also, the teacher and God of the prophets, 
and of the righteous men who have been from all time 
and from the beginning of the world, for the sake of 
example and instruction to us made answer in the 
sacred Gospels to the man who said to Him while 


1 De. xxxiii. 8, 9. 


2 3 R. xix. 20. 


VII. 9- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


389 


He was teaching the multitudes, “ Behold ! thy mother 
and thy brethren stand without and seek to speak 
with thee,” and said in the ears of everyone, “Who 
is my mother? and who are my brethren?” : and He 
stretched forth His hand towards His disciples, and 
said : “ Behold ! my mother and my brethren. For, 

whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in 
heaven, he is my brother and sister, and mother.” 1 
And again after other things. With regard also to 
the burial of that blessed God-loving virgin’s body, 
if you determine upon a course worthy of the per¬ 
fection of Christians and the high garb of virginity, 
you will allow her to be buried in the place where 
she placed her spirit in the heavenly Father’s hands, 
an expression which Christ, the new first fruits of our 
race, left us as an inheritance, when He died the 
voluntary death for our liberation and said, “ My 
Father in thy hands I place my spirit. 2 For “the 
earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof ”3 says the 
singing prophet : who also in another place teaches that 
the whole earth is a foreign land to holy men, and that 
they have no country, in that he sings thus to Cod 
over all : “ I am a denizen with thee, and a sojourner, 
like all my fathers.’’4 The reason that patriarchs 
such as Jacob and Joseph desired to be removed from 
the country of the Egyptians to the land of promise, 
and there receive perfect burial, was that with prophetic 


2 Lu. xxiii. 46. 

4 Id. xxxviii. 13 


1 Mt. vii. 47-50. 
3 Ps. xxiii. 1. 


p. 43s- 


390 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VII. 9. 


eyes they foresaw our God and Saviour’s Resurrection, 
which was to take place there ; for which reason also 
the observances of the divine service and worship 
were confined to these places only, so that in the legal 
writings also the following command is given by 
Moses, “Take heed that thou offer not thy burnt 
offerings in every place where thou shalt see, but in 
the place which the Lord thy God shall choose.”1 
But now, when the gospel service and the worship in 
spirit has embraced all the ends of the world, and one 
sacrifice has been offered for the sin of the whole 
world (for, “Behold!” He says, “the Lamb of God 
which taketh away the sin of the world ” 2), it is lawful 
for us to do spiritual service and to worship and pray 
everywhere, and no one can any longer be found 
among- saints and those who conducted themselves 
according to the perfection of the gospel who gave 
injunctions or who greatly concerned himself about 
being buried in this land or in that. For they looked 
to the hope of the resurrection, and the last trump, 
which shall in the same manner awake those who 
sleep from the dust of earth, as says Daniel the divine 
among prophets,3 and “from end to end of heaven,’’4 
as Jesus Christ who spoke in the prophets said in the 
,p. 439. Gospels ; who to the Samaritan woman also who 
thought that the observances of worship were limited 
and confined either to Mount Gerizim according to the 


1 De. xii. 13, 14. 
3 Da. xii. 2. 


2 John i. 29. 

4 Mt. xxiv. 31. 


VIII. I. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


391 


folly of the Samaritans, or to Jerusalem according to 
the opinion of the Jews, said, “Woman, believe me, 
an hour cometh when neither in this mountain nor at 
Jerusalem shall they worship the Father " ; and again 
after a little more ; “ But an hour cometh, yea now is, 
when the true worshippers shall worship the Father 
in spirit and in truth ; for the Father also seeketh 
such worshippers. God is spirit ; and they that 
worship him must worship in spirit and in truth.” 1 
Following these things the wise Paul also in writing 
to Timothy said, “ I will therefore that men pray 
everywhere, lifting up holy hands without wrath or 
cogitations.” 2 Not the end. 


VI 11. Eighth section.3 About men who cut off their p.440. 

o-enital members, and about men who have 
& 

them cut off through necessity, and about men 
who killed themselves in time of martyrdom : 
and that it is the custom in many churches for 
the glories and praises of the saints to be read. 


1. Of the same to Stephen the 7'eader . ( From those 513-8. 

during episcopacy , from the *]th book the 392 nd 
letter . ) 

I confess that I rejoiced greatly when I received 
the letter which your religiousness sent me by the 


1 John iv. 21, 23, 24. 


2 1 Ti. ii. 8. 


3 titAos. 

26 


392 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VIII. I. 


magnificent Sergius, the governor of the second 
people of the Syrians,1 2 for two reasons : both because it 
was yours, and because its contents were what they 
are. For we have now by experience found the man 
such as you described him in your words to be : and in 
this great thanks are due to your God-loving soul. 

By asking after you have received the discourse pro¬ 
duced by us upon the saintly Simeon" that we should 
compose another also in the form of a historical 
narrative you seem to me to be doing the same as a 
covetous and strict lender, who, when he sees that his 
p- 441. debtor is unfruitful, desires to receive the principal 
only, but, when he has received it and seen the gold 
in his hands, is induced to demand the interest also, 
which before receiving the principal he despised, 
determining in a friendly way that his own only should 
be repaid without increment. Know clearly however 
that it was our endeavour in that discourse, even 
while applying ourselves to the festal and laudatory 
style of composition, not to neglect the historical and 
narratival aspect also : in order that it might contain 
both at once, and the hearer might be more gratified 
at receiving a history adorned with flowers of praises, 
and at the same time as far as possible not failing in 
ecclesiastical gravity. 

That the praises of the saints are read even in 


1 I.e. the province of Syria II. 

2 Wright C.B.M. 536, 791. The order of the homilies shows that 
it was delivered in spring 513. 


VIII. I. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS, 


393 


churches is witnessed by the discourse of the wise 
Basil on the forty martyrs,1 which is read to the people 
in the city of the men of Berytus, as well as by that 
of the holy Pamphilus, both there and in the city of 
the men of Caesarea, which is the metropolis of b irst 
Palestine. The laudatory discourse also that was 
delivered upon Gregory the Wonder-worker" we 
ourselves have known to be read in many churches, 
and in the royal city itself : similarly also that upon the 
o-reat Basil. We who are scrutinizers of the laws must 
do you an injury, and so stop your greedy ears. I 
think that the preface 3 of the same discourse that we p- 442. 
wrote on the same holy Simeon will cause you difficulty, 
seeing that it is unacceptable to the Byzantines. But it 
is easy for you to use three or four passages that stand 
at the beginning, and leave out the things that cause 
difficulty, and read the rest continuously. 

But the lawful freedom of speech of your love of 
God, or rather to say what is more true your con¬ 
fession on behalf of piety, we have heard from others. 

And you are blessed both in the distinction enjoyed 
here, and in the expected reward, which is promised to 
those who have fought well. I he end. 


1 P. G. xxxi. 568. 


2 Id. xlvi. 893. 


npooLiuov. 


394 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VIII. 2. 


513-8. 2. Of the same to Cassian bishop of Bostra. ( From 
those during episcopacy , froi7i the yth book the 
372 nd letter .) 

In this one letter I make answer to all those written 
at different times by your sanctity. 

And after other things. As to the case of the man 
whose genital members have been cut off, you are not 
right in saying that the fact that his name is not 
mentioned in the transactions against the impious 
Julian1 is enough to secure acquittal in our eyes. In 
fact, if a time of inquiry come, we shall certainly insist 
upon saying why such a count 2 was drawn up. But 
this principle must be observed, that according to the 
p. 443- provisions of the canon this shall be a great defence 
for him, that he in truth suffered this at the hands of 
physicians, by reason of some infirmity that had arisen 
in him, and he was not himself his own destroyer : 3 for 
this is what falls under accusation and the canonical 
punishment. If therefore this appear to be so, out of 
benevolence place him among the clergy : you will not 
be in any way whatever relaxing the ordinances of the 
church. Julian of the hateful name was deprived for 
other reasons greater than these : and this count 3 was 
added to those by way of addition : and, even if it is 
not true, it cannot benefit him in any way. Since you 


1 Bp. of Bostra (Zach. vit. Sev. p. 30; Evagr. iii. 33). 

2 Ke<f)d\cuov. 3 Mansi ii. 668. 


VIII. 3- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


395 


have written to us about the gentle Dorotheus, it seems 
you have forgotten the points on which he caused us 
just vexation, which I made known to your love of God 
in another letter: and for your perfect knowledge I have 
thought good to insert a copy 1 of that in this letter. 
The end. 


3. Of the same to Aurelius the scholastic. ( From those 
during episcopacy , from the 7 th book the 376th, 
37 Stk letter .) 

The fact that your wisdom has been pleased to 
show a kind disposition 2 towards those who are dis¬ 
tressed by any vexation is good and of great profit. 
But for those who like my meanness are entrusted 
with the orovernment of rational souls it is not a safe 
thing to walk contrary to the laws of the Spirit, and 
by granting indulgence do violence to what those 
approve. By doing such things we shall without 
our own knowledge be giving those that are under a 
superior liberty to sin, so that we shall henceforth be 
unable to cut off others also who neglect church 
discipline, by reason of the fact that we ourselves have 
already undermined this. Therefore with regard to 
the devout Thomas, if on account of some infirmity 


1 v 

J MXOV. 

2 Or, with an easy emendation, “ The fact that your wisdom is 
benevolently disposed.'’ 


513-8. 


p. 444. 


396 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VIII. 3. 


his genital members have been removed by the skill 
of physicians, whether cut by the knife or burnt by 
drugs, he has under the canons liberty to minister, 
and there is no difficulty as to his performing priestly 
functions, and standing before God's altar “with open 
face”1 as the Apostle says. But, if he presumptuously 
mutilated himself, we will not put force upon the 
determination of the canons concerning him, and give 
occasion for blame against us to those who are eagerly 
and malignantly observing what we do. It may in 
fact happen that we cannot do all that we wish, 
unless it be by setting at naught the offence caused 
to many, and wounding “the weak conscience” of our 
brethren, as it is written.2 If it were not so know well 
that I too inasmuch as I am clad in bodily weakness 
p- 445- am much inclined to benevolence. However, since 
I am “bought with a price,”3 with the blood I mean 
of the great God and our Saviour Christ, I coerce my 
will according to His laws and check the unrestrained 
impulse. These things I have written to the saintly 
Cassian also the bishop of your resplendent metro¬ 
polis :4 for I think I heard from his love of God that 
it was rather on account of an infirmity and under 
the skill of physicians that the aforesaid man was 
mutilated. The end. 


9 • • • 

“ 1 Co. vm. 1 2. 

4 


1 2 Co. iii. 18. 
3 Id. vi. 20. 


via. 2. 


VIII. 4- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


397 


4. Of the same to J ohn the scholastic of JJostra. ( From 519-38. 
those after banishment, from the $th book the 39 th 
letter. ) 

I praise the man who addressed an epistle to your 
Christ-loving erudition, and is earnestly desirous of 
learning the intention of the commandments of the 
Spirit, and rightly shrinks from the crime of trans- 
oressinor the commandment of the divine laws, which p- 446. 
leads to manifest death. Por the God -inspired 
writings somewhere say, “ 1 he commandment of the 
Lord is a fountain of life : and it makes one turn aside 
from the snare of death.’ 1 Wherefore I also ot 
necessity answer with what comes to my knowledge, 
since it is not a safe thing for me to keep silence and 
neglect the question. If men who have been admitted 
to act as priests to God do not make manifest to 
those that are in need the path of what ought to be 
done, it is equivalent to committing murder, bor He 
that speaks in Hosea the prophet says, “ Priests have 
hidden the Lord’s way : they have slain Shechem : 
because they have wrought iniquity in the house ot 
Israel.”2 F'or the sharp sword that provides the devil 
with an instrument for the slaughter of our souls is an 
iniquity. Wherefore we will set the question of him 
who asks before our answer, as he requested. It is 
word for word as follows. 


1 Pr. xiv. 27. 


2 Ho. vi. 9, 10. 


398 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VIII. 4. 


p-447- Question one. “The loud-voiced Isaiah admonishes 
those that thirst to go to the water.1 Having there¬ 
fore for a long time disputed about the points 2 to be 
mentioned without being able to find anyone here to 
explain these clearly to us, and yearning greatly in 
thirst, we have now had recourse to your wisdom as 
to fountains of salvation, you who are able from your 
own resources and by the help of the God-taught men 
there to explain to us what the right opinion is 
concerning the propositions 3 submitted by us. But 
let the story be taken as relating to imaginary persons. 
There were with a certain man two deacons who had 
received the habit from him, and were admitted to the 
diaconate by his hands : not both at one time : but 
each of them separately. These concerted a partner¬ 
ship in wickedness : and having corrupted one another 
left their archimandrite, having perhaps even before 
p. 448. their departure made an agreement to trample under 
foot the anathema that would be launched against 
them. Therefore, after they had withdrawn them¬ 
selves, these men’s archimandrite, wishing to check 
the evil, immediately through a certain brother placed 
them under an anathema, the exact terms of which 
were that they were not to be together nor talk with 
one another, nor taste wine for some short stated time.4 
Bor it was thought that what had been done was chiefly 
due to the indulgence of the belly. But these men 
treated the anathema with contempt, and on the very day 


1 Is. lv. T. 


2 K€(f)d\aia. 


irpoTacrei 5. 


4 7rpo0ecr/JLLa. 


VIII. 4- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


399 


were together and in company, and did not lefrain from 
the drinking of wine even for the space of one day only. 

“ That if they had observed the pronouncement they 
would not have been under the anathema, and that 
after the anathema had been removed also it would 
have been easy for them to be together is, I think, 
obvious to everyone : but, since they were intected 
with contemptuousness and did not take account of 
the anathema, in what light must we hold these men ? 
and is it possible for him who placed them under 
anathema to give them forgiveness when the ban has 
once been broken contrary to his pleasure ? Or, even 
if he who pronounced the anathema shall forgive them, 
will the Lord also with him forgive their contempt of 
the anathema and their neglect of the pronouncement ? 
What I ask is whether even if the author of the ban 
himself wishes to grant release it is difficult for him 
to do so, or if it is in fact upon him that the whole 
matter depends so that he may even change his mind 
and give way, or if it depends upon a certain definite 
penance and strict observance of the things that were 
forbidden them before, and whether this is to be 
observed for ever, or is to be applied to them lor a 

space of time as a discipline. 

“ To speak generally, if a man is under an anathema, 
and on his own authority deliberately transgresses 
against it, what does he deserve ? And is the act ol 
release after the transgression free from danger for the 
author of the ban ? and does God grant forgiveness 
with him, and judge the man who has sinned mno- 


\ 


. 449. 


p. 45°- 


400 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VIII. 4. 


cent ? I ask further also whether pronouncement and 
anathema and separation differ from one another in 
meaning, or if, the meaning being one, it is only the 
articulation of the syllables1 that is different.” 

Answer. Since Moses who was named a faithful 
servant in all God’s house 2 says to those who are to 
judge, “Ye shall not recognise a person in judgment ; 
judge according to the small and according to the great; 
thou shalt not be afraid of the person of a man, since 
the judgment is God’s,”3 and Koheleth too gives us 
wise instruction, speaking plainly thus, “ There is a 
time for everything under the sun,”4 we the mean one 
also must, as far as is possible for us, so make answer 
to the question as if the judgment were divine and 
p. 451* not human, and produce a solution of the doubt in 
accordance with the distinctive character of the time. 

It therefore the head of the monastery reproved the 
brothers who have now left while they were within 
and living under his power, and found fault with them 
for disorderliness of conduct, and forbade them the 
corrupting intercourse, he would have reason for lay¬ 
ing an ordinance upon them after they left also, and 
ratifying this by an admonitory anathema. But, if 
he is shown to have been silent the whole of the time 
during which they were under his authority, and not 
to have found any such fault with them at all, he is 
now giving ground for suspicion that he is rather in¬ 
flicting a man’s vengeance upon them for his own 


( TvWd/Sin . 


2 He. iii. 5. 


3 De. i. 17. 


4 Ec. iii. 1. 


VIII. 4- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


401 


injury, not applying a correction out of concern for 
their salvation. Everyone who wishes is allowed to 
leave a cloister freely without any blame following him. 

A man who leaves a monastic community does not, as 
in the case of the holy churches and of those who are 
included in the honourable clergy, need a dimissory 
letter or similar permission : for this is not laid down p. 452. 
in any of the holy canons. In conformance with this 
distinction therefore we say that the pronouncement 
that has been laid upon the brethren shall hold or 
not hold. If they received a warning while within 
the cloister, it is manifest that they have sinned, inas¬ 
much as they have trampled upon the pronouncement. 

But, if they left without having had any fault found 
with them, they are not subject to the pronouncement 
that was laid upon them after their departure : but for 
their disorderly character they shall give account to 
the righteous Judge, when they shall themselves bear 
the burden of their own sin : “ for everyone,” as the 
Apostle says, “shall bear his own burden But, if they 
fall under the ordinance, it is manifest that penitence will 
help them. Every sin, even one that is very grievous, 
is cured by the method of sincere penitence, and those 
who show penitence worthy the name have nothing 
incurable about them ; and the man himself also who 
laid the ordinance upon them can remove the interdict : 
not introducing thereby human favour, but serving 
the divine will. But, if he shall be wrathfully and p. 453. 


1 Ga. vi. 5. 


402 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VIII. 4. 


hostilely disposed, and be unwilling to release those 
who sincerely repent, it rests with another authority 
higher than his, viz., that of the bishops, upon learning 
the truth, to remove that which out of human bitterness 
and malice is maintained even after sincere penitence. 
But it rests with him who has authority to remove 
the interdict to approve the measure and character of 
sincere penitence, where nothing is explicitly stated 
by the church canons, as in the case of certain sins. 

Such pronouncements the divine scripture is able to 
term both “ordinances” and “pronouncement”1. For 
it is written in Numbers as follows : “This is the word 2 
which the Lord commanded. Any man who shall vow 
a vow unto the Lord, or swear oaths, or lay down 
an ordinance concerning himself, shall not make his 
pronouncement void. All that proceedeth out of his 
mouth he shall perform.”3 Also, when Samuel the 
prophet had commanded Saul, and had ordered him 
to arm himself against Amalek, and deliver to death 
p* 454- everything soever that he captured of men and of 
cattle, and he was victorious and gained mighty suc¬ 
cess in war, and he transgressed the ordinance and 
kept the goats and oxen alive, and he angered God, 
the divine scripture introduces the prophet himself 
saying thus : “ Because thou hast rejected the pro¬ 
nouncement of the Lord, the Lord shall reject thee 
from being king over Israel.” And Saul said to 

o o 

Samuel : “ I have sinned in that I have transgressed 

o 


'j 


1 Marg. “ word.” 


2 Marg. “ pronouncement.” 


3 Nu. xxx. 2 


VIII. 4- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


403 


against the word of the Lord.”1 You see Samuel 
called the divine commandment and ordinance “the 
pronouncement of the Lord ", and Saul “ the word of 
the Lord.” Jeremiah the prophet also applied the 
term “commandment” to the ordinance that the 
righteous Jonadab established for his sons and his sons’ 
sons, commanding them not to taste wine at all, nor 
possess a house or field, but to live in tents. Jeremiah 
was commanded by God over all to take ajar of wine 
and a cup, and urge his sons’ sons to drink, contrary 
to what was commanded them by their fathers’ father : 
and they made answer saying, “We have hearkened 
to the voice of Jonadab our father, that we should not 
drink wine all the days of our life, we and our wives 
and our sons and our daughters, besides not buildino- 
houses to live in them. And we have had no vineyard 
or field or seed : and we have dwelt in tents : and we 
have done all the things that Jonadab our father com¬ 
manded us.’’ And thereupon He that commanded 
the prophet to do these things, in order to convict the 
disobedient people of Israel, speaks thus : “The sons 
of Jonadab the son of Rechab have maintained the 
commandment of their father : but this people hath 
not hearkened unto me." 2 This ordinance the Spirit- 
inspired writings are also in the habit of calling 
“covenant.” 1 For instance, when the chiefs of the 
Jews had with the knowledge of King Zedekiah 
agreed after the space of six years to let the Hebrew 


1 i R. xv. 23, 24. 2 Jer. xlii. 8-10, 16. 3 SLaOrjKrj. 


• 455- 


404 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VIII. 4. 


handmaid and slave go free according to what is 
written in the law,1 and they had transgressed the 
ordinance that was enacted by them, the same prophet 
Jeremiah speaks thus: “The word that came from 
the Lord unto Jeremiah, after King Zedekiah had 
completed a covenant with the people in Jerusalem to 
proclaim a release, and to let every man his Hebrew 
slave and his Hebrew bondmaid go free, that no man 
might be in bondage from Jerusalem ; and all the 
great men and all the people who entered into the 
covenant turned aside from dismissing every man his 
bondman and his bondwoman, and releasing their 
p. 456. bondmen and their bondwomen.” 2 Also, when those 
who had returned from Babylon joined themselves to 
foreign women, of the peoples of the countries that 
were near them, from among whom God had forbidden 
them to make marriages, and Ezra was roused to 
wrath on account of the sin, those who had offended 
agreed and ordained to send away from them the 
women that were united to them : and one of them is 
described in the second book of those that were written 
by him as speaking in this manner : “ We for our 
part have been false to our God, and have taken 
strange women of the peoples of the land : and now 
there is hope for Israel concerning this. And let us 
now make a covenant to our God, to put away all the 
women and such as are born of them. As thou wiliest, 
arise, and frighten them by the commandments of our 


1 Ex. xxi. 2. 


2 Jer. xli. 8-i r. 


VIII. 4- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 405 


God : and let it be done according to the law. Arise, 
because the word is upon thee and we are with 
thee. Be strengthened, and act.” 1 You see here also 
he called that which was resolved and ordained both 
“ word ” and “ covenant ” 2 : so that in the God-inspired 
writings the same thing was named “ word ” and “ ordi¬ 
nance ” (or “prescription”) and “ pronouncement ” and 
“ commandment ” and “ covenant.” 

An anathema fills the place of punishment for him 
who transgresses what has been ordained. But you 
must know that there are two kinds of anathema. For 
the expression “ anathema ” is also applied to that which 
is devoted and consecrated to God, gold it may be and 
silver, and garments and slaves, and cattle and fields : 
in some cases for the honour and adornment of a 
prayer-house building, in others for the service or 
support of those who are in need, or “ those who con¬ 
stantly attend upon the altar” as Paul says.3 Such 
things it is in no way lawful to transfer to private use 
after they have been consecrated, and to remove from 
the use whereby they are appropriated to God. This 
principle is stated as follows in Leviticus : “ Every 
anathema that a man shall devote unto the Lord of 
all that he hath, from man unto head of cattle, and 
from the plot of his inheritance, he shall not sell it, 
nor redeem it. It shall be a holy thing unto the 
Lord.”4 Thus it is written that Judith acted. “And 


P- 457- 


1 2 E. x. 2-4. 

3 1 Co. ix. 13. 


“ BiclSt'ikt). 

4 Le. xxvii. 28. 


406 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VIII. 4. 


Judith set apart all the goods of Holophernes that 
the people gave her, and the net that she took for 
herself from his chamber, and gave it as an anathema 
p. 45s- to the Lord.”1 But the other kind of anathema is 
when persons are by the sentence and judgment of 
God set apart for death, as Joshua the son of Nun 
ordained in the case of Jericho according to the 
determination of the Lord, saying, “This city and 
all that is therein shall be anathema to the Mighty 
Lord ; however Rahab the harlot and all whom she 
hath in the house save alive.”" After the same 
fashion the divine Samuel also said to Saul about 
Amalek : “ And thou shalt destroy and make anathema 
him and all that he hath, and shalt not spare him : 
and thou shalt slay from man unto woman : from 
babe unto suckling : and from ox unto sheep : and 
from camel unto ass.” 3 Wherefore also Moses to 
the words cited shortly before from Leviticus adds 
these expressions which distinguish this other kind 
of anathema as we said : “ And every anathema which 
shall be set apart by men shall not be redeemed, but 
shall surely die.”4 The anathema therefore that is 
laid upon those who transgress against the divine 
ordinances, or commandments or commands, is of the 
p. 459- second kind, the anathema which ordains death to the 
man who transgresses or sins. But death is separation 
from God. For God is life. Accordingly it follows 


1 Judith xvi. 19. 
3 1 R. xv. 3. 


2 Josh. vi. 1 7. 

4 Le. xxvii. 29. 


VIII- 4- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


407 


that death also is deprivation of life, and it consists in 
our being separated and removed from God. Into 
this kind of anathema Paul also cast those who preach 
to us contrary to what we ourselves have received : 
and he said in the epistle to the Galatians, “ But, 
even if we or an angel from heaven preach unto you 
contrary to what we preached unto you, let him be 
anathema. As we have said before, I say now also 
again : if any man preach to you contrary to what 
ye received, let him be anathema.”1 In the 
first epistle to the Corinthians also he wrote in 
a similar fashion : “If any man loveth not our Lord, 
let him be anathema.”1' However he that tramples 
upon an anathema decrees against him double and 
manifold death, and he is alien to the blessed call¬ 
ing and name of Christians : whence by transgress¬ 
ing against the pronouncements of the laws that hold 
the church of God together he becomes disobedient 
to the church : and the man who becomes disobedient 
to the church our Saviour and Lord and God Jesus i>. 460. 
Christ in the Gospels consigned to the lot of the 
nations, saying, “ But, if he also hear not the church, 
let him be unto thee as a Gentile and as a tax- 
gatherer.”3 In general therefore an anathema is a 
separation. For it separates the man who is guilty 
and is removed from God’s people, as is said by Isaiah, 

“ Let not a foreigner that is nigh unto the Lord say, 

The Lord shall then separate me from His peopled ” 4 


1 Ga. i. 8, 9. 


2 1 Co. xvi. 22. 


3 Mt. xviii. 17. 


4 Is. lvi. 3. 
27 


408 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VIII. 4. 


But the word “ separation ” is also used when a man is 
separated for a time from ministering, or from com- 
municatinor in the sacrifice that is offered. 

o 

Question two. “ Men who cut off their own members 
are rejected by the great synod : with the qualification 
that it grants remission to those who have suffered this 
at the hands of masters or of barbarians, or by reason 
of disease, or some other imperative caused This is 
manifest to those who look at the canon : but for the sake 
of a searching investigation let a case in point ‘d such as 
this be presupposed. A certain man among those with 
us, who had worn the monastic habit from his childhood, 
p. 461. as soon as he began to reach physical puberty, fearing 
the enticements of nature, and thinking that he was 
doing a great thing, did not consider the consequences 
beforehand : but, being deceived by ignorance or by 
enthusiasm, cut off his own members without his 
superiors having knowledge of it. At the time he 
underwent many punishments for his presumption : 
but, when he attained to manhood, he adopted a very 
devout mode of life, giving himself up to fasts and to 
the singing of psalms accompanied by many tears, and 
shunning women and bringing his body into subjection 
by abstinence ; though it is for the sake of these 
thino-s that those who cut off their own members 
generally fall into this audacity, since they then 
associate with women without suspicion, and expect 
thenceforward to minister to their belly without dis- 


1 Mansi ii. 668. 


- {’7ro#e<ri9. 


VIII. 4- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


409 


crimination. But the man whose case we are con¬ 
sidering is not of this kind. He is temperate in all 
things : his hand is unsparing in deeds of mercy : and 
his whole life he is, if one may so say, mourning for 
the presumptuous deed that he committed against 
himself: and so much so that he is often brought even 

o 

to despair. But some bid him despair of grace, and 
say that the sum of his many labours is useless to him. 
Wherefore, even though after his audacious act he 
was admitted first to the diaconate then to the 
presbyterate, he is in distress because he has learned 
that this is forbidden by the canons. Therefore let 
your God-inspired wisdom explain to us what ought 
to be thought about men who so conduct themselves, 
or what is the penitence proper for these, and what is 
the benefit derived from that penitence, and whether 
the hopes of these men are vain, and they have no 
expectation of salvation, and in this matter only the 
power of penitence is weak, seeing that, not even 
when he is penitent for what he has done, and weeps 
constantly and wears himself out with supplication, is 
he to expect forgiveness for the sins committed : or if 
his upright life and sincere penitence are enough to 
blot out the presumption of the deed ; and if he should 
continue to hold his axia or function, or must inevitably 
be stripped of this, being expelled by the canons?” 

Answer. The decision and answer upon this question 
is manifest. If a man who has cut off his own crenital 
members and destroyed them was to have forgiveness, 
be it on the ground of ignorance or immature age, or 


p. 462. 


• 463. 


410 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VIII. 4. 


fear, or a devout life after the presumptuous deed and 
evil act, the exactitude of the canons, pronounced as 
they were through the inspiration of the divine Spirit, 
by the holy apostles and by the saintly shepherds who 
were after them, would have foreseen it. The twenty- 
first canon of the Constitutions 1 published to the nations 
by the apostles through Clement speaks thus : “ Let 
not a man who has mutilated himself become a clergy¬ 
man. For he is a self-slayer, and an enemy of God’s 
p- 464. creation.” And the twenty-second canon also speaks 
thus : “ If a man being a clergyman shall mutilate 
himself, let his deprivation be effected. For he is a 
slayer of himself.” Next follows the twenty-third 
canon also, which says these words : “ Let a layman 
who has mutilated himself be separated for three years. 
For he is an offender against his own life.”'2 The 
first canon also of the great synod of the three hundred 
and eighteen holy men, of which the question also 
made mention, proclaimed principles consonant with 
the declarations of these apostolic constitutions,1 placing 
those who have cut off their own members outside the 
whole clergy, even those who have already been 
admitted to any kind of ordination. For it spoke 
thus : “ But, if any man being sound in health has 
cut off his own members, this man even if enrolled 
in the clergy must be set aside. And henceforth 
no such man ought to be presented.”3 But the 
p. 465. practice of penitence prepares those who have com- 


1 SiaTa^cis. 


2 Mansi i. 33. 


3 Id. ii. 668. 


VIII. 4- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 411 


mitted this presumption for forgiveness in respect 
of the sins committed, in order that they may not 
fail to attain the expected life and the kingdom of 
heaven. 

But, if any man thinks penitence profitless, and 
fancies that this is feeble, because it does not contrary 
to the intention of the holy canons introduce into the 
clergy a man who has cut off his own members, and 
restore him to the sacred ministry, he misses the right 
conception. No one is blamed on that dreadful day 
of judgment because he was not a clergyman, but be¬ 
cause he did not produce fruits worthy of penitence. 
A man who is sincerely penitent and conscious of his 
own position, even if he is a man free from every 
canonical impediment that might prevent him from 
officiating as a priest and ministering, shuns such an 
honour. In facta man does not take “honour unto 
himself, but by being called of God, as also was 
Aaron ” \ as said the apostle Paul in the epistle to the 
Hebrews. The ninth canon also makes these general 

o 

provisions about those who have fallen under canonical 
impediments and been presented to the priesthood : 
“If any have been presented as presbyters without 
examination, and when examined have confessed the 
sins committed by them, and after they have confessed 
any men being moved in a direction contrary to the 
canon have laid a hand upon them, such men the 
canon does not accept. For the catholic church 


. 466. 


1 He. v. 4. 


412 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VIII. 4. 


requires blamelessness To the same object the tenth 
canon also is directed. 

These things I for my part have considered and 
written down in answer to the questions sent me by 
your believing wisdom ; not as one who has high 
thoughts (far be it !), and who exalts himself above 
those who sin ; but I have poured forth a flood of 
sympathetic tears over the sinners, and I also am clad 
in weakness of flesh, as the Apostle somewhere says ; 2 
and of necessity as well as in consequence my speech 
has borrowed the exactitude of the canons, and has 
uttered their words ; to listen to which and delight one¬ 
self even for a short time in this transitory life that 
flits away sooner than a dream is a cause of great and 
unending joy, and of the exaltation of the angels and 
p. 467. the festival of the spirits above, and of ineffable bliss. 

May the holy Unity in Trinity, for that is our God, 
keep your believing wisdom : while you increase in 
zeal for the orthodox faith, and bear troubles for its 
sake with firmness, and walk blamelessly in the 
evangelic commandments ; and may It admit you to 
the future endless life in the kingdom of heaven, 
through the prayers of all the saints, Amen ! The end. 


1 Mansi ii. 672. 


2 Ga. iv. 13. 


VIII. 5- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


413 


5. Of the same to Andrew the reader and notary. 
(. From those after banishment , from the gth book 
the 61 st, 51 st letter. ) 

The letter of your devoutness which has now been 
brought, I received on the last day of the month ot 
July, on which was the commemoration of the saintly 
Timothy, who was archbishop of the city of the 
Alexandrines, who completed a long residence in 
exile after the manner of a martyr, and of King 
Theodosius the younger, piously deceased, who in zeal 
and in the maturity of his intellect surpassed all who 
reigned before him : to whose prayers I also ascribed 
the receipt of the letter, since I had been expecting it 
for many days, and I was disturbed by various 
anxieties, and I was anxious lest it too had been 
overlooked and lost. 

And after other things. As to John the scribe 
who threw himself into a river and departed trom this 
life, I am in doubt, and I have no sure decision to 
give. Know that since the times of Christ’s coming 
in the flesh we find in church histories that this is 
allowed to women, to remove themselves I mean from 
this life, and throw themselves on to rocks or into 
water : on account of the weakness of their nature, 
and the fact that they are exposed to double danger, 
that of the pollution of the body I mean, and that of 
denial of the faith : but in the case of men we have 
nowhere known this principle to have been accepted or 


537. 


p. 468. 


414 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VIII. 5. 


sanctioned. But it is written about one of the holy 
Maccabean martyrs that the torturers thought he was 
drawing back, and that he was showing siens of 
change : and upon their releasing him for a short time 
he leaped upon the implements of torment glowing 
from the fire and the instruments1 of torture, and 
separated his soul from his body and flew to heaven.2 

Therefore, what has thus happened must certainly 
be judged according to the disposition 3 of his heart 
and the character of the words that John said. 

But may the God of mercy, who desires our 
salvation rather than our destruction, grant him the 
portion of those that are saved! Indeed the holy 
John the bishop not only treats such a death as a 
subject of praise in the case of the holy Pelagia the 
p. 469- martyr, but also pronounces a festal discourse over 
three other women, I mean Domnina and Prosdocia 
and Berenice, who by reason of the urgent dangers to 
which they were exposed threw themselves into the 
waves of the Euphrates.4 Eusebius also in his 

Church History recorded acts like these on the part of 
females.5 

And after other things. But you did well in 
sending is a or copies of the synodical letter and of the 
other letter to those in the East, for their comfort and 
establishment in the faith. 

And again after other things. But the fact that 


1 opyava. 2 4 M. xii. 20. 3 Sia#eo-i9. 

4 P. G. xlix. 579, 629. 5 H. E. viii. 12. 


VIII. 5* SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


415 


you have continued to reside at Alexandria we also 
regard as the effect of great prayer, although I am in 
no small degree weary, since I write letters to everyone 
with my own hands, and fill the place of a notary, and 
l am moreover annoyed at the confusion of the letters, 
since my handwriting is ill-regulated, although the 
recipients of them are good believers. If you are 
obliged to come to us, seek the lord James the man of 
the counts retinue (P),1 and he will appear before you 
more quickly than words can express, and with God s 
help you will be free from care in other things. 

And again after other things. But as for those who, 
after knowing of the death of the wicked Gaian, hold 
assemblies in which a dead service is performed in his 
name, and commit impieties like those of the heathen, 
who celebrate symbolic services in honour of dead men p. 470 
as of gods, it is quite clear that some divine wrath of no 
gentle kind will come upon them in common, as may 
be inferred from the divine scriptures. But may God 
grant them to be roused from their error, and to be 
converted from their recklessness while there is time! 

As to the passage in the letter addressed to father John 
the son of Aphthonia which you say was a difficulty to 
you, it is a perfectly recognised construction, and it 
oufflit not after such lonor consideration to have baffled 

o o 

you. After the conjunction “indeed" the conjunction 
“ but ” is used, either immediately, or after other things 


1 This perhaps represents Ko/xmavos; or we might render “of 
Beth Kumis 


416 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. VIII. 5. 


that have been said in a parenthesis : as is also to be 
seen clearly apparent in the place that was a 
difficulty to you. It stands thus: “And let these 
things indeed be both conceived and understood in 
this way : and let them keep us away indeed from 
things that are evil, but let them lead us to the hope of 
things that are excellent." If we inquire into things 
that are so well recognised, it will even give rise to an 
accusation of foolish speaking among those who are 
versed in outside learning. Such constructions may 
be found plentifully used, both in every one of the 
ancients, and in the holy fathers. For such a 
construction is a piece of fine and artistic composition. 
For instance, an expression of the holy Basil, taken 
from the letter to Amphilochius about the Holy Spirit, 
follows so to speak in the very track and confirms what 
P* 471. I say. “Therefore the names indeed are of exalted 
nature and great like these, and names that have not 
indeed any excess of glory. But of what kind are the 
operations? Ineffable indeed on account of their 
greatness, but innumerable on account of their 
abundance.”1 You notice, I think, how the doctor 
after saying “Therefore the names indeed are like 
these,” again employed another conjunction “indeed”, 
saying “names that have not indeed any excess of 
glory.” But this clause is a parenthesis, and the 
sentence composed by him fits together as if it had 
never been inserted at all : as if he had said, “ There - 


1 De Sp. S. 48, 49 (P. G. xxxii. 156). 


IX. I. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


417 


fore the names indeed are of exalted nature and great 
like these. But of what kind are the operations? 
Ineffable indeed on account of their greatness, but 
innumerable on account of their abundance. Since 
this book was found lying at hand by me, I have 
quoted this to you from it. If it had not been so, as I 
said before, one may find similar constructions like 
showers of rain in every book. Not the end . 


p. 472* 

IX. Ninth section.1 About baptisms performed in 513-8. 
time of necessity by deacons or by laymen ; 
and about men as to whom there is doubt 
whether they have been baptized or not. 

1. Of the same to the fathers. (From those during 
episcopacy , from the 6th book the \th letter.) 

/Eneas and Zacharias the devout deacons, and 
Elijah the devout monk, who have obtained a testi¬ 
monial from you, of which I also was not unaware, 
have been admitted by the Holy Spirit, the two former 
to the honour and second seat of the presbyterate, 
the last to the rank of the deacons, and to the status 
of the diaconate. I would that all were like these, 
men who are advanced to this position with a good 


1 TtVA.05. 


418 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. IX. I. 


and sound testimonial, and because they are called by 
reason of being needed, and do not put themselves 
voluntarily forward out of unseemly ambition and self- 
will. And after other things. But those who re¬ 
ceived the name of clergymen from Gregory 1 the 
follower of 1 heodotus the Re-anointer2 must in all 
points and by all means be reckoned among laymen. 
However, in the case of those who have been admitted 
to baptism by them, let no one say that they must be 
f- 473- enrolled among the unbaptized. In fact we hear that 
many when beset by a storm at sea, or by other press¬ 
ing circumstances of a similar kind, in order not to 
miss the invocation, have conferred baptism upon them¬ 
selves, either with their own hands or with the assist¬ 
ance of others who however were laymen, the rite 
being made complete for them by the invocation, and 
the anointing with the holy chrism 3 being added after¬ 
wards : although it is a matter of presumption for us 
to say anything decisive in such cases, and not to speak 
by way of investigation and consideration. 

As to the follower of Isaiah the Armenian,4 let him 
not even be named, a man who like Dathan and 
Abiram rose not against Moses but against the high- 
priestly chrism, and wished not so much to be as to be 
called that which he also coveted. About him one 
might find many things to say, a man who, besides 
his illegal pretence in contravention of the canons, 


1 Cf p. 208 ff. 

■’ fJLVf)OV. 


2 Cf. p. 185. 

4 Cf. p. 208 ff. and P. G. lxxxvi. 45. 


IX. I. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


419 


has also committed the very serious sin of oath- 
breaking, not once but twice also and thrice and many 
times, and instead of the character of oath-keeping has 
gained that of oath-breaking. And no wonder. In 
fact in the times of the holy Timothy also they say that 
Cyrus the simple thus arose suddenly and out of self-will 
and fatuously pretended to hold the high-priesthood, 
and perished together with this drunken supposition. 

And again aftei' other things. You write also 
about the bishop of the city of the men of Berytus, 
finding fault with the indiscriminating character 
of his clergymen ; and you are unaware that he 
has in fact fallen into the nets of Eutyches and of 
Valentine, and of those who have contracted the dis¬ 
ease of the phantasy1 and deny the true Incarnation. 
He has had the infirmity latent in him all this Ion" 
time, and I do not know how it is that he has now 
brought it to light. For this reason also I have sent 
the religious presbyter and steward - Eusebius and the 
God-loving presbyter and entertainer of strangers 
Victor to the said city of the men of Berytus, in order 
to convert the man who has erred if he accepts correc¬ 
tion, or if he is contentious expose him by refutation, 
and subject him to the canons. This same man also 
admitted the man who was prelate of Scythopolis to 
honour after his decease, a man who was scarcely even 
a Christian as you yourselves also know, thus commit¬ 
ting a deed full of all folly and without discrimination. 


1 c fiavTa<TLa . 


2 oikoj'o/xo?. 


p. 474. 


420 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. IX. 2. 


Wherefore also I meet with daily deaths, since I fight 
and strive with greater severity with those who are 
thought to be catholics than with those outside. For 
everyone who sins and receives any kind of admonition 
arms himself for strife and battle. And again after 
other things. But I beg- that the letter be also read as 
usual to the saintly presbyter Zoninus and Irenaeus 
p* 475- and Zenobius and Eubulus and the rest. Through 
the persons mentioned, who appropriate the super¬ 
scription, this epistle was addressed to their love of 
God also ; and through you I greet all the God-loving 
fathers and brothers who are with you, and I ask to 
have your God-beseeming prayers, given with great 
earnestness. The end. 


513-8. 2. Of the same to Theodore bishop of Olbe. (From 
those during episcopacy , from the gih book the 8th 
letter. ) 

The questions asked by your love of God no one 
will be able to decide, from the written laws of divine 
scripture, or from the spiritual constitutions 1 of those 
who at one time and another instructed the holy 
churches. To some extent it seems to be a dangerous 
thing for us to say anything at all on such matters. 
But again, on account of the importance of the question 
and its bearing on salvation, I considered it an im- 


1 


IX. 2. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


421 


pious thing to hide in silence what has come to my 
knowledge without written source, and not make it 
clear to your sanctity. You say in fact that one of 
the barbarian slaves bought with money, after com¬ 
municating in the communion of the divine mysteries 
as a baptized man, after this said that he did not know 
at all whether he had been admitted to the laver of 
regeneration. 

Know that I heard some old Alexandrine monks, 
whose mind has been trained by long asceticism, tell 
the following story. In the great city on the day 
called that of the recipients (thus in accordance with 
the custom of the country they name what we call 
“first baptisms”), a great multitude having as usual 
thronged together, especially of little babies at the 
breast, and being admitted to the divine grace it so 
happened that two women were in doubt about their 
infants, whether that of the one or that of the other 
had been baptized ; for there had in fact been an 
interchange, and the two babes had been received, 
and it was already manifest that one had been admitted 
to the laver of forgiveness, while the other had not 
passed through the rite ; only it was not known which 
of them it was. This came to the ears of the holy 
Cyril the teacher of exact orthodoxy who at that time 
adorned the high-priestly seat ; and, taking the two 
infants, by the inspiration of the wisdom from above, 
he dipped them in the life-giving water, speaking over 
them as follows: “He that has not been baptized is 
baptized in the name of the Father and of the Son and 


p. 476. 


• 477- 


422 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. IX. 2 


of the Holy Spirit”; and so he settled the point that 
was in doubt. I remember that in the holy monastery 
of father Romanus of saintly memory also, which is 
situated in Palestine, that a certain monk, who by race 
was an Ethiopian, after he had for a long time com¬ 
municated in the sacred mysteries, since he was also 
counted in the order of those who had taken upon 
them the solitary life, upon seeing certain persons 
baptized there, thinking that he had seen a strange 
sight, secretly confessed to one of the brothers that 
he had not been admitted to the divine laver. And 
the man who was at that time archimandrite of the 
said monastery (this was Eupraxius the holy old man), 
fearing lest perhaps, if he were baptized, some might 
fasten the stigma of men who re-baptize upon them, 
informed the prelate of the city of the men of Beth 
Gabrin of what had then happened : and he concluded 
and judged that the brother who was unbaptized ought 
p. 478. to be admitted to holy baptism. This action was very 
right, and not outside the scope of the divine laws 
of the Holy Spirit. For, since our Lord plainly 
decreed and said to Nicodemus, “Verily verily I say 
unto thee ; unless a man be born of water and the 
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God,” 1 it 
is absolutely necessary to follow the safe course, and 
to use the holy Cyril’s expression and say, “ So-and-so 
is baptized if he has not been baptized, in the name 
of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit.” 


1 John iii. 5. 


IX. 3- SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


423 


I" or in fact by ineffable graciousness the immanent 
power of the Holy Spirit baptizes at the word of the 
baptizer and accompanies it. For the wise Paul also 
says that we are cleansed “ by the laver of water by the 
word,” and so put off every spot and wrinkle of sin.1 
This power He who became poor for our sake gave p.479 
to those that perform priestly functions, in order that 
we ‘'through his poverty might be rich ; 2 and He 
said also to the holy apostles, and to those who 
succeeded these afterwards, “Verily I say unto you, 
all things that ye shall bind on earth shall be bound 
in heaven , and all things that ye shall loose on earth 
shall be loosed in heaven. ” I his same power He also 
named “ the keys of the kingdom of heaven.” 3 There¬ 
fore with the knowledge of these things direct your 
steps to that which it is right to do, and follow the 
safe course as I said before, not as by stealth and with 
fear, but “with open face”:4 because “we are not of 
fear that leadeth unto perdition, but of faith that 

gaineth the soul, ■’ as the same wise Paul a°ciin 

& 

somewhere says. The end. 


3. Of the same to Theda the countess, from those 519-38 
after banishment , from the $rd book the 53rd 
letter. ) 

I he letter of reminder that was given by your magni¬ 
ficence to the learned and believing grammarian Stephen 

3 Mt. xviii. 18, 19. 

28 


1 Eph. v. 26, 27. 
4 2 Co.i ii. 18. 


1 2 Co. viii. 9. 
b He. x. 39. 


424 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. IX. 3. 


p. 480. 


showed me by the reading of it that still even now you 
remain that I hecla whom Theotecnus the presbyter, 
who is in all things steadfast and religious, would 
depict to me in words of piety, tracing the likeness as 
in colours : who so much attracted me by his words that 
I was then the first to begin to write a letter to you. 
Wherefore also I confess myself indebted to God our 
Saviour that neither has his testimony which he bore on 
your behalf been falsified, nor my faith in your God- 
loving modesty which I then gained. T he devoutness 
of your character is shown by the fact that your own 
judgment was not enough for you, and you had not con¬ 
fidence enough to presume to things to which it is not 
proper to presume before being confirmed by a lawful 
utterance of high-priests. And now you are blessed on 
account of your praiseworthy fear, by the text of the 
sacred writings that says, “ Blessed is he that feareth 
everything through devoutness.” 1 Further praise I 
assign to you from the divine law also which ordered 
a man in disputed causes, and that while the service 
consisting in shadowy things and types yet prevailed, to 
repair to the place where the Levites and priests dwelt, 
and the judge who had the headship over all things at 
that time, and from them obtain a solution ol the doubt. 
It is good and very beneficial to quote in the letter the 
words of the law itself, which are as follows : “ But, 
if any matter be too hard for thee in judgment, be¬ 
tween blood and blood, and between judgment and 


1 Pr. xxviii. 14. 


IX. 3. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 425 


judgment, and between stroke and stroke, and between 
reviling and reviling, words of judgment in your cities, 
thou shalt arise and go up to the place which the Lord 
God shall choose for His name to be called there : and 
thou shalt go in unto the priests the Levites and unto 
the judge that shall be in those days, and they shall 
inquire and show thee thy judgment : and thou shalt 
do according to the commandment which they shall 
pronounce to thee that are from the place which the 
Lord thy God shall choose for His name to be called 
there . and thou shalt observe well to do according to 

hi* £5 

all things that shall be ordained for thee. According 
to the law and according to the judgment which they 
shall pronounce to thee do : thou shalt not decline from 
the sentence \\ hich they shall pronounce to thee, neither 
to the right hand, nor to the left.” 1 I he intention of 
these expressions of the law you have fulfilled in actual 
deed, both by feeling intelligent doubt, and by referrin0* 

i . ' o 

the question as to the doubt to the pronouncement of the 
high-priests, in that you have stated that a certain baby, 
having been seized with severe illness, and having al- 
ready reached the very gates of death, was sent to a 
prayer house building to receive the laver of regenera¬ 
tion, and the communion of the divine light ; and, it so 
happening that the presbyter of that place was not 
there, you say that the deacon by reason of the urgency 
of the case dipped the boy in the water of life, and 
performed the legal ceremony ; and after the action 


p. 4S1. 


1 De. xvii. 8-1 1. 


426 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. IX. 3. 


the presbyter came and complained of what had been 
done as unlawful, and sought to subject the deacon to 
punishment. For it was doubted among you whether 
the boy who was baptized received the perfect grace. 

You must know that in matters that are doubtful 
482. and rarely occur one cannot find broad statutes . since 
those who made the statutes took care to avoid 
o-ivino- occasion through absence of restraint for the 
rules of strictness to be corrupted. Therefore con¬ 
cerning this problem 1 also and concerning its rareness 
it is written in the Constitutions “ or in the Commands 
of the Apostles, which they named the Testament3 of 
the Lord, that a deacon also may administer the laver 
of regeneration when a presbyter is not present, by 
reason of the imminence of the necessary end of death : 
this same rare observance being proclaimed in these 
words: “In case of necessity, if a presbyter is not 
present, let a deacon baptize ”.4 Therefore the presbyter 
did well in paying attention to what was done by the 
deacon out of necessity, and performing the ceremonies 
that follow baptism, and laying upon the boy who had 
been baptized the anointing with the holy chrism,5 and 
the seal of the perfection that results from this. 

As to the other question about the other strange and 
. 483. unknown boy who could not repeat any mystic symbol, 
by which you might have been able to learn whether he 
is a believer or an unbeliever, as not having received 


1 7rpora(m. 

4 Test. Dom. ii. 10. 


2 Sia/ra^cis. 

3 fxvpov. 


3 Sia OrjKT). 


X. i. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


427 


the laver of regeneration, a letter has been written by me 
to the God-loving bishop Theodore of a certain city in 
Isauria named Olbe,1 and I have determined to quote 
the same to you at the end of this letter, as being 
sufficient to provide you with a solution of the doubt. 

May you be preserved to us, noble God-loving 
woman, who show your strict practice regarding faith 
in God even by the questions which you ask in doubt ! 
That strictness continue to keep till your last breath : 
for “ without faith it is impossible to please ” 2 says the 
Apostle. The end. 


X. Tenth section/1 About a man who has a wife and 
children and wishes to become a monk : and 
the same also about women, and about the 
marriage of these. 


l Of the sa??ie to Alypius . ( From those before episco¬ 
pacy, from the 3rd book the 257th letter .) 

In many instances, when it was necessary for some 
sanction to be given to an action, I have known your 
illustriousness to set great store by the judgments of 
my erring and uncertain mind, as I persuade myself 
that it is. 

And after other things. You certainly, I think, 

i^* 2. - He. xi. 6. ^ tlt\ 05. 


490-512. 


p. 4S4. 


428 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


X. I. 


remember that I engaged in a discussion with you 
about your consort, whom, having been struck by 
some unexpected suspicion, you drove from your 
house, and acted like men whose marriage has been 
dissolved, not even giving her the necessary susten¬ 
ance ; and how I quoted to you the laws of the Lord 
and God and Saviour of all, that men are not per¬ 
mitted to put away those that cohabit with them 
under any other conditions except for one reason, I 
mean that of fornication ; and fornication we judge 
to be that which is manifestly detected, and demon¬ 
strated by witnesses or manifest proofs, so that, if 
any suspicion otherwise occur, we do not define this 
as fornication : but rather we turn the supposition into 
a gentler channel. For “ in matters that are in doubt 
we must incline to clemency,” as the Theologian 
Gregory says.1 I have indeed gained sure knowledge 
that the woman is not liable to charges of fornication 
so much as to going out freely. But such a thing as 
this invites you to forgiveness, and does not give you 
cause for separation. But, if you are strict in requir- 
p. 4S5. ing modest conduct, know clearly that you are com¬ 
manded to practise the same observance towards your 
wife as you wish her to practise towards yourself. 
Christ our lawgiver speaking through Paul said, 
“The wife hath not power over her body: but the 
husband : and in the same fashion the husband also 
hath not power over his body : but the wife. J Re- 


1 Or. xxi. 15. 


2 1 Co. vii. 4. 


X. I. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


429 


fleet therefore whether you also have never been 
discovered to have been seduced by the pleasures of 
the body. But why do I say “ pleasures ” ? Whether 
you have not in curiosity gratified your eye with 
greedy gazing, making yourself in no lovely fashion 
a spectator of another’s loveliness ; the eye which 
the divine word condemns to be plucked out, in order 
that it may not bring eternal torture upon the whole 
body : 1 whether you have not relaxed under the in¬ 
fluence of the touch : whether you have not indulged 
the sense of smell : whether your ears have never 
taken delight in dissolute songs : whether you have 
kept all your senses untainted. He that is a strict 
examiner of the doings of others shall have the same 
judgment exacted from him in the case of his own 
sins also. If “the head of the wife is the husband,’’2 
how is he to find fault with the rest of his body as 
being diseased, when he himself is not in sound 
health ? 

And again after ' other things. And many think 
in the case of a man that when he sins with his bodv 
he deserves forgiveness, but a woman deserves to be 
afflicted with grievous punishments. But this is not 
so: but exactly the contrary. For scripture says that p.486. 
a woman shall be admitted to forgiveness, inasmuch 
as she is the “weaker vessel”:3 but a man, inasmuch 
as he holds the place of head, must be an example to 
the other members of the same body. Therefore be 


3 1 Pe. iii. 7. 


1 Mt. v. 29. 


2 1 Co. xi. 3. 


430 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


X. i. 


not merciless or hard to your member, if you obey 
Christ’s laws ; and do not apply amputation and cut 
it off from you : but claim it as part of your body, 
in order that Christ, the Word of God, who out of 
graciousness became head to the body of the church 
that was infirm, may claim you also as part of Him. 
If He raised human nature, which had committed 
fornication, to heaven by showing Himself as man 
upon earth, what terrible thing shall we think our¬ 
selves to be doing, if we show ourselves gentle to our 
own members, or rather if we are not found to be 
harsh to them beyond what is right, and that when they 
are not committing unpardonable sins? In fact Christ 
plainly proclaims to us that we ought not casually 
and lightly to cut off her who has been united to us 
in one flesh through trusting vain suspicions: and He 
says that separation was introduced into the polity 1 or 
social life by Moses on account of our own hardness of 
heart: but ‘‘from the beginning it was not so,” He 
proclaims to the discerning." 

How therefore, tell me, shall we ourselves have for¬ 
giveness, when we do not conduct ourselves, I do not 
say according to the gospel laws, but not even accord¬ 
ing to the figurative laws used by Israel who conducted 
p.487. himself according to the flesh and was a child? For 
such statutes were given to them in the Book of 
Numbers by Moses, or rather by God who gave the 
statute to Moses. He says that, if a man say that his 


1 7roXtreta. 


2 Mt. xix. 5-9. 


X. I. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


431 


wife has committed adultery, and do not find her doing 
this evidently, or be able to prove the act by witnesses, 
but is excited by the rage of jealousy, that he shall 
commit such judgment to God : and that he shall 
approach the priests of his time, not entering a suit 
of jealousy, but offering “a sacrifice of jealousy.’’ And 
look, I pray, at the principle that is carried out in the 
sacrifice, how even before the actual methods of con¬ 
viction are used it defends the woman. Whereas it 
was the custom for fine wheaten llour to be offered in 
sacrifice, he commanded barley meal to be offered on 
her behalf, signifying by the barley the falseness and 
futility of jealous suspicion : but neither shall oil (he 
says) be poured over the sacrifice, on account of the 
asperity and unkindness of the occasion : and, when 
the sacrifice has been performed in this way, and the 
rest of the sacred rite has been duly accomplished, 
then the woman shall drink the water of conviction, 
the priest having first prayed over the same water, and 
shall either repel the evil suspicion from her by suffer¬ 
ing no evil in her body, or shall be found to be guiltv 
of the charges, and fall into God’s hands by her belly 
being rent and the penalty for the deeds that have 
been done paid by her on the spot.1 Wherefore have 
I repeated this to you ? That you may learn that we 
also ought not to entrust the judgment upon this 
matter to ourselves, but to refer everything to our 
sacrifice which is Christ. He is no liar who said that 


1 Xu. v. 12-31. 


% 


p. 488. 


432 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


X. I. 


unless our “ righteousness exceed that of the scribes 
and of the Pharisees ” we shall not “ enter into the king¬ 
dom of heaven L1 Therefore both according to the 
old law and according to the gospel polity,2 where 
the suspicion is not clear, let us not take ourselves 
but God as the judge of these things. And we 
must obey Paul who gives wiser advice than we 
do. He says, “ Therefore judge nothing before the 
time, until the Lord come and make light the hidden 
things of darkness, and reveal the counsels of the 
hearts ; and then shall every man have praise from 
God.” 3 

That you have just cause for making the charge we 
are clearly persuaded : but that the woman has not 
offended beyond forgiveness I think you have already 
been persuaded by what has been written. But, if 
this does not persuade, we say this. She has sinned, 
she has done all that is evil as you have said, she has 
recognized her sin, she confesses that she is guilty, she 
weeps and groans, she takes refuge in your mercy, she 
begs your clemency ; seize the opportunity. Commit 
yourself to God : prepare pity for yourself by showing 
pity. You also being a man are certainly in need 
of mercy. Look at common nature. Consider the 
p.489. instability of human things. We are certainly not 
walking upon ground that is firm and not to be 
shaken. Let us expect ourselves also to fall, and let 
us set upright those that have fallen. The saying 


" 7ToA.lT€ltt. 


1 Mt. v. 20. 


3 1 Co. iv. 5. 


X. 2. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


433 


is not mine : “ Let him that thinketh he standeth take 
heed lest he fall,”1 says divine scripture. Not the 
end. 


2. Of the same in the person of Abba on behalf o/ 489-508. 
brother Maximus , to a certain woman. ( From 
those before episcopacy , from the ist book the 
272 nd letter.) 

I have asked our holy father Abba about that 
question as requested in your modesty’s epistle, and I 
have received a complete answer from him. He said 
that those who have once been united in marriage, 
seeing that marriage “is honourable and the bed 
unsullied,” 2 ought not to desire to separate from one 
another by reason of religion except where there is 
consent. For the divine Apostle says, “ Deprive not 
one another, except it be by consent for a time, in 
order that ye may give yourselves up to prayer, and 
again come together.” For the same said above that 

O o 

it is the husband who has power over the wife’s body, 
and, vice versa , that it is the wife who has power over 
the husband’s body : saying, “ The wife hath not 
power over the body but the husband : and in the 
same fashion the husband also hath not power over 
his body, but the wife.”3 It is therefore manifest that, p 490. 
unless the husband consents, the wife who separates 
has no forgiveness, and she makes herself a cause of 


1 Id. x. 12. 2 He. xiii. 4. :5 1 Co. vii. 4, 5. 


434 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


X. 2„ 


his turning aside to fornication. If then your husband 
consents, you are permitted to place yourself under 
the yoke of piety : there is no one who will find fault 
with so praiseworthy and admirable a choice. But, if 
the husband cannot restrain his body, and therefore 
will not permit you to do this, put up with the mar¬ 
riage-state : such intercourse that saves the husband 
is better than an abstinence from pleasures that is 
unknown to the canons. The aim of divine scripture 
not in this only but in everything else too regards not 
the person of him who has obtained mercy, but that 
of h im who is infirm : and it especially wishes th$.t 
those who are strong shall condescend to those who lie 
on the earth. It does not accept the man who regards 
his own interest only, but the man who rather treats 
his neighbour’s interest as if it were his own profit. 
So therefore in this present case also it is pleasing to 
God that both of you should attain and win the goal 
of purity consisting in continence : but, if the inclina¬ 
tions of your husband’s will do not accord with your 
own readiness, the laws of holy scripture judge the 
marriage-state to be better, in order that they may 
gain you both. This we say on the assumption that 
the husband wishes to live chastely, and restricts the 
pleasures that cannot be restrained to intercourse with 
his wife only. But, if he goes beyond what is right, 
p. 491- and does not keep the marriage unsullied, but associates 
with other women also after the manner of a beast, 
then the wife incurs no danger by neglecting such a 
man, and giving the preference to the excellent state. 


X. 2. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


435 


and taking no account of the marriage, but soaring on 
piety’s wing, and turning her eyes to the solitary life, 
and keeping her holiness of mind and of body always 
unsullied. 

This also our said holy father further laid down, 
saying that, although the husband be living chastely, 
being content to have intercourse with you only, but 
you have already chosen for yourself to live among 
virgins, and have included yourself in their order, 
although the thing was not right in its beginning, for 
you ought not in fact to have left your husband while 
he was living chastely, yet still it is not seemly for you 
now to separate from the virgins, and give them also 
occasion for stumbling. It is to be feared lest, if you 
return to your husband, they also may imitate such a 
practice, and may defile God’s bridechamber after 
having been once united to Christ the heavenly Bride- 
groom. It is impiety of a high degree that after 
having been set apart to God they should prefer the 
corruptible intercourse rather than the immortal and 
heavenly connexion. But, if you have not yet lived 
with viroins, but onlv withdrawn from intercourse, 
according to the principle stated by us above act in 
common with the husband, and, if he does not consent, 
you ought to follow his inclination, and prefer the 
marriage-state to purity, because this is pleasing to 
God. 

But, if the husband does not desire intercourse with 
you, but wishes you to live within the house with the 
children who have been born to you from the common 


P- 492- 


436 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


X. 3. 


marriage even if they be males, this too is also accept¬ 
able to God. 

These things have been said as in a letter : but we 
think that in what we have written we have in no 
point failed to answer the question of your religiousness. 

This epistle has been addressed to you by our holy 
lather himself in his own very words ; for he was able 
to make his own spiritual mind clear without the great¬ 
ness of his divine thoughts being befouled by the 
squalor of my words. The end . 


508-11. 3. Of the same to Theodore the tribune and notary. 

(. From those before episcopacy , from the \th book 
the Sgth letter .) 

I think that I still see the torch 1 of the divine light 

o 

shining in you, under the influence of which you would 
have almost gone so far as to betake yourself to the 
philosophic life, had it not been that you restrained 
that tyrannical desire like some fiery steed by the bits 
of God’s laws. What are the bits ? “ Art thou bound 

to a wife? seek not release.” And again “Let every 
man in the calling wherein he was called therein 
abide.” And again, “ Deprive not one another, except 
p. 493- it be by consent for a time, in order that ye may give 
yourselves up to prayer, and again come together.”2 
If then you have by devout and God-loving conduct 
attached your spouse to the same zeal and yearning for 


1 \afA7rd8a. 


' i Co. vii. 27, 29, 5. 


SELECT LETTERS OE THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


437 


X. 3. 


the good life, fly, and withdraw to philosophy. But, if 
she has not attained to this excellence, and cleaves to the 
life here, and is unable to restrain the impulse of the 
flesh, seek not your own good but your fellow’s.1 The 
whole force of Christianity as well as the command¬ 
ment supporting the law and the prophets that says, 
“Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself,’’1 points to 
this : the commandment which the Lord above all 
fulfilled when He graciously showed Himself to us by 
His coming in the flesh, and He said “A new com¬ 
mandment I give unto you that ye love one another 
as I have loved you, that ye also may love one 
another ; and by this shall every man know that ye are 
my disciples, if ye love one another.” 1 How then shall 
we not offend against the laws of love, if we suffer the 
wife who has been reckoned to be one and the same flesh 
with us to perish ? for, just as no man of sense prays that 
his head may be sound, while his other members are 
afflicted with paralysis, or are filled with disease, (for the 
head also will certainly share in the malady), so it is not 
in accordance with sound understanding for us to con¬ 
cern ourselves about our own salvation, while we neglect 
our wife’s, when we shall on her account be brought to 
hell. Although in the Gospels with leaving father or 
mother or children there is also included without 
division the leaving of a wife,4 yet this must necessarily 
be subject to the later apostolic distinction. In fact in 


p. 494- 


1 Id. x. 24. 

3 John xiii. 34, 35. 


J Mt. xxii. 39, 40. 
4 Mt. xix. 29. 


'P- 495- 


438 SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. X. 3. 


external laws also, and in fine in every statute and 
conception general loose statements assuredly follow 
later distinctions. That the wise Paul understands 
the meaning of the Lord’s laws better than we do we 
shall admit even against our will. But let us not 
think it the wife’s consent if the wife permit the 
husband to go merely in order that he may betake 
himself to a life of continence, while she turns aside 
to the pleasure of worldly passions and a dissolute 
life ; but only if she choose the same continence and 
philosophy as the husband, or, if not this, at least 
chastity and purity. Indeed, when Paul permitted 
separation from society by consent, he used the plural, 
saying, “ in order that ye may give yourselves up to 
prayer,” and not “ in order that the husband alone may 
give himself up,” or contrariwise “the wife.” 

This epistle I have written to you in proportion to 
my poverty. If you obey this, you will obtain the 
reward for the choice of philosophy, and that for the 
education of your children, training them “ in the 
training and teaching of the Lord ”.1 

I forbear to say that you can also in all characters 
practise philosophy, seeing that you have a soul- 
possessing pillar of excellence in that sharer of your 
name and your belief and man of God : whom also I 
beg you greet. 

Who could voluntarily forget you, good couple that 
you are, the modesty of your character, the gentleness 


1 Eph. vi. 4. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


439 


X. 4. 


of your thoughts, your sadness, your cheerfulness ? 
For, while you are sad for piety’s sake, you yet also 
by God’s grace avoid wildbeastdike harshness, and 
you show the mercy of pity towards the needy and 
poor. Through you your father Asclepius of learned 
and illustrious memory also reaps a blessing, inasmuch 
as it was to form the material of your beneficence that 
he amassed the profits derived from law-courts. For 
alone, if I may so say, with few others he failed to 
conform to the passage of Koheleth that says, “ There 
is a sickness which I have seen under the sun, riches 
kept for him that springs from them to his hurt.”1 
Wherefore also you seem in your sleep to see him 
feasting when you are justified. Accordingly as one 
that is wise in the Lord take the same Koheleth as a 
good counsellor and “ all that thy hand findeth to do 
do according to thy might ” ; 2 and reverse the order, 
and feed your children by good works, and leave them 
to God as a patron. The end . 


4. Of the same to Conon the silent tary. ( From those 
before episcopacy , from the $rd book the 227th 
letter. ) 

John, the soldier of Christ, being ardent in every¬ 
thing, and fervent through abundance of faith, has 
thought fit to address an epistle to me containing a 


1 Ec. v. 12. 2 Id. ix. 10. 

29 


p. 496. 

508-11. 


440 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


X. 4. 


question that is overbold and passes beyond canonical 
limits about your modest daughter, and about those 
who are eager to take her in marriage. He gave 
in fact the names of those who are wooing her, and 
also in the name of your magnificence asked that the 
question might be brought before the holy old men, 
and before some of the women who have practised 
an ascetic life, in order that they may say to whom 
it is most fitting for the girl to be joined in marriage. 
But I, knowing that fathers who have the spirit of 
discretion turn deaf ears to such questions, in order 
that they may not seem to be bringing upon them¬ 
selves the reputation of soothsayers and charlatans, did 
not dare to write anything of the kind to them, lest 
perhaps I might even expose myself to sentence as 
an uninstructed person, for being clad in the philo¬ 
sophic and solitary garb and yet propounding to them 
questions suited for those that live in the world, which 
those attempt only out of compliance with the pleasure 
of those that ask, men who pass all their time in 
Byzantium, and often turn their attention even in- 
P. 497. voluntarily to such voluntary service,1 to use a scriptural 
expression. But we know a few ol the fathers who 
return answer, being stirred by God, and not by the 
questions or the propositions," but by abundant Spirit : 
of whom the sacred text says, “ Speech in the heart 
of a man is as deep water, and a flowing river and a 


1 Sebyanayuth dehlthci — iOeXoOprjcrKeLa (Col. ii. 23). I he text needs 

a slight emendation. 2 7rpoTdo-eis. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


441 


X. 4. 


fountain of life.”1 The wealth of grace is so to speak 
plentiful, and of its own accord it makes those that 
surround it outside share in any gift. If your great¬ 
ness had gone to some such men in order to visit 
them, you would perhaps at any rate have derived, 
not as the result of the question or of the proposition,2 
but as the product of such plentiful store, something 
that would have been of service for the solution of 
the question and the understanding of the present 
matter. 

As to those who have received such grace from God 

o 

let this suffice. But, since the utterance of our Saviour 
says in the Gospels, “ To every one that asketh thee 
give,”3 whether it be a gift pertaining to the intellect, 
or one pertaining to the senses, it is necessary for me 
also who see few things, and, far from being able to 
foresee or preconceive the future, do not even know 
what lies at hand, to say what my advice is. It is 
that you should give the girl who has been brought 
up by you in faith and in the love of God to that one 
among all her wooers who has the most correct and 
orthodox disposition as regards faith in Christ, and 
sets himself most earnestly to lead a devout and 
modest life: for this all other things also follow as in 
the second line. In fact He is no liar who said, 
“Seek first the kingdom of God and His righteous- 
ness, and all these things shall be added unto you” :4 
since to speak the truth it is indeed an abominable 


O / 


p. 498. 


1 Pr. xviii. 4. 


7rpora(ri<>. 


3 Lu. vi. 30. 


4 Mt. vi. 33. 


442 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


p. 499. 

513-8. 


X. 5. 


thing, and one that does not greatly gratify God, or 
perhaps even excites His wrath, for us to pass over 
manifest judgments as to what it is right to do, and 
facts from which God’s pleasure is especially to be 
seen, from whom everything whatsoever that is good 
comes down,1 and give directions by unknown things 
or by predispositions, and commit everything to 
revelations ; for some have even applied this meaning 
to the words, “ Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy 
God.”2 If you will turn your eyes towards the said 
object, and choose what it is right to do, you will 
not stray from the right course, seeing that you will 
obtain God as a surety for the future and for a good 
result. The Apostle also admonishes us saying, 
“Whatsoever ye do whether in word or in deed, 
do all in the name of our Lord Jesus, giving thanks 
to God and the Father through Him.”8 The end. 


5. Of the same to Theodore the Byzantine monk , 
brother-in-law of prefects .4 (From those during 
episcopacy , from the \th book the 1 8th letter. ) 

It was perfectly obvious that your devoutness would 
fall into “a later mind” as is written 5 after thus incon¬ 
siderately beginning the solitary life; and this after many 
arguments had often been discussed between you and 


1 Ja. i. 17. 

4 hrapypi. 


2 Mt. iv. 7. 

5 Pr. xxiv. 71. 


3 Col. iii. 1 7. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


443 


X. 5. 


me, and scriptural principles and patristic admonitions, 
which the God-clad doctors of the holy church left to 
us, directing every man in every order and kind of life 
known to the gospel to the royal road, and handing 
down the advice that we should beware of turning- 

o 

aside to the right or to the left, as the divine scripture 
says.1 

However, as you have in fervour betaken yourself 
to such a garb and mode of life, you need another 
exposition. Before attaching yourself to Jesus and 
taking up the cross you were yourself free to consider 
what mode of life was best for you to choose. But, as 
you have gone up to the hill of philosophy, do not any 
more return to the land of Sodom, lest you be fixed as 
a pillar of salt. To bury a father also was right, and 
in full accord with reasons of nature : but even this 
was thought a secondary matter after following Jesus. 
You should at the beginning have listened to Koheleth 
who says, “ Let not thine heart be hasty to utter thy 
speech before God’s face ; since a dream cometh 
through a multitude of trials.”1 However, since as I 
said we have come to this, we will now quote the 
admonition ot the same Koheleth which says, “ Better 
is it for thee that thou shouldst not vow than vow and 
not pay.”3 This too is worthy of consideration : that, 
when Moses the great was prescribing the array of 
physical war (which however signified the nature of 
the spiritual array), he ordered the rulers of the sons 


. 50c. 


1 Id. iv. 27. 


2 Ec. v. i, 2. 


^ Id. v. 4. 


444 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


X. 5. 


of Israel in time of battle to cry to those that were 
going out to combat and say, “ Who is the man that 
hath built a new house and hath not dedicated it ? let 
him go and return to his house, lest he die in the war 
and another man dedicate it. And who is the man 
that hath planted a vineyard ? And who is the man 
that hath betrothed a wife ? V and things like these. 
If a man then, when the law gave him liberty to stay 
at home for one of these reasons, had in ready ardour 
taken up arms and hastened to join battle with the 
foemen, and accordingly stood even at the very 
pinnacle of danger : and afterwards had come to 
remember the passibility of the flesh, and had gone 
back again, would anyone be right in saying that he 
had not left the line of battle and been enrolled with 
deserters and traitors, because before going out to the 
combat he had permission from the law to remain 
within the house ? Certainly not. Accordingly you 
also, who have joined battle with invisible enemies, 
p. 501. and stripped yourself not against blood and flesh, but 
against principalities and powers and spirits of wicked¬ 
ness,2 must not trade upon laws which you rendered 
superfluous by taking arms : but keep the same excel¬ 
lent mind in which you made light of children and of 
wife, and perform true service to the “ Father oi the 
orphans and Judge of the widows,”0 and He will be 
more truly a husband to the wife, and a father to the 
children. We must also examine the character of 


1 De. xx. 5-7. 


2 Eph. vi. 1 2. 


3 Ps. lxvii. 6 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


445 


X. 5. 


times and of persons, and so apply the divine command¬ 
ments to deeds to be done, and choose those that are good 
instead of those that are bad. For this reason among 
animals also some are clean and allowed to be eaten 
and hallowed for sacrifice, those whose hoof is parted, 
and those that besides this chew their food also and 
masticate it, and chew the cud as it is written.1 Often, 
when a thing a short time before appeared to be lawful 
and a matter of duty, the interposition of some small 
circumstance has at once and immediately rendered it 
unlawful. For instance, after the twelve men whom 
Moses sent had explored the land of promise, together 
with Caleb and Joshua the son of Nun he urged the 
whole congregation to go up to that land ; but, when 
they showed fear and hung back and turned to conten¬ 
tion and abuse, and after the transgression against God’s 
commandment and the wrath threatened against them 
prayed the next day that they might go up, he who 
the day before had been urging them to go up pre- p. 5°2* 
vented them from doing so, saying, “Ye shall not 
prosper. Go not up, for the Lord is not with you ; ” 2 
and nevertheless they went up, and they roused God 
to double exasperation. 

You too therefore, who put on the angelic garb of 
the monastic life without restraining the fervour that 
led you to this by the strict letter of the canons, have 
other men also as an example, who were fired with a 
fire or fervour like yours. Imitate them, and distin- 


1 Le. xi. 3. 


2 Nu. xiv. 41, 42. 


446 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


x. 5- 


guish yourself in the struggles of the solitary existence, 
lest, while wishing to correct a small fault, and that at 
an improper time, you forget yourself and fall into a 
pit of evils, and dishonour the sacred garb by involv- 
ing yourself in worldly cares. As it is an unhallowed 
and prolane thing for us to apply to human use a revered 
vessel that has once been set apart for the service of 
God, so also is it foul and abominable for a man who 
has given himself to God, and hallowed in some sort 
his own life, to turn back to the claims and judgments 
of the flesh. 

Say farewell therefore to the thoughts that call you 
to live in the world, and keep to the road that lies 
before you, until you reach, as it is written, “the goal 
ot victory of the upward calling of God, which is in 
Christ Jesus our Lord.”1 

There is only one thing which I would have wished 
p. 503- added to the beginning that you have made ; that you 
had joined yourself in everything, both in community of 
opinion concerning the faith and in community of habi¬ 
tation, to the holy fathers of the house of the saintly 
presbyter Theodore; which also you were in the 
beginning impelled to do and for which you were very 
eager ; and I do not know how the hater of what is 
good hindered you. But it is easy for us not to be 
cheated by Satan to use the language of the divine 
Apostle.2 

Th ese things we have written while much harassed 


1 Ph. iii. 14. 


2 2 Co. ii. 11. 


X. 6. SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 447 


with many affairs and not able even to breathe, because 
we are inflamed with love towards you, and know that 
we owe even more to your excellent person. Never at 
any time shall we be forgetful of the good deeds that 
you have shown towards us. The end . 


6. Of the sa7ne to the inmates of the monastery of the 
blessed Basszis. ( From those during episcopacy , 
from the Jth book the 354/// letter.) 

Some respectable men have come to us, asking me 
to write to your love of God, in order that you may 
dismiss the man who has renounced the world, who is 
from the village and has in unapproved fashion put on 
the garb of monasticism among you, so that he may 
continue to till the soil and not dishonour the holy pro¬ 
fession of monks, since it was not in quest of virtue for 
its own sake that he came to this. I hear that he has 
left h is wife contrary to the apostolic law and without 
consent, while they have, 1 learn, children also, born 
of their common cohabitation. But this will certainlv 

j 

seem a crime to you also, and a thing contrary to the 
divine laws. Either therefore explain what the truth 
of the matter is, or, if the case is as we have been in¬ 
formed, send the man to live in the world. We must 
provide “things honest,” as it is written, “not only 
before God, but also before men.'’ 1 The end. 


513-8. 


p. 504. 


1 Id. viii. 21. 


448 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


X- 7- 


519-35. 7. Of the same to Ccesaria the patrician } ( From those 

after banishment , from the $rd book the 4 bth 
letter. ) 

It seemed to me perfectly credible that, as stated 
by your glorious modesty, you gained so much profit 
from reading my mean letter with understanding. 
The good soil that is like your God-loving soul knows, 

• it knows indeed, how, even when receiving barren 
seed, to give forth fruitful produce in plenty, inso¬ 
much as to reach to the perfect measure of a hundred." 

And after other things. As to the short treatise 
that is being circulated and carried about by certain 
persons, which you say is inscribed with my name and 
bears such an ascription, a treatise that I shrink from 
even taking upon my lips, seeing that it is full of 
ignorance and stupidity, know that it is not the work 
of our meanness at all : but a forgery either of certain 
p. 505. foolish men who are called orthodox, or of heretics who 
wish to hide their shame and make it appear to those 
who come across it that it is we who keep men away 
from communion with them by fraudulent words, not 
they who separate from them by reason of their sound 
faith, and recognise and abhor their manifest impiety 
and Jewish opinions. 

Let not this too be unknown to your God-loving 


1 Cf. p. 244 note 3. If the inference there drawn is correct, this 
letter cannot be placed later than 521. 

2 Mt. xiii. 8. 


SELECT LETTERS OF TIIE HOLY SEVERUS. 


449 


X. 7. 


highness : that a certain devout presbyter also came 
from the East, and showed us other letters also 
purporting to be mine, that are in part forged and 
falsified ; the forgery and garbling having been done 
by certain persons whose business it is to forge such 
things to their own destruction as the Apostle says.1 
And we brought him the documents themselves : and 
after comparing the genuine documents he reprobated 
and condemned the falsehood, and cursed the wicked 
men who commit such wanton wickedness against the 
truth. And no wonder if the devil through his own 
instruments wrought such things against us the sinner 
and weakling, considering that in the same way he 
contrived similar things or even more serious against 
the apostolic doctors of the church also. I he great 
Basil in the letter addressed to the ascetics and 
solitaries under him, at Orobiane and at Chalane, 
asserts that certain persons were circulating forged 
and spurious letters against him : as to whom he also p- 506. 
says ; “ Many letters are being circulated against me, 
which contain abuse and derision and speak evil of us 
in respect of the actions : for which we have a defence 
ready before the court of truth ” : and again ; “ My 
words shall judge me: but for the offences of others 
no man shall condemn us. Moreover in another 
letter also, writing- to those at Neocaesarea, he showed 
that certain persons were also inventing dreams against 
him, thinking by this also to cast aspersions upon his 


1 2 Pe. iii. 16. 


450 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


x. 7 


faith : about whom even while laughing at their 
absurdity he says, “ Men who acted so shamelessly 
against us as even to invent certain dreams against us, 
bringing charges against our teachings as hurtful.” 1 
But, since I do not read negligently anything that is 
written to me by your believing excellency, but do so 
w ith much consideration and diligently, I think it to be 
necessary lor us to give you some short answer on 
another matter also. You besought me to pray on behalf 
ol your modesty that the Lord would release you from 
the bonds ol this world, and would bring you to the 
calm haven of penitence, seeing that you are buried as 
you say in the evils ol this world. Do not forget there¬ 
fore, you whom I revere above everyone, that the 
apostle Paul in his epistle to Titus lays down a law for 
women that are yoked in marriage in these terms ; “ Let 
the young women be lovers of their husbands, lovers 
p. 507. of their children, chaste, pure, good housekeepers, 

> subject to their husbands, that the word of God be not 
blasphemed.” It is therefore manifest that, if anyone 
depart from the canon of this statute, and be carried 
though but a little to the right side or the left, he will 
be judged as a transgressor against the law. A 
woman who fears God and obeys Christ’s commands 
must practise love of her husband as readily as the 
love of God itself. If the husband is the head of the 
wife in the same fashion as the Lord is the head of the 
church, a woman who loves her husband chastely 


1 Ep. 207. 1. 


2 Tit. ii. 4, 5. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


451 


X. 7. 


through the medium of her husband loves Christ the 
Head of all heads. On the same principle also a 
woman who keeps her house, and keeps the things 
within the house with strenuousness and watchfulness, 
imitates a man who presides over a church and wisely 
administers the sacred things on the care of those that 
are in need. That every believers house also is a 
church the same Paul further bears witness when in 
greeting certain believers in his epistles he says, “ Greet 
also the church that is in your house.”1 One may 
fitly admire the way in which the Apostle, after saying 
that women who love God ought to be such as keep 
their houses, immediately added “good housekeepers.” 

For there are women who from their great carefulness 
in housekeeping are induced to make profit out of the p. 508. 
goods, and are hence incited to covetousness, the 
mother of evil deeds. Wherefore, to cut away such a 
vice, he said that such women ought to be good, in 
order that by the justification and consolation of those 
that are in need the house also may be increased ; 
seeing that the blessings that are from heaven will be 
measured to them in return, and they will through 
beneficence lay down beforehand a good foundation 
for themselves in the future life. At the same time 
by naming them good he also inculcates kindness to 
menservants and bondmaids, and all that are bound 
under the yoke of slavery. Of the love of a husband 
also and of chastity this is the criterion, not that a wife 


1 1 Co. xvi. 19. 


452 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


X. 7. 


look at her personal chastity only, but how far she 
regards her husband’s preservation also with watchful 
eyes, and makes every effort that he too may be 
content with intercourse with her only, not that he may 
turn himself to another connexion. If she herself be 
chaste, but do not concern herself about her husband 
falling into fornication, she has, unknown to herself, 
become chaste in half her body and in half of it defiled, 
in that she is transgressing against the divine laws. 
If in fact they are not two, according to our Saviour’s 
saying,1 but the two are reckoned as making one flesh, 
what profit is there in the chastity of one portion, when 
the conjoined portion is led away to lasciviousness ? 
Marriage is then “ honourable and the bed unsullied,” 2 
P. 509. when the whole of it is hallowed in the whole body. 
But the whole body is husband and wife, having the 
same mind, and treating the marriage as a mystery of 
God, and hence making the procreation of children 
to be blessed, and from all sides bringing praise and 
glory, not reviling, upon the word of God. If you 
walk by these laws and know your place, and do not 
desire other things beyond the measure that is com¬ 
manded, you will be an inheritor of the kingdom of 
heaven, and with the wives of those patriarchs 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all that are such, you 
will receive the promises of immortal life : who also 
lived with men that were owners of sheepfolds (?) 
and lords of cattle and of much wealth and armed 


1 Mt. xix. 16. 


2 He. xiii. 4. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


453 


X. 7. 


themselves for war when the time summoned to this 
also, and with them fulfilled God’s commandments 
perfectly. 

These things I have written because I gave my 
attention to the words contained in the letter of your 
believing soul, and I considered the fire of the Spirit 
that is in you, and I feared lest out of great fervour 
you might incautiously form some plan that is at 
variance with the laws of piety ; for you know such 
pleas, which by the use of considerations that are rather 
upon the right side are apt to deceive the pious. 

The words of divine scripture that have been cited 
would even by themselves have been enough to 
confirm your love of God in acquiescence with the 
admonition of our meanness : but I have thought it 
good to corroborate what I have said irom the teaching 
of the fathers also, and to plant the loyal disposition 
more firmly in you. The wise John, who was bishop 
of Constantinople, towards the end of the commentary 
on the Gospel of Matthew, in the exposition the 
becfinninor of which is “But [esus stood before the 

o O J 

Governor ” wrote in these terms about the cunnincr ol 

o o 

the devil, by which he has cheated specially fervent 
souls : “ He has also a third evil trap : as for example : 

when he thows an appearance of devoutness over a 
sin. ‘ And how has the devil succeeded so far as to 
cheat even in these things?’ Hear, and beware of 
his counsels. Christ commanded through Paul that 
wife should not separate from husband, and they 
should not defraud one another, except perhaps by 


. 510. 


454 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. X. 7. 


consent. But some women, having on the ground of 
a desire for continence separated themselves from 
their husbands as if they were doing some devout 
action, have thrust them down into adultery. Reflect 
therefore what an evil thing it is that, while under¬ 
going so much toil, they should be charged with 
having done the greatest wrong and pay the utmost 
penalty, and thrust their spouses down into a pit of 
destruction. Other persons again by abstaining from 
foods under the law of fasting have gradually come to 
P si 1. reject these: a thing which itself also brings heavy 
punishment. And this happens when they assign 
greater validity to their own thoughts than to the 
determinations of the scriptures.”1 Therefore I beg 
your glorious modesty to turn the glances of your 
understanding on all sides, and hear the divine 
laws, and listen to Paul who says, “ Let every man 
wherein he was called therein abide.”2 Since God 
called you under the yoke of marriage, in it also 
maintain a loyal contest, and show prowess : and be 
one that loves her husband and loves her children and 
is a good housekeeper, in order that through these 
things you may at the same time be also one that 
loves God. Never on account of these things term 
yourself one buried in the mire of evils, and flee 
from the bonds of the world : but flee from the 
bonds of evil. For in these we are all in the same 
fashion bound. The divine text somewhere says, 


1 P. G. lviii. 768. 


2 1 Co. vii. 14. 


X. 8. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


455 


“ Who will boast that he hath a pure heart? Or who 
will be confident of being pure from sins?”1 But we 
who have believed the gospel try, as far as is possible 
for men, to purify our soul through commandments : 
in order that God, looking upon the readiness of 
our heart as is sung in the Psalms,2 not upon the 
weakness of our nature, may admit us to mercy and 
graciousness in the day of judgment, and make us 
sharers in the kingdom ol heaven, because the 
heavenly One became man and consorted with those 
that are on the earth, having become a man in truth 
and without difference and not in semblance. The end. 


8. Of the same to Georgia daughter of Anastasia P* 5«2- 
the hypatissa. (From those after banishment , 519-38 
from the 5 th book the 22nd letter.) 

Since for my part I never regard your glorious 
modesty’s affairs with indifference, but with oreat 
earnestness concern myself for your salvation, as for 
that of a beloved daughter, and I look into God’s 
deep judgments, by the evidence of actual facts I 
perceive that you are supported by great help from 
above, and conduct your life with very watchful care. 

P or that you should have reached the flower of vour 

J 

age and not yet been yoked in marriage to your 
glorious parents perhaps and to the others who love 
a worldly manner seems a reason for anger as well 
as a matter of sorrow. But I regard it as a thing of 

<0 o 

2 Ps. ix. 38. 


1 Pr. xx. 9. 


30 


456 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


X. 8. 


great profit and pronounce it to be so. 1 his, I think, 
is the meaning to which the statement made by the 
wise Paul to the Corinthians also points; “If any 
man thinketh that he is put to shame in his virgin 
if she hath passed the flower of her age, so also ought 
it to be.”1 What he says is in fact something like 
this; “What is thought by some to be a cause ol 
shame, I mean that a virgin should reach an advanced 
time of life, this I have thought to be both advan¬ 
tageous and beneficial.” Just as the fruit of a tree, 
when taken before the time, causes no pleasure by 
p. 513- its taste, because it is without the sweetness that gives 
the pleasure, but actually hurts the teeth, by reason 
of its sharpness or acidity, in the same way also a 
virgin who has not yet ripened in her season so to 
speak, but has the disposition of the flesh undeveloped 
and too tender, hurts and does not profit the man 
who marries her : because her character is not fixed, 
and inasmuch as her time has not yet come is unstable 
and not constant, but rather easily excited and driven 
to childish wrath, and disturbed perhaps by melancholy 
and irrational gloominess. How is it anything but 
shameful that, while a wrestler does not go down into 
the violence of the arena [unless he has been 
thoroughly trained in wrestling, or a soldier | 2 into 
the battle array, unless he has been thoroughly trained 


1 1 Co. vii. 36. 

2 This is clearly the sense required, but more than this is needed 
to fill the gap. 


X. 8. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


457 


in military matters, a virgin should be introduced 
into the society of marriage, and should pass to the 
headship and government of her husband’s house 
without having been perfectly trained in her parents’ 
house, or learned how she should govern a house, and 
in what way she ought to behave to each of those 
that are under her authority ? It has often happened 
that bad men, when they have obtained women who 
are undeveloped and of unfixed character, have per¬ 
verted them to their own bad model, and stamped the 
lines of their own wickedness upon their tender dis¬ 
position as upon wax. W hence, when they have 
been sated and not been able 
• •••••• • 

your modest mother in your father’s glorious house, p* 5*4- 
and through advanced a^e has been instructed in 
administrative science, and has been perfectly 
exercised in such useful exercises, and you have at 
the same time also increased the wisdom of your 
character, you will go to your husband’s house like 
some image and statue that is perfect in beauty and 
not lacking in anything, and you will be to him “a 
helper like unto him ” ; since woman was in fact 
created by Him who said in the beginning, “It is not 
good that the man should be alone ; let us make him 
a helper like unto him."1 A woman who is trained 
and skilled in governing a house, and intelligent and 
a real helper in the world’s difficulties, is in truth a 


1 Ge. ii. 18. 


458 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


X. 8. 


haven for a man. For in fact, when a man has gone 
out to . 

• • • • • ••• 
in a law-court, either because he is doing or because 
he is suffering wrong, or again he is often inflamed to 
anger, and wantonly insults or on the contrary is in¬ 
sulted in his turn, the anger of another blowing against 
him like some storm. But, when the time calls and he 
returns to his house for food, agitated and disturbed 
by anxieties, he encounters his wife’s intelligence : he 
finds her temper both placid and calm : he tells what 
has happened to him in the street. Then she like a 
trained physician gently looks into the hidden sources 
of trouble : she touches his heart with intelligent words, 
p- 5r5- and learns the causes. And, when she has found that 
he has been excited without good reason, she appeases 
the fury of his mind by offering peaceful 


that 1 I have written these things also. And I beg 

o o 

you, lady, not to tell anyone whatever that you have 
received this letter from me, even if he be an angel 
from heaven. You will in fact both bring danger 

o o 

upon me by telling it and vex God ; and you will 
make many angry with me, because I did not write 
to them too just as I have done to you. But we 
believe that Christ, the God of orthodoxy, who every 
day carries out the words that say, “ Other sheep also 


Possibly from another letter. 


i 


XL 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


459 


I have which are not of this fold ; and I must brino- 
them also and they shall hear my voice, and they 
shall be one flock and one Shepherd/’1 will make your 
glorious and exalted father also His own. Not the end . 


XI. Eleventh section." That a man who can help or p. 516 
assist the ricrht confession while enraged in 

O OO 

state affairs must not become a monk. 


Of the same to Misael the chamberlain . 3 ( From those 513-8 

during episcopacy , from the 4 th book the 100 th 
letter. ) 

How can I express my admiration of the labours of 
your magnificence which you display towards my 
meanness in the way that they deserve, seeing that I 
have one mouth and one tongue ? Still however, since 
you do not care about praises upon earth, but make it 
your one and only endeavour that through good works 
your name may be written in the book of life, I pray 
as a sinner that this grace may be abundantly bestowed 
upon you by God the bestower of gifts that are so 
great. For by your faithful care you have delivered 
our church that was in a pitiful condition through the 
hostile contrivances of the illustrious /Emlas from a 

O 

heavy burden. 

1 John x. 16. 2 titAos. 

3 Cf. Land, Anec. Syr. ii. 275. 12, 22, iii. 356. 11. 


460 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


XI. 


But it wounds me deeply that, because your soul 
has been smitten with divine love, it should conceive 
the idea of adopting the philosophic and solitary life, 
though it is living in a philosophic manner and has 
within that which it seeks as if it were at a distance. 
By God’s grace, while you conduct yourself in so 
p- Sl7- chaste and ascetic a fashion, you have this privilege 
also that has been bestowed from above, I mean not 
only to believe on Christ, but also to suffer for His 
sake,1 and endure distress with Israel when in turmoil ; 
whence also the illustrious crown of martyrdom is 
being woven for you. By desiring retreat or solitari¬ 
ness at a time so unsuited for it you are doing the 
same as if one of those three boys, of one of whom 
you are namesake, when the golden image of 
Nebuchadnezzar the fighter against God was set forth, 
and he was required to stand up and confute the error, 
had fled and withdrawn, thinking to win safety for 
himself, and not bow his head to the abominable and 
unlawful object of worship. In that case they would 
not have obtained such glory with God as that which 
they gained by undergoing the trial of the furnace, 
and quenching the fire by their virtue, and gaining 
God as a witness to their modest and humble mind by 
saying, “ Our God is in heaven whom we serve, one 
that is able to deliver us from the burning furnace of 
fire ; and if not be it known unto thee, O king, that 
we do not serve thy gods, and the golden image 


1 Ph. i. 29. 


XI. 


SELECT LETTERS OF TIIE HOLY SEVERUS. 


461 


which thou hast set up we do not worship ” ; 1 in order 
that these words might be an instruction and a pattern 
in piety to all in later times too wrho should love God. 

How then can you, when the king is pious, flee 
from the fight with the heretics, instigated as you are p- 5i8- 
by a God-loving thought, and refusing to endure their 
blasphemies, and looking at this only, and reckoning 
our nakedness as nothing ? If this is carried into effect, 
you will now double for me personally the grief that I 
felt by reason of the departure of Peter the presbyter 2 
who is among the saints, and will throw me “ fall after 
fall,” as the great Job somewhere says : " and then I 
shall know clearly from facts themselves that God has 
utterly abandoned us, and has turned away His face 
from those that praise Him in the right way : and we 
will say as is written “ to the mountains, ‘ Fall upon us.’ 
and to the hills, ‘ Cover us.’ ” 4 I forbear to say that 
neither will you obtain that desire, seeing it will not 
be in accordance with God’s judgment that you will 
be abandoning the life in the world. 

Further also a story like this has been conveyed to 
us by those who have grown old in asceticism. In the 
times of the Arians, two men who lived in the philo¬ 
sophic manner remained in the desert, and in the unsocial 
life. And, when the word of truth was being attacked, 
and was being obscured by heretical craftiness of speech, 
and they were called to give help (for they had in fact 
qualifications for fighting on behalf of piety), they were 

1 Da. iii. 17, 18. 

3 Job xvi. 14. 


2 Cf. p. v, and Wright C.B.M. 335. 
4 Ho. x. 8. 


462 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


XI. 


disinclined to do so, because they clung to philosophy, 
and action seemed to them irksome. And the one 
put constraint upon himself, and showed more respect 
to the commandment than to the peace that he loved, 
and hastily set off to take part in the contests, and 
p- 5!9- obeyed those who called him. I3ut the other remained 
according to his pleasure in the desert, and the spirits 
of evil came and assailed him with Greater vehemence, 
and he became possessed of the feeling that he had 
been stripped of God’s grace and help, and was in 
danger of being devoured by fiends as it were by lions ; 
and he was awakened and reflected upon his thought¬ 
lessness, and he changed his mind and immediately 
followed his brother’s good resolution, and took a 
hand with him in the contests on behalf of the faith. 

I say nothing of Obadiah who served under Ahab 
the grievous tyrant, and secretly fed a hundred 
prophets in a cave, contrary to the pleasure of the 
holder of power. I also pass over the selling of 
Joseph, and the bondage to the Egyptian woman and 
her false charge, and the other stories : since not only 
have you heard the sacred writings, but you are in fact 
well-versed in them. Wherefore these things too we 
have written as a mere admonition only so to speak, 
by which we urge you, inasmuch as you live not to 
yourself but to God, immediately to say what has been 
written and has been handed down by our Lord as a 
teacher, “ Nevertheless not as I will but as thou wilt. ” 1 


1 Mk. xiv. 36. 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


463 


It is in truth a great sin for us to desert Christ when 
He needs help. Such a man acts in the same way as 
a man who is rich and quickly passes by one who is 
hungry, and one who is naked or sick, or shut up in 
prison ; for the need of all these Christ makes His 
own. Wherefore also He bitterly inveighs against the 
crime and holds it up to reprobation before the theatre 1 
of the world or rather before all rational nature, saying, 
“ Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of these little ones, 
neither did ye it to me.”2 May we all escape having 
experience of these words ! The end. 


The end of the sixth book of the select3 or chosen 
letters taken from the letters of the holy Severus, 
patriarch of Antioch in Syria. 


Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy 
Spirit in whose power w*e began and by whose help we 
have ended for ever and ever Amen ! 


For the glory and honour of the holy Trinity the 
saintly lord Elisha, metropolitan of the Christ-loving 
city of Nisibis, exerted himself and acquired this 
spiritual treasure ; for his own profit and that of all 
who love God.* But, if any man borrows this book to 
read it or to copy from it, and detains it, or makes 
erasures or excisions, or shall do it any kind of injury, 

1 Oearpov. 2 Mt. XXV. 45. 3 cAcAoyat. 


P. 52°- 


464 


SELECT LETTERS OF THE HOLY SEVERUS. 


let him know that he is transgressing against the awful 

o o o 

word of God. 

p. 521. 7 ranslated from Greek into Syriac by the religious 

presbyter Athanasius of Nisibis and written at his 
dictation by the devout presbyter Severus, at the 
instance of the saintly bishops, Matthew of the city of 
Berrhcea and Daniel of the city of Edessa, in the year 
nine hundred and eighty of the Greeks. But for our 
Lord’s sake let every reader pray for them ! 

But this book was written by ... 
who is diligent in his business and foolish 

reads what is written, and breaks what 
is commanded ; loves what is near, and despises what 
is counselled ; a trumpet for words, and a flute for 
sounds, that has been in no way benefited by anything 
that passes through them ; a foolish sailor who has not 
gained proper skill in steering his ship rightly : and 
how to call his name ..... unless it 
be “hateful” and if you who hate . . . . 

if you wish ....... 


“Whoever loves not our Lord Jesus Christ, let him 
be anathema.” 1 


i Co. xvi. 22. 


INDEX OF PERSONS, PLACES, ETC. 

[An asterisk denotes doubt whether all the passages relate to the same person.] 


PAGE 

Abba, monk, . . 433, 435, 436 

Achillas, cleric of Alexandria, . 334 

Adelphius, heresiarch, . . 55 

Advocatus fisci , . . . .197 

/Egilas, illustris , . . .459 

/Elian, presb. , . . . 378, 379 

/Eneas, presb. and monk, . . 47 


212, 279, 296, 297, 298 
Jli, 312 
. 1^0 


Africa, 

Agapetus, bp. of Synada, 

Agapius, bp 
‘Akiba, monast. of, . 104, 109, 382 

Alexander (1), bp. of Alexandria, 197 

(2) , bp. of Constantinople, . 197 

(3) , vindex of Anazarba, . . 87-9 

Alexandria (in Egypt), 7, 8, 76, 79, 

143, 144, 151, 153, 157, 163, 165, 
166, 170, 195, 213, 216, 223, 225, 
228, 257, 267, 270, 2S0, 284, 300, 

320, 331, 334, 357, 4i5 5 Synod 
of, 160, 225 

Minor (in Cilicia), 9S. Bp. John. 
Alypius (1), boy, . . 143, 1 44 

(2),# .... 427-32 

Amasia, . . . . .221 

Ambrose, bp. of Milan, . . 304 

Ammian, . . . 233-6, 246 

Ammonius, presb. of Alexandria, 253-6 
Amphilochius, bp. of Iconium, 312, 416 
Anasartha, Castra , 91. Bp. designate 
Stephen. 

Anastasia, hypa/issa, . . 455, 457 

Anastasius ( 1 ), bp. of Rome, . 303 

(2) , count, . . . 231,232 

(3) , Emperor, 4, 16, 70, 71, 72, 75, 
82, 84, 94, 101, hi, 124, 125, 126, 
200, 203, 255, 257, 288, 294, 461 

(4) , neyaAoTTperrecrTaTOs, . . 140 

Anathema, meaning and effect of, 398- 

400, 405-7 


PAGE 

Anatolius (1), deacon of Antioch, 35 

(2) , deacon, .... 196 

(3) , .... 33 1 “3 

Anazarba. Bp. Entrechius. 

Andrew (1), archim. in Caria, 179, 180, 
1S3, 186, 187 

(2), reader, . 195, 270, 271, 413-7 
Antaradus, . . . 126, 263 

Antencyclical, . . . . 7, 8 

Anthedon, ..... 102 

Antioch, 17, 18, 25, 43, 47, 48, 52, 54, 
59, 7i, 73, 89, 94, 107, 122, 123, 
132, 135, 139, 162, 163, 185, 208, 
223, 260, 266, 268, 270, 288, 302, 
319, 320, 348, 353, 355; Synods 
of, 25, 48, 70-2, 73-5, 84> 107, 
10S, 353 ; state of ch. of, 43, 44, 
64, 65, 103, 120, 459 
Antiochus, tribune, . . . 57 

Antipater, /uLfyaKoTTpenearaTos, . 90 

Antoninus, bp. of Berrhcea, 57-63, 1 5 1 —3, 
159 62 

Apamea, 36, 4S, 70, 92, 101, 110, in, 
381. Bps. Isaac, Stephen, 
Cosmas, Peter. 

Apaphon, presb., . . .120 

Aphthoria, monast. of, . .119 

Apokrisiarioi , 65, 130, 131, 134, 135, 

266 

Apollinaris, bp. of Laodicea in 

Syria, . . . .215 

Area, bp. of, . . 263-6 

Arcadius, Emperor, . . . 223 

Archdeacon, 19, 31, 32, 103, 127, 128, 
187 

Archelaus, reader of Tyre, . . 363 

Arc/u'a/ros, . . . 83, 286 

Archive-house, . . . .19 

Arethusa, bp. of, 73 


466 


INDEX. 


l’AGE 

Arius, presb. of Alexandria, 197 ; heresy 
of, 6, 10, 13, 276, 304,316. Arians, 
9, 207, 250, 269, 276, 286, 291, 
296, 302, 304, 335, 336 
Armenia, .... 55, 208 

Ascalon, . 342 

Asclepius, illustris , . . . 439 

Asia, . 18 1 

Asterius (1), bp. of Celenderis,1 . 4 

(2), sophist, .... 286 

Athanasius (1), I., bp. of Alexandria, 
197, 206, 207, 287, 335, 336, 363 

(2) , II., bp. of Alexandria, . 255 

(3) , presb. of Nisi bis, . . 464 

Athrib, ..... 340 

Atticus, bp. of Constantinople, . 312 

Augusta. Bp. Serenus. 

Aurelius, scholastic of Bostra, 395, 396 
Auxentius, bp. of Milan, . . 304 

Baptism, heretical, . 77, 1 8 1 , 285, 

296-302, 304, 313, 314, 315, 317, 
348> 352> 353) 4^8 

of sick persons, . . . 296 

Barbarians, raid of, . . 148, 149 

Basil (1), bp. of Ccesarea in Cappadocia, 
9, !3> r95, 215, 220, 259, 261, 

266, 269, 276, 291, 312, 313, 335, 

343, 344, 385,.393,.4i6, 449, 45° 

(2) , bp. of Pompeiupolis in Isauria, 289 

(3) , deacon of Antioch, . 97, 98 

Berenice, . . . . .414 

Berrhoea. Bps. Antoninus, Matihew. 
Berytus, . . . 1 14, 271, 392, 

419. Bp. Marinus. 

Beth Gabrin, .... 422 

Beth Remsha, .... 62 

Bishops, election and ordination of, 
7-io, 13-5, 66, 67, 91, 92, 94, 95, 
97, 98, hi, 1 12, 126, 127, 212-4, 
217-26, 228, 302, 303 
without sees, . . . 211, 215 

Bisula, bp. of Germanicupolis, 26, 80 
Bosporius, bp. of Colonia, . 205, 206 

Bostra, 397. Bps. Julian, Cassian. 
Byzantium, 204, 440. Byzantines, 393 

C/ESA rea in Cappadocia. Bp. Soteric. 
in Palestine, 393 ; Synod of, 223, 
224 

Coesaria, patrician, 244-6, 248, 249, 
272, 275, 448, 450, 452-4 


PAGE 

Calliopius, patrician, . . . 382 

Callistus, archdeacon, 17-20, 21, 22, 31, 
32, 69 

Cappadocia, 55, 205, 344. Capp. I., 
258. Capp. II., 55, 205, 258. 
Cappadocians, 259 

Capua, Synod of, 223 

Carthage, 296 ; Synod of, 212, 279, 299, 
297, 298 

Cassian (1), bp. of Bostra, 129, 130, 
I5I~3, 159 62, 394, 395, 396 
(2), monk of Palestine, . . 315 

Castor, bp. of Perga, . 39-41, 259 

Catechumens, . . . 187, 188 

Celenderis. Bp. Asterius. 

Celer 2 mag. off. , . • 73, 75, 84 

Cestrus. Bp. Elpidius. 

Chaeremon, cleric, . . 255, 256 

Chalane, monast. of, . . . 449 

Chalcedon, Synod of, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 
16, 19, 68, 83, 84, 88, 182, 206, 
254, 255, 256, 258, 284, 287, 294, 
295, 3°8, 315, 328, 330, 341, 352, 
361 

Chalcis (in Syria), 57. Bps. Simeon, 
Isidore. 

Chamberlain, . . 63, 199, 459 

Charisius, presb. of Philadelphia in 
Lydia, . . . 299, 348 

Chios, . . . . -199 

Chorcpiscopus , 104, 105, 108, 109, no 
Chrism, 294, 298, 300, 301, 312, 313, 
314, 315, 331, 348, 349, 352, 353, 
354, 418, 426 

Cilicia I., . . .113, 149 

Clement, bp. of Rome, . . 410 

Colonia. Bp. Proclus. 

Commanus, Synod of, . . 35 

Conon(i), XyaTodiwKTTis, . 125, 126 

(2), silentiary, . 362, 439, 442 

Constantina. Bp. John. 

* Constantine ( 1 ), bp. of Laodicea in 
Syria, . 151-3, 159-62, 192 

(2), bp. of Seleucia in Isauria, 3, 4, 
11, 15, 19, 20 

Constantinople, n, 28, 43, 69, 73, 82, 
83, 123, 13 1 , 159, 204, 237, 257, 
258, 266, 267, 281, 287, 31 1, 312, 
360, 361, 362, 440 ; Synods of, 83, 
205, 267, 343 

Constantius, Emperor, . . 206 

Corduba, ..... 206 

Corycus, 318, 319. Bp. Indacus. 


1 Vit. Sev. p. 28. 


2 Theoph. A. M. 6004, Cod. Just. IV. xxix. 21. 


INDEX. 


467 


\ 


PAGE 

Cosmas (i), archim. of monast. 

of Cyrus, . . . 261-3 

* (2), bp. of Apamea, 47-51, in 

(3), presb. and monk 1 of Chalcis 
in Syria, . . 52, 109, no 

Count, 35, 129, 221, 231, 263, 269, 281, 
415 ; see also East. Countess, 

423 

Cross (emblem), . . 46, 33 1 , 332 

Curator, . . . .114 

Cyprian, bp. of Carthage, 212, 279, 
296, 297, 298, 299, 314 
Cyriac, cleric, . . . 35 1 

Cyril, bp. of Alexandria, 45, 157, 159, 
317, 364, 421, 422 

Cyrrhus, 341. Bps. Sergius I. and II. 
Cyrus (1), (the Simple), pseudo-bp., 
419 

(2), cleric, . . . 342~4 

monastery of, . . .261 


Damascus. Bps.Mammian, Thomas (?). 
Daniel, bp. of Edessa, . . 464 

Dara. Bp. Thomas. 

Deaconesses, 139, 192, 194, 269, 364, 
368 

Decius, Emperor, . . .170 

Demoniac possession, . 85, 187, 190 
Didymus, bp., . 17 1-5, 176, 178 

Dimissory letters, . 44, 45, 401 

Dioctesarea in Isauria. Bp. Ililarian. 

in Pontus, 209. Bp. Gregory. 
Diodorus, bp. of Tarsus, . . 341 

Dionysius ( 1 ), bp. of Alexandria, 169, 
170, 279, 296, 297, 335, 336 

(2) , bp. of Corinth, . . 285 

(3) , bp. of Rome, 296, 335, 336 

(4) , bp. of Tarsus, 35, 84, 85, 100, 
260, 261, 289, 290, 293, 318, 319 

Dioscorus (1), I., bp. of Alexandria, 136, 
270 ; his commemoration, 270 

(2) , II., bp. of Alexandria, 133,257-9 

(3) , cleric, . . . 255, 256 

Diphysites, 38, 180, 181, 1S2, 184, 281, 

291, 294, 295, 304, 315, 316, 317, 

348,353,361,375 

Diptychs (ecclesiastical), 19, 20, 40, 68, 
77, 127, 163, 254 

Dokias , ..... 340 i 

Doliche. Bp. Philoxenus. 

Domnina, ..... 414 


PAGE 

Dorotheus (1), bp. of Marcianupolis, 
156, 157, 158 

(2), . 395 

Duke, . . . . . .41 


Earthquake, .... 340 

East (diocese), 51, 58, 74, 88, 91, 126, 
134, 157, 163, 165, 166, 223, 271, 
300, 304, 308, 325, 328, 334, 449 ; 
count of, 373, 374, 376, 377, 378, 
414 

Edessa. Bp. Daniel. 

Egypt, 51, 1 13, 134, 143, 165, 166, 
209, 215, 216, 222, 224, 225, 231, 
300, 327, 328, 340 

Ekklesiekdikoi , . . . .120 

Eleusinius, bp. of Sasima,2 83, 286, 
359-63 

Eleutherius, sacellaritis , . 65, 66 

Elijah ( 1 ), bp. of Jerusalem, 119, 120, 
129, 130 

* (2), deacon and monk, . 50, 417 

Elisha, bp. of Nisibis, . . 463 

Elpidius, bp. of Cestrus,3 . 159, 161 

Emesa, . 35, 207, 208, 226, 227 

Encyclical of Basiliscus, 7, 181, 225, 258 
Entrechius, bp. of Anazarba, 53, 54, 56, 

66, 67, 361 

Epagathus, . . . 233-6, 246 

Ephesus, Synods of, 156, 157, 284, 299, 
300, 316, 317, 348, 352 
Epimachus (1), bp. of Rhinocorura, 326 

* (2), presb., 134-7, ME 142, 150 

Epiphania in Syria, bp. of, . . 73 

* Epiphanius (1), bp. of Magydum, 7, 

8, 218, 221, 375, 376 

(2) , bp. of Tyre, . 97, 98, 364 

(3) , Isaurian bp., ... 68 

Ethiopian, .... 422 
Eubulus, presb., .... 420 

Eucharius, bp. of Paltus, . 46, 47 

Eunuchs, ordination of, 394-6, 408-12 
Euphrates, . . . .414 

Eupraxius, archim. of monast. of 

Romanus, . . . 422 

Eusebius (1), bp. of Ccesarea in Pales¬ 
tine, . . . 313, 414 

(2) , bp. of Pelusium, . 251, 252 

(3) , bp. of Samosata, . . 9 

(4) , count, . . . 221, 222 

(5) , deacon of Antioch, . .123 

(6) , deacon of Apamea, . 103, 104 


1 Zach. Rh. vii. 10. 2 Theoph. A. M. 5999. 

:5 Michael Chron. ed. Chabot, p. 267. 


468 


INDEX. 


PAGE 

Eusebius (7), presb. of Antioch, . 419 

(8), presb., . . . . 157 

Eusebuna, Cappadocian bp., 342—5 
Eustace ( 1 ), bp. of Antioch, . 302 

(2) , cleric, .... 21 

(3) , monk, . . . 384-6 

(4) , presb., . . . 102, 103 

Eustochius, deacon of Alexandria, 163 
Eutherius, bp. ofTyana, 156, 157, 158 
Eutyches, archim. of Constantinople, 

5, 6, 316, 419. Eutychianists, 
281, 316 

Eutychian, governor of Apamea, . 123 

Evagrius, bp. of Antioch, 223, 302, 303 


PAGE 

Hesychius, presb. of Antioch, . 25 

Hilarian, bp. of Diocaesarea in Isauria, 
17, 18, 21, 22, 27, 28, 69, 70, 86 
Himerius, bp. ofNicomedia, 156, 157, 
*58 

Hippocrates, scholastic (?), . 132, 133 

Homoousion , . . . 31 1, 335 

Honorius, Emperor, . . . 223 

Hosius(l), archim., . . . 332 

(2), bp. of Corduba, 206, 207, 286, 
287 

Hypatissa , . . . . .457 

Hypatius, mag. mil. Orient is, 60, 1 13-5, 

125 


Fabius, bp. of Antioch, . 169, 170 

Firminus, cleric of Paltus, . 46, 47 

Flavian (1), I., bp. of Antioch, 223, 
224, 3°3> 3 °7 

(2) , II., bp. of Antioch, 4, 13, 26, 80, 
I3I.353 

(3) , bp. of Constantinople, . 284 

Flavias, 53. Bp. Procopius. 

Forgery of documents, 18, 69, 70, 157, 

448-50 ; punishment of, . 69 

Forty Martyrs, ch. of, at Antioch, 119 

Gaian, bp. of Alexandria, . 415 

Galatia, . . . . -55 

Gauls, ..... 175 

Genesius, ..... 103 

Gennadius, presb. of Minidus, 282, 283 
Georgia, dau. of Anastasia, 455, 457, 458 
Germanicea. Bp. Thomas (?). 
Germanicupolis, 13, 26,80. Bp. Bisula. 
Grammarian, . . . . 423 

Great Monastery, . . 371-3 

Greece, 93 

■Gregory (1), (of Nazianzus), bp. of 
Constantinople, 9, 13-5. 68, 135, 
205, 206, 232, 235, 239, 240, 242, 
246, 248, 250, 251, 268, 269, 270, 
296, 343, 344, 428 

(2) , pseudo-bp. of Diocsesarea in 

Pontus, . 208, 209, 228, 418 

(3) , (Thaumaturgus), bp. of Neo- 

coesarea, . . 219-21, 393 

(4) , bp. of Nyssa, . 205, 206, 220 

Hebdomarii , .... 99 

Heliodorus, curator of Hypatius, 114 
Helladius (1), bp. of Caesarea in Cap¬ 
padocia, . . . 205, 206 

(2), bp. ofTarsus, 156, 157, 158, 159 
Henotikon, . 16, 255, 256, 330 

Heraclea, . . . • • 73 

Heracliana, archimandritess, . 192 


Iberia, . 8, 102, 224, 271, 328 

Ignatius ( 1 ), bp. of Antioch, . 174 

(2), presb., . . . .107 

Incorruptibility of Christ’s body, 349, 
350 

Indacus, bp. of Corycus, . . 318 

Interest, taking of, 25-7, 64, 78, 103, 104 
Irenaeus(i), bp. of Lyons, . . 175 

(2) , (5iya.fJ.os), bp. of Tyre, . 136 

(3) , deacon of Antioch, . . 35 

(4) , presb., .... 420 

Isaac, bp. of Apamea, . 93, 94, 95 

monastery of, . . . 90-2, 32I 

Isaiah (1), pseudo-bp., 208, 209, 21 1, 
213-9, 221, 222, 224-6, 228, 418, 
419 

(2), monk, .... 338 

Isauria, 19, 20, 23, 32, 67, 76, 77, 78, 
82, 149, 150, 155, 318, 427 
Isidora, . . . 386, 387, 389 

Isidore (1), bp. of Chalcis in Syria, 52, 

53 , 59, 1 38, *39, *5°, *5*, 326 

(2) , monk, .... 360 

(3) , presb. and monk of Pelusium, 

25*73 

(4) , tribune, . . . .150 

(5) , of Tyre, . . . . 363 


James, KOfirjTiavSs (?), . . 415 

Jannia, archimandritess, . 368-71 

Jerusalem, ..... 242 

Jews, . 60, 61, 62, 63, 148, 316 

[ohn (1), archim. at Antioch, 132-44, 
148-51, 204, 207, 325-7, 331, 
337-42, 348, 351, 352 

(2) , do., 132-44, 148-51, 204, 207, 

325-7, 33L 337-42 . 

(3) , (son of Aphthonia), archim. of 

Ivenneshre, . . . .415 

(4) , (Canopites), archim. of monast. 
of Theodore, 146, 147, 266-8, 379 


INDEX. 


469 


PAGE 

John (5), II. (Hemula), bp. of Alex¬ 
andria, .... 255 

(6) , III. (Nicoeota), bp. of Alex¬ 
andria, . . 88, 255, 256 

(7) , bp. of Alexandria Minor, 98, 99 

(8) , bp. of Antioch, . 157, 158 

(9) , bp. of Claudiupolis, . 4-7, 1 1 

(10) , bp. of Constantina,1 345-50, 352 

( 1 1 ) , I. (Chrysostom), bp. of Con¬ 
stantinople, . -159, 19°, 210, 

277-9, 306, 414, 453 

(12) , II. (Cappadox), bp. of Con¬ 
stantinople, . . 360-3 

(13) , count, . . .129, 263-6 

* (14), deacon and monk, 102, 378, 379 

(15) , monk of monast. of ‘Akiba, 382 

(16) , monk, . . . 1 9 1 —3 

(17) , presb. and logothete, . 290 

(18) , reader, .... 327 

(19) , rhetor of Alexandria, . 315 

(20) , scholastic of Antioch, 37, 61 

(21) , scholastic ofBostra, 397, 405, 41 2 

(22) , scribe, . . . 413, 414 

(23) , son of Ammian, name to be 

given to, . . 233, 234 

(24) , tribune, . . 275-7, 280-2 

(25) , ..... 439 

Joseph, monk, . . 1 9 1 

Judas the Apostle, ch. of, at Berytus, 

271 

Julian (1), archim. of monast. of Bassus, 

178 

(2), bp. of Bostra, . . . 394 

3), bp. of Emesa, ... 35 

(4) , bp. of Halicarnassus, 349, 350, 
358 

(5) , chamberlain, . . . 199 

(6) , monk of monast. of Cyrus, 261, 
262 

(7) , presb. of Alexandria, . 330 

(8) , presb. of Tarsus, 113-5, 293, 294 

Julius, bp. of Rome, . . 284, 285 

Justinian, Emperor, . . . 199 

Juvian, Mauretanian bp., . . 296 


Khurish, monast. of, 

K0UT)Tiav6s (?), 

Ktetores , 


. 261 

• 415 

in, 227 


Lampetius, Adelphian, . . 55 

Laodicea in Phrygia, Synod of, 284, 
298, 316, 317 

in Syria. Bps. Nicias, Constantine. 
Law, civil, ..... 69 


TAGE 

Lectionary, .... 234 

Leo, bp. of Rome, 258 ; Tome of, 5, 88, 

254, 255, 256, 258, 361 
Leontius (1), deacon of Antaradus, 127, 
128 

(2) , (Tapitoleon), magistrian, 73, 84 

(3) , martyr, ch. of, at Tripolis, 271 

(4) , monk, . . . 216, 275 

(5) , presb. of Antioch, . 35—8 

\t)(tto8iockttjs, .... 125 

Libanius, presb. of Apamea, 103, 104 
Liberius, bp. of Rome, . 206, 207 

Litigation forbidden to monks, 385, 386 
Logothete, .... 290 

Longinus, presb. of Antioch, 25, 26, 

28, 29, 79, 80 

Lydia, . . . 299, 300, 348 

Macedonius (i), I., bp. of Constanti¬ 
nople, 312. Macedonians, 269, 
310, 31 1, 348 

(2) II., bp. of Constantinople, . 255 

Magister militum, . 4, 60, 113, 125 
M agister officio rum, . . 73, 84 

Magistrian, . . . 73, 84 

Magnus, African, . . . 296 

Magydum, 7, 8. Bp. Epiphanius. 
Majuma, monast. of, . . .102 

Mammian, bp. of Damascus, . 20 

Mani, heresiarch, 219, 316. Manichees, 
316 

Marde, hill of, 345, 346, 347, 352 
Marinus (1),- bp. of Berytus, . 419 

(2), chartularins ,3 . . .381 

Marion, bp. of Sura, 108, 179, 350-2, 

355-9 

Mark (1), cleric of Berrhoea, . 62 

(2) presb. and monk of Cilicia. 
286-9, 29°~3 

Maron, bp., monast. of, . 105 

Marriage, second, 127, 134-7, 141, 

142, 147, 148, 196 

Married bishops, . . 168, 169 

Martyrius, cleric of Anazarba, 88, 89 
Massalians, . . . 287, 291 

Matthew, bp. of Berrhoea, . 464 

Matronian, illustris , . . *37 

Mauretania, .... 296 

Maximian, bp. of Constantinople, 158 
Maximin, scholastic, . . 37, 358 

Maximus ( 1 ), philosopher, . . 335 

(2) , presb. of Seleucia in Isauria, 
1 16, 1 1 8 

(3) , . 433 


1 Cf. Land Anec. Syr. ii. 173. 15. 


2 Evag. iii. 33. 


3 Zach. Rh. vii. 9. 


470 


INDEX. 


PAGE 

Meletius, bp. of Antioch, 276, 277, 302 

Melian earth (pigment), 

• 379 

Meloe, 25, 26, 77, 80, 81. 

Bp. 

Musonius. 

/xeV and 5e, construction of, 

415-7 

Menas of Tyre, . 

• 363 

Mesopotamia, 

9 

Metropolitan, jurisdiction of, 13, 

17, 3°, 

upuiuau, jU113UU,UUll ui, 1/, jU, 

3D 35, 7D 72, 78, 82, 131, 217, 
218, 221, 289, 311, 318 


Milan, ..... 304 

Minidus (in territory of Laodicea in 
Syria), ... 38, 282 

* Misael, chamberlain, afterwards dea¬ 

con, 63, 66, 195, 196, 199, 236, 
237, 243, 244, 246, 459-6i 

* Mitras, . 144, 329, 333, 336, 337 

Monasteries, jurisdiction over, 27-9, 69, 

86, 87, 138, 192, 193, 288, 292, 
293, 377, 378 

Monks, banishment of, . 165, 347 

Montanus, heresiarch, . .219 

Musonius(i), bp. of Meloe, 17, 19-21, 
23-6, 28-33, 76-8o, 81, 82, 83 

(2). vindex of Anazarba, . . 87-9 

Nazianzus, .... 239 

Neoctesarea, 449; Synod of, 1 1 6, 118 
Neon, archim. of Tagais, . 283, 285 

Nestorius, bp. of Constantinople, 5, 45, 
156, 157, 158, 299-301, 348, 364; 
commemoration of, 84 ; heresy of, 
6, 10, 38, 158, 180, 181, 184, 185, 
299-3°D 352, 375- Nestorians, 
38, 281, 304, 334, 341, 374 
Niccea, Synod of, 117, 135, 136, 181, 
197, 224, 297, 298, 300, 408, 410 
Nice, Synod of, . . . . 206 

Nicias, bp. of Laodicea 1 in Syria, 38, 39, 
282 

Nisibis. Bp. Elisha. 

Nonnus (1), bp. of Seleucia in Syria, 
373- 377, 378 

(2), monk of monast. of Simeon, 120-2 
Notary, . . 270,413,415,436 

Novatus (Novatian), presb. of Rome, 

297, 298. Novatians, 1S2, 297, 

298, 312 

Numidia, ..... 296 

Giconomi , . . . 65. 95, 96, 103 

(Ecumenius, count . n, 35, 83 

Olba in Isauria, 27, 68, 78, 82, 427. 
Bps. Paul, Theodore. 


PAGE 

Ordination in another province, 39 ; 
in articulo mortis , 58, 209, 218 

by heretics, 77, 180-3, 202, 203, 
276-80, 282, 283, 302-5, 321, 322, 
353, 4i8 

simomac, 31, 32, 54, 55, 131, 132, 
196, 226 

Origen, presb. of Caesarea in Palestine, 
313 

Orobiane, monast. of, . . 449 

Palestine, 8, 35, 139, 165, 215, 221, 
223, 284, 304, 315, 332, 349, 
422. Pal. I., 393 

Palladius, bp. of Antioch, . 19, 21 

Paltus, 46. Bp. Eucharius. 

Pamphilus, presb. of Caesarea in Palestine, 
393 

Pamphylia, 7, 8, 215, 216, 259, 281 
Patricians, 1 1 , 60, 125, 199, 200, 203 
Patrick (1), mag. mil. in press., . 4 

(2), presb. and monk, . .162 

Patrophilus, bp. of zEgae, . . 269 

Paul (1), (of Samosata), bp. of Antioch, 

1 8 1 , 298, 317. Paulianists, 284, 
298, 300, 301, 316, 317 

(2) , bp. of Emesa, 157, 158, 300 

(3) , bp. of Ephesus, . . 181 

(4) , bp. of Olba in Isauria, 18, 27-31, 
32, 33, 68-70, 81, 82, 86, 87, 153, 
155, 159, 161 

Paulinus, bp. of Antioch, . 223, 302 

Pelagia, martyr, . . . .414 

Pelagius, monk of Seleucia in Syria, 
373-6 

Pelusium, . . 150, 249, 251 

Perga, 7. Bp. Castor. 

Periodeutes , 104, 105, 107, 108, 109, 

1 10 

Pessinus (?) (in territory of Tarsus), 85 
Peter (1), I. (Martyr), bp. of Alex¬ 
andria, ch. of, at Alexandria, 271 

(2) , III. (Mongus), bp. of Alexandria, 
253-6 

(3) , (the Fuller), bp. of Antioch, 19, 
21, 334 

(4) , bp. of Apamea, 34-8, 49, 7 1, 72, 
124 

(5) , (the Iberian), bp. of Majuma, 8, 
102, 138, 224, 225, 271, 328, 338 

* (6), presb. of Antioch, bro. of Severus, 
”, 135 

(7), scholastic, 37 

Phcedimus, bp. of Amasia, . 219-21 


1 Kugener in Oriens Chr. 1902, p. 276. 


INDEX. 


471 


PAGE 

Phantasy, doctrine of, 6, 2S1, 316, 358, 
419 

Philadelphia in Isauria. Bp. Victor. 

in Lydia, . . . 348 

Philip (1), deacon of Antioch, . 119 

(2), presb., . . 145-8, 163, 321 

Philoxenus (1), bp. of Doliche, 89, 90, 


345-50, 352 

(2), bp. of Hierapolis, . 19, 90 

Phoenice, .... 96, 304 

Photinus, bp. of Sirmium, 297, 298, 
300, 301 

Photius, archim. in Caria, 179, 180, 183, 
186, 187 

Phr. Pacatiana, . 

Phrygia, .... 

Plague, .... 

Podalirius, cleric, 

Poemen, Egyptian monk, 

Poetry forbidden to clergy, 

Polycarp, bp. of Smyrna, 

Polyeuctus, presb. of Chalcis in Syria, 
52 


310 
298 
340 
196 

387 

88, 89 

175 


Pompeiupolis (in Cilicia), 100, 289. 
Bp. Basil. 

Pontus, . . . 55, 20S, 209 

Prases (yiye/j.wv), . . 19, 392 

Prefects, .... 311,442 

Proclus, bp. of Colonia,1 83, 167-70, 


342-5 

Procopius, bp. of Flavias, . . 54-6 

Program ma of faith before gates of 
monasteries, . . . 376 

Promotus, count, . . .281 

Property of churches, 26, 44, 45, 62, 
64, 65, 80, 103 

Prosdocia (Prosdoce), . . 414 

Proterians, .... 280 

Proterius, bp. of Alexandria, 181, 1S2, 


305 

P sal tat, . 40 

Psepheion . 108 


Quintus, Mauretanian bp., 296, 298 

Readers, 40, ioi, 195, 270, 327, 363, 
39L 4i3 

Re-anointers, 185, 294, 315, 348, 349, 
.355, 4i8 

Recipients, day of, . . .421 

Registration of family, 35, 78, 208, 348 
Rhaphania, bp. of, . . 73 

Rhetors, . . . . 122, 315 

Rhinocorura. Bp. Epimachus. 


PAGE 

Rhosus, ..... 66 

Romans, ..... 83 

Romanus(i), archim. in Palestine, 315 ; 

his monastery . . 119,422 

(2), Julianist, . . . 288, 356 

Romulus, presb. of Doliche, 89, 90 
Rufmus, magistrian, ... 73 

SabelLIUS, heresiarch, 6, 316, 335 
Sacellarius ( = covt. sacr. larg .), 65, 66 
Samuel, archim. of monast. of Isaac, 324 
Sannus, deacon, . . . .176 

Sasima. Bp. Eleusinius. 

Scholastics, 37, 61, 114, 358, 395, 397 
Scythopolis, bp. of, . . .419 

Seleucia in Isauria, 78. Bps. Con¬ 
stantine, Solon, Stephen. 

in Syria, 347. Bp. Nonnus. 
Senate, . . . . .100 

Serenus, bp. of Augusta, . 114,293 

Sergius (1) I., bp. of Cyrrhus, 108, 179, 
350-2, 355-9 

(2), II., bp. of Cyrrhus, . 341, 342 


(3) , (Bar Fathya), deacon, . 196 

(4) , eVSo^draros, . . . 23 1 

(5) , prases of Syria 1 1. , . . 392 

< 6)t reader of Antioch, . . 327 

(7), scholastic, 37 


Severus (1), bp. of Antioch ; his 
monastic life, 35, 379 ; ordination, 
7, 8, 200-2 ; at Constantinople, 
123, 393 ; banishment, 137, 268; 
life in exile, 164, 341, 358, 359, 
415 ; at Chios, 199 ; works con¬ 
demned, 199 ; his monastery, 222 ; 
writings, 59, 185, 1S6, 198, 199, 
288, 341, 35°> 358, 392, 393 


(2) , presb. of Nisibis, . . 464 

(3) , presb. of Tripolis,2 . . 45 

Sidon, Synod of, ... 255 

Silentiary, .... 362, 439 

Silvanus, cleric, . . . 326, 327 

Simeon (i), archim. of great monast., 

37I"3. 

(2) , archim. of Teleda, . . 323 

(3) , bp. of Chalcis in Syria, 58, 104 

(4) , Stylites, . 333, 334, 392, 393 

monast. tof, . . 120, 323, 324 

Siricius, bp. of Rome, . 223, 224 

Sixtus, bp. of Rome, . . . 279 

Skanthin (?), . . . .315 


Slaves not to be ordained, 102 ; not 
allowed to monks or nuns, 396 
Socrates, scholastic, . . 310-2 


31 


1 Mich. p. 266. 


2 Vit Sev. p. 21. 


472 


INDEX. 


PAGE 

Solon, bp. ofSeleuciain Isauria, 12, 13, 
15, 16, 17-23, 25, 32, 33, 67, 77, 
78, 81-3, 86, 87, 1 16, 1 18, 156 
Soteric, bp. of Caesarea in Cappadocia, 
55, 258, 344, 361, 362 
.Stephen (1), archim. of Tagais, . 284 

(2) , bp. of Apamea, . 380-2 

(3) , bp. of Rome, . . . 296 

(4) , bp. of Seleucia in Isauria, . 150 

(5) , bp. of Tripolis,. . . 44-6 

(6) , deacon of Antaradus, . 127 

* (7), deacon, ... 76, 106 

(8) , grammarian, . . . 423 

(9) , monk of monast. of Isaac, bp. 
designate of Anasartha, 91, 92 

* (10), presb. of Antioch, 22,340,341 

( 1 1 ) , presb. of Tripolis, . . 44-6 

(12) , reader, . . . 391—3 

Stipend of clergy, 25, 42, 43, 56, 65, 

172, 173 

Subdeacons, . 39, 40, 98, 99, 351 

Sura, 179. Bp. Marion. 

Symbatius, Isaurian bp., . . 68 

Synada, .... 310-2 

Syncelhts , ..... 360 

Synodical letters, 70-2, 255, 2S8, 334, 
361, 362, 414 

Synods, — see Alexandria, Antioch, 
Ccesarea, Capua, Carthage, Chal- 
cedon, Commanus, Constantinople, 
Ephesus, Laodicea, Neocsesarea, 
Nicoea, Nice, Sidon, Tyre 
provincial, to be held twice a year, 
101 

Syria, 151, 334. Syr. II., 73, 84, 392 

Tagais, monast. of, . . 283, 285 

Tarsus, 35, 84, 159,288. Bp. Dionysius. 
Teleda, monast. of, . . 323, 324 

Terence, count, . . . 269 

Thecla ( 1 ), countess, . . 423-7 

(2) , martyr, . . . .12 

Thelhadin (in territory of Chalcis in 

Syria), . . 105, 107, no 

Theodora, Empress, . 195, 197-9 

Theodore (1), archim. of monast. of 
Romanus, . . . 164-6 

* (2), archim. of monast. of 

Theodore, 48, 102, 104, 438 ; 

his commemoration, 325 ; his 
monastery, . . . 379, 446 

(3) , bp. of Mopsuestia, 300, 317, 
34R 343 


PAGE 

Theodore (4), bp. of Olba in Isauria, 
148, 420, 421, 423, 427 

(5) , bp. of Tyana, . . 205, 206 

(6) , deacon and monk, . . 368 

* (7), tribune and notary, afterwards 

monk at Constantinople, 436-9, 


442-7 


(8), vindex of Tripolis, . 

46 

Theodoret, bp. of Cyrrhus, 

9, 334 

Theodosius (1), bp. of Alexandria, 

195, 196 

(2), bp. of Synada, . 

310-2 

(3), bp. 

. 251 

(4), I., Emperor, 

. 223 

(5), H*. Emperor, 136, 

413 ; his 

commemoration, 413 
(6), presb. of Antioch, . 54, 56 

Theodotus, bp. of Joppa, 185, 314, 
315, 349, 418 

Theophilus, bp. of Alexandria, 223, 
3°3. 3°7 

Theotecnus, presb., and archiatros , 
83- 5, 286, 288-90, 424 
Thomas (1), the Apostle, monast. 
near ch. of, at Seleucia in Syria, 
374-6 

(2) , bp. (of Damascus or German- 
icea ?), 57 

(3) , bp. of Dara,1 . 345-5°= 352 

(4) , deacon of Antioch, . 97, 98 

* (5), presb. of Antioch, 34, 150, 164, 

165, 339, 34° 

(6), presb. of Bostra, 394, 395, 396 
Thrace, ..... 206 

Timostratus, duke, . . . 41-4 

Timothy (1), II. (ZElurus), bp. of 
Alexandria, 7, 8, 138, 181, 182, 
224, 225, 258, 276, 277, 2S0, 281, 
3°4, 3°5, 320, 326, 333, 339, 349, 
353, 4!3, 4X9 ; his commemoration, 
413 

(2) , IV., bp. of Alexandria, 149, 153, 
166 

(3) , bp. of Constantinople, 254, 255, 
360, 361 

(4) presb. of Majuma, . . 102 

r ott ott] pT)Tr] s (of a mag. mil .), 60, 125 

Tribune, .... 275, 436 

Tripolis, 44, 271. Bp. Stephen. 

Tyana, ..... 205 

Typos (formula) of Anastasius, . 4 

Tyre, 97 ; Synod of (?), 88, 318. Bp. 

Epiphanius. 


1 Elijah of Dara, vit. Jo. Tell. ed. Kleyn p. 40 ; cf. Zach. Rh. vii. 6, viii. 5. 


INDEX. 


473 


PAGE 


Uaris (in territory of Laodicea in 
Syria), .... 38 

Urbicius, monk, 259, 261, 269, 291 


Valentine, heresiarch, . . 419 

Valeriana, archimandritess, 3^4^^ 

* Victor (1), bp. of Philadelphia in 

Isauria, 192, 378-80 

* (2), presb. and xenodochos of Antioch, % 

139)419 a c 

Vindex, .... 4b> °7 


Xenodochos, 


PAGE 

419 


Zacharias (1), monk, . . . 191 

(2) , of Pelusium, . . 249-51 

(3) , presb. and monk, . . 417 

Zeno (1), Emperor, . . .16 

(2), presb. of Chalcis in Syria, 52 
Zenobius (1), deacon of Antioch, 204 
(2), presb., .... 420 

Zoninus, presb., . . . 420 

Zosimus, bp., . . . .272 

Z‘ura, monk, .... 234 


INDEX OF QUOTATIONS. 

/S/ 

BIBLICAL. 


Ge. ii. 18, 

PAGE 

. 457 

xxx. 37 ff., 

• 355 

Ex. xviii. 21, 

• 94 

xviii. 26, . 

. 1 16 

xxii. 1, 

403, 404 

xxii. 25 (?), 

. 103 

xxiii. 7, 

. 47 

xxviii. 4-35, 

. 12 

xxx. 7, 

. 326 

Le. 1. 5 1 • 

. 3°9 

V. I — 1 1, 

. 262 

viii. 7"9> • 

12 

xi. 3, 

. 445 

xi. 25, 

• 235 

xxvii. 28, . 

. 405 

xxvii. 29, . 

. 406 

Nu. v. 12-31, 

43°. 431 

vi. 27, 

4 

x. 31, 32, 

173, 174 

xiv. 41, 42, 

. 445 

xx. 17, 88, 

175, 186 

XXX. 2, 3, . 

. 402 

xxx. 6, 

. 248 

De. i. 1 7» 

. 400 

iv. 6, 7, . 

322, 323 

xii. 13, 14, 

• 390 

xvi. 19, 

• 331 

xvi. 20, 

. 186 

xvii. 6, 

191, 192 

xvii. 8-1 1, 

424, 425 

xix. 14, 

• 39 

De. xix. 15, . 

PAGE 

. 192 

xx. 5-7, . 

. 444 

xxiii. 19 (?), 

. 103 

xxiv. 16, . 

61 

xxv. 13 (?), 

• 345 

xx xii. 39, . 

. 245 

xxxiii. 8, 9, 

. 3SS 

Josh. i. 8, 

. 200 

vi. 17, 

. 406 

Judg. vi. 3, 4, 11, . 341 

ix. 1-6, 

329, 33° 

xvii. 10, 

• 79 

1 R. ii. 25, . 

. 376 

hi. 9> 

. 148 

x. 6, 

3- 147 

x. 9, . 

. 184 

xiv. 11, 12, 

. 342 

xv. 23, 24, 

402, 403 

xvi. 4, 

. 140 

XIX. 20, 21, 

184, 185 

xxx. 24, 

. 173 

2 R. xxiv. 1.7, 

. 171 

3 R. xix. 13, 14, 

. 346 

xix. 20, 

. 388 

xxii. 24 t, . 

. 182 

4 R. i. 3, 

• 93 

< 

>— 1 

1 

MD 

274, 275 

i Pa. xxiii. 14, 

. 193 

2 Pa. xxx. 16-20, 

309, 3 10 

2 E. x. 2-4, 

PAGE 

404, 4O5 

Ps. ii. 1, 2, 

# 

197 

ix. 9, 

• 

175 

ix. 38, 

• 

455 

xiv. 5, 

64, 

103, 

104 

xv. 6, 

• 

152 

xxii. 2, 

• 

257 

xxiii. 1, 

• 

389 

x.wi. 5, 

# 

262 

xxxiii. I, 

162 

XXXV. 1, 

379 

XXXVlll. 13, 

• 

389 

xlii. 4, 

• 

M3 

1. 18, 19, 

• 

377 

Hv. 5, 

• 

342 

liv. 12, 

64, 

104 

Ivii. 5, 6, 

• 

122 

Ixv. 12, 

• 

1 1 

lxvii. 6, 

# 

444 

lxvii. 14, 

• 

21 1 

lxviii. 28, 

# 

214 

lxxxviii. 8 

# 

198 

lxxxviii. 10, 

• 

326 

lxxxviii. 32 -4 

• 

34<> 

xciii. 4, 

105, 

106 

xciii. 5, 

• 

H3 

380 

c. 4, 6, 

• 

ci. 7, 

• 

329 

cii. 11, 
cvi. 7 (?) 

• 

3 

336 

cx. 10, 

• 

57" 

cxvii. 18, 

• 

245 

3*4 

cxviii. 96, 

• 

474 


INDEX. 


Ps. cxviii. 120, 

PAGE 

369: 370 

cxviii. 13 1, 

355, 371 

cxxxi. 1, 2, 

. 292 

cxxxvi. 2-4, 

• 152 

cxxxviii. 21, 

61 

cxliii. 4, 

• 93 

cxlvi. 11, . 

. 268 

Pr. iii. 4. 

. 194 

iii. 6 (?) 

• 175 

iv. 23, 259, 

260, 263, 

iv. 27, 

369 

321, 443 

v. 15, 

• 93 

x. 8, 

209, 374 

xii. 5, 

• 143 

xiv. 27, 

• 397 

xv. 24, 

178 

XV. 31 (Hex.), . 58 

xvii. 1, 

. 178 

xvii. 3, 

. 58 

xviii. 4, 

440, 441 

xviii. 9, 

• 374 

xx. 9, 

• 455 

xx. 17 (?), . 

• 345 

xxii. 2, 

. 318 

xxii. 28, 

• 349 

xxiv. 6, 

. 130 

xxiv. 7, 8, . 

. 187 

xxiv. 71, . 

. 442 

xxv. 15, . 

• 323 

xxv. 25, . 

. 204 

xxvi. 11, . 

. 27 

xxvi. 28, . 

• 79 

xxvii. 1, 

162 

xxvii. 4, 

. 204 

xxviii. 14, . 

142, 146, 

180, 424 
(unidentified), . 330 

Ec. i. 3 (?), . 

. 150 

i. 9, . 

. 209 

iii. 1, 

145, 400 

iii. 2, 3, . 

33, 34 

iii. 4, 

• 145 

iii. 7, 

. 107 

v. 1, 2, 4 . 

• 443 

V. 12, 

• 439 

vii. 17, 

147, 186 

ix. 10, 

439 

Ca. iv. 7, 

3 

Tob v. 5, 

. 205 

vi. 24, 

• 337 

vii. 11, 

336, 337 

viii. 9, 

93 

PAGE 

Job ix. 25, . 93, 

161 

xv. 6, 

31 

xvi. 14, 

461 

xix. 4, 

337 

xxviii. 12, 13, . 

253 

xxxiii. 25 (?), 

25 

xxxix. 34, 35, . 

337 

W. xiv. 29, . 

287 

Sir. xxiii. 20, 

346 

Judith xvi. 19, 405, 

406 

Ho. vi. 9, 10, 

397 

x. 8, 

461 

xiii. 12, 

1 15 

Mi. iii. 9, 10, 121, 

345 

v. 7, . . 

322 

vi. 6, 

320 

vii. 18, 

189 

Joel ii. 12, 13, 

344 

Zeph. i. 8, 140,219, 

282 

Mai. ii. 7, 44, 3° 

302 

Is. ii. 3, 

347 

v. 20, 

1 10 

vi. 7, 

202 

vii. 4, 

300 

viii. 6, 

4 

viii. 18, 

170 

xi. 9, 

257 

xiv. 13, 14, 

219 

xiv. 27, 

329 

xxxiii. 20, . 

16b 

xli. 8-1 1, . 

404 

xlii. 14, 

107 

xliii. 27, . 

250 

Ii. 7, 8, . 

356 

In. 5, 

197 

Hi. 7, 

152 

lv. i., 

39^ 

Ivi. 3, 

407 

lvii. 14 (?), 

166 

lxv. 2, . 23, 

290 

Jer. ii. 22, 

22 

ii. 31, 

23 

11. 35, 36, iii. 1, 2, 

290 

v. 21, 22, . 

128 

v. 31, 

129 

vi. 16, 

72 

viii. 22, 

319 

Jer. xiv. 8, 

PAGE 

. I63 

xiv. 10, 

. 216 

xx. 9, 

67, 68 

xxviii. 9, . 

. 27 

xxxi. 10, . 

• 33 

xl. 6, 

65, 66 

xlii. 8-10, 16, 

• 403 

Eze. iii. 1 7~ 1 9, 

. 227 

xxxiii. 11,. 

• 35i 

xxxiv. 4, . 

. 24 

xxxiv. 7, 10, 

97 

xxxiv. II, 12, 

• 33 

xxxiv. 18, 19, 

21, 4, 

24, 150, 285, 375 

Su. 42, 

. 1 16 

52, 53, 59, 

32, 13° 

Da. iii. 17, 18, 

460, 461 

xii. 2, . 

• 390 

4 M. xii. 20, 

. 414 

Mt. iv. 7, 

• 442 

v. 10, 

. 209 

v. 16, 

. 194 

v. 20, 

• 432 

v. 29, 

369, 429 

vi- 33, 

. 441 

vii. 7, 

. 322 

vii. 16, 

. 217 

vii. 21, 

. 283 

vii. 47-5°, 

• 3*>9 

viii. 3, 

. 177 

x. 8, 

M4, 179 

x. 23, 

• 152 

x. 27, 

• 376 

X. 28, 

• 366 

xi. 30, 

. 368 

xii. 30, 

5i 

xii. 34, 35, 

• 374 

xii. 36, 

• 5i 

xii. 37, 

. 302 

xiii. 8, 

. 448 

xiii. 21, 

. 91 

xiii. 52, . 

• 338 

xiii. 57, . 

. 1 10 

xv. 28, 

. 250 

xvi. 18, 295, 

296, 363 

xvi. 19, 

• 354 

xvi. 27, 

• 344 

xviii. 17, . 

. 407 

xviii. 18, 19, 

no, iii, 

xix. 5-9, . 

354, 423 
• 43° 

xix. 16, 

• 452 

INDEX. 


475 


PAGE 


Mt. xix. 21, 29, 

385, 437 

xxii. 39, 40, 

• 437 

xxiii. 4, 

21 

xxiv. 31, . 

• 390 

xxiv. 45, 46, 

292, 293 

xxv. 45, . 

• 463 

Mk. v. 33, 34, 

. 249 

viii. 23-5, . 

. 1 77 

ix. 25, 

• 215 

xiv. 36, 

. 462 

Lu. i. 79, 

• 338 

iv. 39, 

244, 245 

vi. 30, 

. 441 

vi. 45, 

• 337 

x. 5, • 

. 141 

X. 42, II, 

383* 384 

xi. 23, 

• 74 

xii. 42-4, 164,281,367 

xiii. 27 (?), 

. 122 

xvi. 26, 

. 267 

xvii. 10, 

. 370 

xxii. 19, 20, 

. 238 

xxiii. 40, . 

. 20 

xxiii. 46, . 

• 389 

John i. 29, 

262, 390 

iii. 5, 

. 422 

iii. 6, 

• 314 

iii. 8, 

• 37 

iv. 21, 23, 24, 

• 39i 

x. 1 1-3, 31, 81, 86, 

169 

x. 16, 

458, 459 

xii. 48, 

. 228 

xiii. 34, 35 j 

. 437 

xiv. 27, 

141, 205 

XV. 20, 

228, 320 

xxi. 15-7, . 

• 372 

Ac. ii. 44, 47, 

365, 366 

iii. 8, 

• 332 

iv. 32, . 57 (?), 366 

v. 29 (?), . 

. 146 

v. 36, 

182, 183 

x. 28, 

. 277 

x. 47 , 

• 3*4 

XV. I, 2, . 

. 160 

xv. 8, 

275, 277 

XV. 10, 

• 377 

xvi. 3, 

305. 3°6 

xx. 34, 35, 

• 3 67 

xxi. 39, . 

7 

xxv. 16, 

46 

Ro. i. 9, 

96 

/P 

0 

Ln 

PAGE 

I89, 270 

11. 21, 22, . 

. 242 

ii. 24, 

13°, 197 

viii. 15, 

• 324 

x. 2, . 

180, 349 

x. 10, 

. 302 

X. 21, 

• 23 

xi. 16, 

11 

xi. 22, 

72, 351 

xii. 19, 

. 62 

xiii. 1, 2, . 

. 247 

xiv. 23, 

• 5i 

xvi. 17-9, . 

. 229 

1 Co. i. 5 (?), 

. 163 

ii- 14, 

. 42 

iv. 1, 

281, 356 

iv- 5, 5E 

iv. 7, 

275> 432 
294, 295 
. 283 

iv. 20, 

vi. 7-9, 

27 

vi. 14, 15, . 

262, 263 

vi. 18, 

• ID 

vi. 20, 

• 396 

vii. 4, 5, 428, 

433, 436 

vii. 20, 

• 436 

vii. 23, 24, 

372, 454 

vii. 25, 

. 168 

vii. 27, 

• 436 

vii. 31, 

• 367 

vii. 36, 

• 456 

viii. 12, 

37 2, 396 

ix. 7, 13, . 

99, 4°5 

ix. 16, 17, . 

142, 382 

ix. 21, 22, 

3 °3, 3°4, 

307, 

321, 332 

ix. 26, 

150, 3(l3 

X. 12, 

370, 433 

x. 13, 

. 130 

x. 24, 

372, 437 

x. 32, 

. 86 

xi. 3, 

. 429 

xi. 21, 

- 365 

xi. 26, 

22 

xi. 28-32, . 

. 188 

xii. 15, 16, 

- 74 

xii. 28, 

• 4i 

xiii. 1, 

260, 371 

xiii. 5, 

. 101 

xiv. 15, . 

. 218 

xiv. 40, 

. 98 

xv. 31, 

. 285 

xv. 33, 

. 366 

xvi. 13, . 

. 11 

xvi. 19, 

. 451 

xvi. 22, 

407, 464 

2 Co. i. 17 (?), 

# 

PAGE 

42 

11. 7, 

0 

241 

ii. 11, 

• 

446 

ii. 19, 

• 

236 

iii. 2, 

• 

263 

iii- 3, 

266 

iii. 18, 

241, 

261, 

396, 

423 

iv. 2, 

. 

241 

vi. 3, 

• 

135 

vi. 14, 

• 

328 

vi. 17, 

• 

264 

vii. 4, 

• 

I67 

viii. 9, 

• 

423 

viii. 21, 

194, 

447 

xi- 4, 

• 

5i 

xi. 19, 

• 

336 

xii. 11, 

28, 

332 

Ga. i. 8, 9, 

i56(?), 349(?), 

407 

ii. 2, 

• 

98 

iii. 17, 

• 

146 

1V- 13, 

• 

412 

v. 2, 

3o6> 

308 

.v. 4, . 

• 

377 

V. 10, 

• 

5i 

V. II, 

377 

vi. 5, 

• 

401 

Eph. ii. 8, 

9, 

265 

iv. 3 (?), 

0 

292 

iv. 11, 

0 

4i 

iv. 29, 

0 

365 

v. 3, 4, 

240, 

242 

V. 26, 27 

1 • 

354, 

423 

vi. 4, 

• 

438 

vi. 12, 

• 

440 

vi. 16, 

• 

322 

Ph. i. 9 (?), 

I(j3 

i. 16, 

* 

32^ 

i. 29, . 

268, 

400 

iii. 14, 

• 

446 

iv. 3. 

• 

384 

iv. 10, 

• 

35i 

iv. 13, 

• 

381 

Col. i. 16, 

40 

ii. 18, 

# 

21 

ii. 23, 

185, 

298, 

440 

iii. 1, 2, 

4, 

• 

169 

ni. 17, 

• 

• 

442 

iv. 6, 

• 

• 

383 

1 Th. ii. 5, 

10, 

• 

96 

v. 21, 

• 

• 

320 

476 


INDEX. 


PAGE 

i Ti. ii. 8, . . 391 

ii. 12, . . 383 


iii. 

2, 

67 (?), 

1 12, 168 

iii. 

4, 

. 168 

iv. 

J5, 

367, 368 

V. 

22, 

23, • 42, 64, 94 

vi. 

5, 

• 369 

vi. 

10, 

23, 379 

vi. 

1 1 

(?), ’ 

. 67 

2 Ti. 

ii. 

9, • 

• 152 

ii. 

19, 

9 

iv. 

2, 

• 133 

iv. 

7, 

8 

iv. 

16, 

17, • 

. 76 

Tit. 

i- 5, 

7, • 

. 210 

i. 

9' 

. 94 

ii. 

3, 

• 383 

ii. 

4, 5 

. 450 

t iii. 5, 

PAGE 

. 400 

iii. 10, 

264, 273, 291 

e. ii. 16, 

17, 

. 28l 

iii. 13, 

. 291 

iii. 14, 

. 250 

iv. 5, 

. 28l 

v. 4, 

. 411 

vi. 6, 

• 330 

vi. 18, 

• 295 

vii. 7, 

. 217 

ix. 28, 

, 

201, 202 
• 376 

x. 4, . 

x. 14, 

. 201 

x. 28, 29 

• 

62, 63 

x. 31, 

. 279 

x. 34, 

. 8 

x. 37, 

270, 344 

x. 39, 

241, 423 

He. xi. 6, 

PAGE 

263, 427 

xii. 4, 

• 

I69, 26l 

xiii. 4, 

• 

• 433 

Paul (unidentified), 347 

Ja. i. 17, 

. 

126, 442 

i. 26, 

• 

• 350 

1 Pe. i. 12, 

. 

. 214 

iii. 7, 

• 

. 429 

2 Pe. ii. 22, 

• 

• 352 

iii. 16, 

• 

35°, 449 

1 J. ii. 16, 

• 365 

2 J. 10, 11, 

• 

229, 263, 

264, 

269, 

272, 291 

3 J* 3, • 

. 

. 164 

ECCLESIASTICAL. 


PAGE 

Acta deposition^ Juliani ep. 

Bostrse, .... 394 

Syn. Chalcedonis, actio V. 

(Mansi vii. 1 13), . . . 5 

Syn. Commani (ripa|ts xj-ko^vt]- 

fxarwv), . . . . 55 

Syn. Ephesi I. (Mansi iv. 1344), 

299, 3°°, 348, 352 

Syn. Ephesi II. (unidentified), 

284, 316 

Syn. ep. Syrke II., 75 

Syn. Palti, .... 46 

‘Akiba, monks of monast. of, letter 

to Severus, .... 382 

Alexander of Alexandria, ep. ad 
Alex. Const. 9 (Theod. H.E. 

i. 9) . :97 

Anastasius, Emperor, letter to 

John III. of Alexandria, . 255 

letter to Severus, ... 84 

typos addressed to Flavian of 
Antioch, . . . . 4, 5 

Anonymous, confession of 

faith, . . . . • 3J5 

letter to Antoninus of Berrhoea, 57 
letter to John of Bostra, 397, 398-400, 

408, 409 

letter to Severus, . . 193, 194 

Apophthegmata Patrum, Poemen 


PAGE 

Archimandrites, petition to 

Severus, . . . . 131 

Athanasius I. of Alexandria, 

Apol. c. Arian. 44 (?), 207, 287 

De Sententia Dionysii, . . 335 

Athanasius II. of Alexandria, 

letters, . . , . 255 

Basil of Csesarea, Ascetic Treatise 


(unidentified), . . 195, 385 

Comm, in Ps. (unidentified), . 313 

ep. 9-2, . . . • 335, 336 

ep. 105, 214.2, 250, . . 269 

ep. 207.1, . . . 449, 45° 

ep. 262.2, . 259, 261, 264, 269, 291 
ep. 265.2, .... 215 

ep. ad monachos Orobianes et 
Chalanes (unidentified), . 449 

ep. (unidentified), . . . 343 

Horn. xix. .... 393 

Reg. Fus. Tract, ix. 2, . . 386 

De Spir. Sane. 48, 49, . . 416 

72, 312, 313 

Can. Apost. 21-3, . . . 410 

Apost. 78, . . 85, 189, 190 

Apost. 81, .... 102 

Syn. Ant. 3, . . . 29, 30 

Syn. Ant. 4, . . . 124, 155 

Syn. Ant. 6, . . . . 154 


INDEX. 


477 


PAGE 


an. Syn. Ant. 9, 

• 

30, 3i 

Syn. Ant. 12, . 

. 1 14, 123 (?), 154 

Syn. Ant. 13, 22, . 

• 39 

Syn. Laod. 1, . 

. 136 

Syn. Laod. 4, . 

# 

. 27 

Syn. Laod. 7, . 

• 

. 298 

Syn. Laod. 33, 

• 

• 273 

Syn. Laod. 40, 

• 75 

Syn. Neocoes. 9, 

• 

1 16, 1 1 7, 1 18, 

136, 137 

Syn. Nic. 1, . 

• 

394, 408, 410 

Syn. Nic. 4, . 

97 (?), 

212, 222, 224 

Syn. Nic. 5, . 

• 

. IOI 

Syn. Nic. 9, . 

73, 

1 1 7, 1 1 8, 128, 

135, 

136, 41 1, 412 

Syn. Nic. 10, . 

• 

. . 4 1 2 

Syn. Nic. 17, . 

• 

27, 104 

Syn. Nic. 19, . 

• 

1 Si, 297; 298 

Celer mag. off., letter to Severus, 84 | 
Church Histories (unidentified), . 2S6 , 

Constit. Apost. viii. 27, . 21 1, 213 

Cosmas of Apamea, petition of 

resignation, . . . 48, 49 

Cyprian, ep. 69, 71, 73, . . 296 

eP* 7 3*3» • *. • • 29S, 299 

Cyril of Alexandria, ep. 17, 45, ^64 

ep. 54, • • • .157, 158, 159 

in Theod. Mops. (Mansi ix. 235), 317 

Dionysius of Alexandria, letters 
to Dionysius and Stephen of 
Rome, . . . 296, 297 

Dioscorus I. of Alexandria, letter 

about Irenoeus Siya/io s, . 136 

Dioscorus II. of Alexandria, 

ripfi£is virofxvrnxa.7 wv, . . 1 33 


Eleutherius sacellarius , letters 

to Severus, .... 65 

Epiphania, Arethusa, and Kha- 
phania, bps. of, attack on 
Syn. of Antioch, . . 74, 75 

Eusebius of Caesarea, II. E. vi. 41, 

169, 170 

viii. 12, . . . . . 414 


Greg. Naz., letter against 
Gregory of Nyssa (unidenti¬ 


fied), . 

Or. vi. 11, 

Or. xix. 7 (?), 
Or. xxi. 15, 
Or. xxxiii. 4, 
Or. xxxiii. 15, 


. 206 

14, 15 
. 68 
. 428 

269, 270, 343 
250, 251, 296 


PAGE 

Greg. Naz., Or. xxxix. 14, . . 135 

Or. xl. 26, 232, 236, 237,239, 240, 

242, 243, 246 
Or. xliii. .... 393 

Or. xliii. 37, . . . 9, 10, 13 

Greg. Nyss., letter against 
Gregory of Nazianzus (un¬ 
identified), .... 206 

Vit. Greg. Thaumat., . 133, 393 

Hilar ian of Diocaesarea, letter 

forged in name of, . 18, 69 

Hippocrates scholastic (?) and 

others, letter to Severus, . 133 

Ignatius ad Ephes. 5, . 174,175 

ad Philad. 3, . . . .174 

ad Smyrn. 8, . . . .174 

Irenneus adv. Haer. IV. xxxiii. 7 

(62), . 175 

Isaurian bps., letters to Callistus, 18 
Isaurian or Cilician correspondent, 

letter to Severus, . . 149, 150 

Isidore of Pelusium, ep. ii. 246, 252, 253 

John II. of Alexandria, letters, . 255 

John III. of Alexandria, letter to 

Dioscorus and Choeremon, . 256 

letter to Timothy of Constan¬ 
tinople, .... 255 

John Chrysostom, Comm, in 

Matth. , . . . 4^3, 454 

Comm, in Titum, . . .210 

Laudes Pauli, . . 277-9, 306, 307 

De Proditione Judce, . .190 

De SS. Bernice ct Prosdoce, . 414 

De S. Pelagia, . . .414 

John (not further defined), letter 

to Severus, . . . 439, 440 

Julian of I Ialicarnassus, Appendices, 342 
Julius of Rome (Pseudo-), letter to 

Dionysius, . . . 2S4, 2S5 

Liturgy, . . . 122, 187, 188 

Marin us charlularius , letter to 

Severus, . . . .381 

Mark archim., Tr\ripo<Pop'ia, 289, 291 
Musonius of Meloe, letter to 

Longinus, 25, 26, 28, 29, 79, 80 
letters to Severus (?), . . S3 

ripci^s, . . . • . -77 

Pamphilus, oration on,1 . . 393 


1 The life by Eusebius is perhaps meant. 


478 


INDEX. 


l'AGE 

Peter of Alexandria, letters, 255, 256 
Peter of Apamea, petition to Syn. 

of Antioch, . . . • 71 

nPS£ts uiro/j.irn.<.dTU)v (at Alexandria), 

228 

See also Act. Syn. Commani 
and Dioscorus II. 

Re-anointers at Antioch, peti¬ 
tion, ..... 185 

Rhosus, clergy of, petition to 

Severus, . . . 66, 67 

Sergius II. of Cyrrhus, 71 -pa£is, . 341 

Severus of Antioch, against the 

Grammarian, . . .198 

Horn, xxx., . 334, 335, 392, 393 

against Julian, . . 350, 35^ 

against Romanus, . . . 288 

letter to Anastasias or Celer, . 84 

letter to brothers at Alexandria, 267 
letter to Cassian of Bostra, . 395 

letter to Dionysius of Tarsus, . 84 

letter to the fathers, . . 119 

letter to John the count, . 129 

letter to John son of Aphthonia, 

415, 416 

letter to Julian the chamberlain, 199 
letter to Misael the deacon, . 199 

letter to Philoxenus of Plierapolis, 90 
letter to Solon of Seleucia, . 25 

on Two Substances, . . 199 

(Pseudo-), treatise and letters, 

448, 449 

Simeon, monks of monast. of, 

recantation, . . . 323 

Simoniac clergy, letters to Severus 

on behalf of, . . • I3I 


PAGE 

Siricius of Rome, letter to Eastern 

bps., .... 223, 224 

Socrates, H. E. vii. 3, . 310-2 

Solon of Seleucia, letter to Severus(?), 

18, 19, 20 

Synod of Caesarea, letter to 

Theodosius I., . 223, 224 

Synod of Capua, letters to Theo- 

philus and to Eastern bps., . 223 

Synod of Tyre (?), letter to John 

of Alexandria, ... 88 

Synodical letter (ymcertain °f 

whom) and another letter . 414 

Syrian bps. at Alexandria, letter 

to Syrians, . 162, 319, 320, 339 

Ten bps., formula of, . .361 

Testamentum Domini ii. 10, . 426 

Theodore presb. , letters to Cosmas 

of Apamea, ... 48 

Theodoret, H. E. v. 4, . . 9 

Theodosius II., order about 
Irenceus oiyafxos (Mansi 
v. 420), . . . .136 

Theophilus of Alexandria, letter 

to Flavian, . 303, 304, 307, 30S 

Timothy of Alexandria, letter 

on reception of heretics, 181, 320, 

326, 339 

synodical to Peter of Antioch, . 324 

Timothy of Constantinople, synod¬ 
ical to John of Alexandria, 255, 361 

Virgins of Antioch, letter to 

Severus, . . . .270 

Zacii arias of Pelusium, letter to 

Severus, .... 249 


SECULAR. 


PAGE PAGE 

Anonymous, . . .61, 265 Cod. Just. I. iv. 17 (?) . . 111 

IX. xxii. 22 (?), ... 69 


ADDENDA AND CORRIGENDA. 


P. vi. note 7. There can be no doubt that Epiphanius of 
Magydum was the ordainer of Severus. 

P. vii. 1. 13, 14. This sentence is open to misunderstanding. Severus 
never openly opposed the Plenotikon, but by explaining it as a 
condemnation of the Synod he made it useless as a compromise. 

P. x. 1. 6. For 1 zKXoyaC’ read 1 IkXo yen’. So at p. 1, note 2, and 
p. 3, note 1. 

P. xiii. 1. 14. For ‘ Cosmos ’ read ‘ Cosmas ’. 

P. 9, 1. 16. For ‘ who longed for him ’ read ‘ for whom he longed \ 
(Ryssel in Theol. Literaturz. 1904, No. 5, p. 148.) 

P. 19, note 2. For S/y/xtoi/’ read ‘ i/ye/xoiv ’. 

P. 60, marg. If the general is Hypatius, the date should probably 
be 515-8. 

P. 66, note 2. For 1 B 7 read ‘ MSS.’ 

P. 87, marg. If the synod is that of Tyre, the date should be 514-5. 

P. 88. For ‘ him ’ read ‘it ’. There is a play on the word ro/xos. 

P. 96, marg. For ‘315’ read ‘513’. 

P. 107, 1. 7. For ‘ Koholeth ’ read ‘ Koheleth 

P. 1 14, 1. 20. For ‘Syrian’ read ‘Serenus’. 

P. 125, marg. The date should probably be 515-8 : see on p. 60. 

P. 148, marg. For ‘ 25 ’ read ‘ 21 ’. It is clear that the banish¬ 
ment of the bishops and monks was in progress or had only just been 
completed: see p. 34, note. (John’s date is to be preferred to that 
of ‘ Zacharias.’) 

P. 164, marg. For ‘ 525 ’ read ‘521 

P. 167, marg. This seems to date from the time of the expulsion 
of the bishops (519-21). 

P. 1 7 1, marg. For ‘ 25 ’ read ‘ 21 \ A Monophysite could hardly 
have been in possession of an Eastern see after 521. So on p. 176. 

P. 1 7 1, note 1. The incursion may also have been that of the 
Huns (Land Anec. Syr. ii. 13. 7, 41. 19, and note to v. Douwen and 
Land’s translation). 

P. 179, marg. As the bishops and monks appear not to have 
been in exile, the date should probably be 519-21. 

P. 185, 1. 25. This treatise is no doubt our v. 6. 


32 


480 


ADDENDA AND CORRIGENDA. 


P. 185, note 2. For ‘ i.’ read ‘ii.’ 

P. 185, note 3. For ‘ 5 ’ read ‘4’. * 

P- 216, 1. 14, 15. For ‘feet? did he . . . Pamphylia 5 read ‘feet 
(but he did . . . Pamphylia) ’ (Ryssel, l.c.\ 

P. 231, 1. 9. For ‘gracious’ read ‘glorious’. 

E. 233, marg- For ‘519’ read ‘521’. A comparison of p. 236, 
1. 15 ff, and p. 237, 1. 22 ff. , seems to show that Ammian and 
Epagathus were in Constantinople, but Z‘ura (p. 234, 1. 16) could 
hardly have been there before 521 (Land Anec. Syr. ii. 13. 22 ff.). 

P. 244, marg. For ‘ 521 ’ read ‘ 523 ’. This follows from the last 
correction. 

P. 244, note 3. This chronology is very hard to reconcile with 
the fact that John of Ephesus saw Ctesaria apparently before she 
entered the convent. 

P. 278, 1. 13. For ‘ circumcize ’ read ‘ circumcise ’. 

P. 294, marg. A comparison with p. 185 makes it probable that 
this letter should be placed in 513. 

P. 297, 1. 22, ‘But’ . . . p. 298, 1. 16, ‘Africa’. This passage 
is quoted in some answers addressed by certain ‘ holy fathers ’ to 
some questions from the East in Brit. Mus. Add. MS. 12,155 f. 
244 r., where it is headed merely ‘Of the Holy Severus.’ As we 
should expect, this version differs both from that in 14.601 and from 
that in 12,155 at f- 220 r. and other MSS. 

P. 298, 1. 9-11. For ‘although . . . Photinus ’ read ‘and that 
though the miserable heresy of Paul of Samosata and that of Photinus 
are pregnant with the same folly’. 

P. 307, 1. 13. For ‘professional’ read ‘technical’. 

P. 320, note 2. For ‘ 3 ’ read ‘ 4 ’. 

P. 342, marg. This letter, having been written before i. 56, must 
be dated 5 r9-2i : see on p. 167. 

P. 342. Transpose notes 2 and 3. 

P. 375? note. For ‘xxxix.’ read ‘xxxiv.’ 

P. 393, 1. 4. Emend the text and read ‘ on ’ for the first ‘ of’. 

P. 393, note 1. For ‘ 568 ’ read ‘ 508 ’. 

P. 415, note. For ‘ ko/jutlolvos ' read ‘ Ko^navo? ’. 

P. 436, note 2. For ‘ 29 ’ read ‘ 20 ’. 

P. 454, note 2. For ‘ 14 ’ read ‘ 20 ’. 


PRINTED BY NEILL AND CO., LTD., EDINBURGH. 


* 


