Title: An Account of the Greek Church, as to Its Doctrine and Rites of Worship, with Several Historical Remarks interspersed, relating thereunto; to which is added, An Account of the State of the Greek Church, under Cyrillus Lucaris Patriarch of Constantinople, with a Relation of his Sufferings and Death
Creator: Thomas Smith, B.D., Fellow of St. Mary Magdalen College, Oxford
Publisher: London: printed by Miles Flesher for Richard Davis in Oxford, 1680 (title page MDCLXXX)
Publication Date: 1680
Rights: Public Domain (pre-1930 publication); the item record (Internet Archive, from the early English books microfilm scans) carries no possible-copyright-status field
Source: Internet Archive item bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_an-account-of-the-greek-_smith-thomas-of-magdal_1680, full-text OCR file bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_an-account-of-the-greek-_smith-thomas-of-magdal_1680_djvu.txt, fetched directly by the library/source-research thread, 2026-09-29. The item page carries no possible-copyright-status or licence field.
Provenance note: Header prepended by the library thread; the OCR text follows unchanged, apart from this header. Rights basis: the 1680 title-page date clears this registry's public-domain-by-date rule; the host gives no rights field, so the printed date is the whole rights basis. The long s is read by the OCR mostly as the long-s character. OCR artifacts are left as found; nothing was corrected, re-spaced or retyped.
Content note: An Oxford divine's outside description of Greek doctrine and worship, with a life of Cyril Lucaris; not the Greek church's own voice. Scan quality: better than the Rycaut scan; about 87 percent of text lines are mostly real English words by a crude vocabulary check, with long-s and column errors. Second witness only; check any quotation against the page images.

---

G. Da 


_—— = — 


EE AN 


ACCOUNT 


OF I'HeE 


Greek Church, 


AS TO 


Its Doctrine and Rites of Worth : 
wITH 


Several Hiſtoricall Remarks interſperſed , re- 
|| lating thereunto. 


To which is added, 


An Account of the State of the Greek 
Church, under Cyrillus Lucaris Pa- 
triarch of Conſtantinople , with a 
Relation of his Sufferings and Death. 


— —- 


— 


—_— 


— — - > OD — —  —O—— 


By THO.SMITH, B. D. and Fellow of 
| S. Mary Magdalen College Oxon. 
| 


— 
— —_ 


LONDON, "i 


| Printed by Miles Fleſher for Richard Davis in 
Oxford, MDCLXXX. 


in | 


A 
ki 
” 


To THE 
Right Reverend Father in God, 


HENRY 


Lord Biſhop of London, 


Dean of His MAJESTIEs 
Chappel-Royall, 


AND 


One of the Lords of His M AJ E- 
STIE's moſt Honourable 
Privy Council. 


My Lord, 
F I had no particular obligati- 
on to your Lordſhip, the very 
Argument of the following Ob- 
ſervations , upon a Preſumption 
at leaſt, that they are faithfully 
madeand colle&ted, would ſoon 
havedetermined my choice, and 
fuggeſted ro me where I ought 
A 3 ro 


— FLA 


| [5 /vcO 


The Epiſtle Dedicatory. 


to addreſs my ſelf in a Dedica- 
tion. How highly your Lordſhip 
has merited of the Greek Church 
by making 1t into your care, and 
by opening a Sanctuary for the 
poor diſtreſſed Biſhops and 
Prieſts of that Communion to 
fly unto, 1s not unknown at Con- 
 ftantinople + and whatcyer the 
ſucceſs of it may be , They 
cannot be ſo unjuſt, as not 
to applaud your Lordſhips de- 
ſ19n, as worthy of your great 
Charity and Picty , to relicvc 
the neceſſities of thoſe, whom 
cither curioſity and love of lear- 
ning ſhall draw into theſe parts, 
or Turkiſh cruelty and perſccuti- 
on ſhall drive and force out of 
their own Country ; and at the 
ſame time to reduce them from 
thoſe errours and corruptions , ' 
which haye of late crept in a- 
mong them, by bringing them 

into 


ww ww IS OT & W 


--E I 


The Epiſtle Dedicatory. 


into 4 nearer and more fanuhar 
acquaintance with the Dottrin, 
= rites of Worſhip eſtabliſht 
in the Church of England. Ir 
cannot be doubted in the leaſt, 
that the molt likely way to effect 
this excellent deſign, was not 
onely to permit but to encourage 
the building ofa Church in Lon- 
don for their Nation ; where 
they might enjoy the free exer- 
ciſc of their Worthip 1n all chings 
that are decent and inoffentive, 
and any way cſlential ro their 
Religion. That this has been 
done with ſuch Chriſtian gene- 
rolity and prudence, they owe, 
next to Hlis Majeſty unto your 
Lordſhip : whom they mult tor 
ever look upon as their great 
Patron. And it the Governours 
of their Church have not ſuch a 
gratctull refentment of the ta- 
vour, as it highly challenges and 

delcrvcs, 


The Epiſile Dedicatory. 
deſerves, or if They, who en- | 
joy the happineſs and benefit , 
ſhould render themſelvesleſswor- 
' thy of it, yet your Lordſhip will 
not loſe your reward with God : 
and all good men conſider it as 
the effect of that publick and 
| quan mind, which has been 
o conſpicuous in all parts of 
your Lordſhips conduct. With 
what a ſteday courage your 
Lordſhip has defended the 
Church of England, in this day 
of Trial, againſt the furious af- 
ſaults of her reſtleſs enemics, the 
Papiſts on the one hand, and the 
Giddy Sefaries on the other , 
( who both agree in the ſame 
_ of pulling down the Hic- 
rarchy, and overturning the Go- 
vernment, 1n order to her more 
eftcctual ruine,) all her true and 
enuine Sons, who love and pray 
r her peace and proſperity , ' 
cannot. 


* % 


Aa. Ms ra © AG: Loder en Yo 


= 


18 


The Epiſtle Dedicatory. 


cannot but moſt gratefully ac- 
knowledge. And though the 
ſpirit of fury rages ſtill , and 15 
not to be charmcd or allayed by 
that nuldneſs and ſweetneſs of 
temper, which 1s ſo natural in 
your Lordſhip, yet they cannot 
but inwardly admurc you, agamſt 
whom they have onely thus to 
objcct, that you are a Biſhop. 
It1s for the great honour of our 
Church, that we can ballance 
your Lordſhip againſt any of 
your renowned Predeceſſours , 
and again(t the moſt celebrated 
Biſhops of the Church of Rome, 
as Antonine, Borromeo and Sales : 
and 1t 15 the great happineſs of 
our Church too, that a Perſon of 
ſuch Hluſtrious Birth and Merit 
is advanced to ſo high a Station 
and Dignity init. It will bethe 
proper work of thoſe, who ſhall 
write the Hiſtory of our Times, 

a tO 


The Epiſtle Dedicatory. 


to tranſmit a full character of 
your Lord(hips worth to Poſteri- 
ty, which, when envy and ma- 
liceare laid aſide, = an umpar- 
tial judgment is made of Perſons 
and Things , will always pay a 
great reſpect and honour to your 
Name and Memory : and there- 
fore 1t will better ſuit with my 
Meannefs , with my Function , 
and with my Obligations , to 
pray to Almighty God to conti- 
nue ſuch a publick Bleſſing to 
his Church, and to proteſs my 
ſelf in the higheſt degree of 


duty, 
My Lord, 
Tour Lordſhip's moſt Flumble 
and moſt Obedient Servant, 


Tho. Smith. 


T O 


ow BY "R "Br Ho 2 2 ao Fell 


TO THE 


READER. 


Aving obliged my ſelf by Promiſe in 
a Letter, which [ wrote from Con- 
ſtantinople i» the year 1669. to an Ho- 
nourable Gentleman at Whitehall , #por 
my return into England to preſent hins 
with an account of the State and Condition 
of the Greek Church , as to matter of 
Do@rine and Rites of Worſhip and Diſ- 
cipline, ( an inbred curioſity, which made 
me undertake that Voyage at firſt , and 
afterwards ſufficiently expoſed me to dan- 
ger in that barbarous Country, where they 
are ſo jealoas of every inquiſitive Franke, 
that appears in any of their inland Towns 
out of a place of Trade, as if he were aSpy, 
and came to view the ſeveral places, where 
they might be attaqued with the greateſt ad- 
vantage,or rather the duty of my FunFion 
inciting me to ntake uſe of thoſe happy oppor- 
' 


tunties, 


To the Reader. 


tunities, which [ there enjoyed, in order to a 
fall and ſatisfafFory diſcovery ©) to comply 
with this obligation, and to ſatisfy the im- 
. portunity, as it is very well known, of ſe- 
veral excellent perſons, who were pleaſed 
in Diſcourſe and by Letters, to mind me 
of a Promiſe alſo, which I had made in 
my Latine Epiſtles, of publiſhing at ſome 
time or other an account of thoſe Obſerva- 
tions, which I had colleFed upon this 
Argument, 1 drew up about five years 
(ence a ſhort Scheme of them in Latine, and 
20t long after preſented it to the Right Re- 
verend Father in God, the preſent Lord 
Biſhop of Oxford, one of the greateſt ex- 
amples of the Age for promoting and en- 
couraging Learning, and whoſe merits 
to the Univerſity will make upa great part 
of the future Hiſtory of it, who did me the 
bonour to print it at the Theater , where 
fo many excellent Books have been by his 
Lordſhips dire&ion and cate publiſhed. 
That I now publiſh the ſame in Engliſh, 

(though with large additions) it is more 
to doe right to the world, then to my ſelf, 
who have no private paſſion to gratify in it : 
my deſign in the one and the other being 
to contribute ſomewhat to the publick 
good, 

. It cannot le imputed to me as a piece of | 

vanity | 


[#1 
i 
"> 


UMI 


To the Reader. 


#1y Reader may not onely be betteredin his 
judgement but in his life too. 

Tou will here clearly ſee, with what 
great difficulties the poor Eaſtern Chriſti- 
ans ſtruggle , againſt what mighty oppoſi- 
tion they ſtill maintain the profeſſion of 
Chriſtianity, and how the Croſs of Chriſt 
triumphs , notwithſtanding the cruel 
mockings and inſultings of the profeſt 

nemies of it : though it muſt be mo 

Jadly confeſſed, that ſeveral corruptions 
and errours in point of Dodrin and Su- 
perſtitions Rites and Pradices in Worſhip 
have crept in among them, to the great 
diſadvantage, ſcandal, and diſhonour of 
our Holy Religion, which is hereby conti- 
mmally expoſed tothe cenſure and contempt 
of the Mahometans, who, dull and ſtupid 
4 they are, do not pretend to examine 
the grounds and reaſons of the Chriſtian 
Belief, but judge of the whole by ſuch odd 
phantaſtick miſrepreſentations, and fortify 
their old prejudices every day more and 
more with freſh matter of diſlike. 

The common people among the Greeks 
doe as they aredireFed, without the leaſt 
examination or demmrr, and depend al- 
together upon their Teachers and Spiritual , 
Guides in matters of Religion : being 
wholly ignorant of and unacquainted po 
| | Fe 


Sn =. 3 5 Www 2 ww 0x7 ww WW WW ws Y 


GG OO OQ 


To the Reader. 


vanity and oftentation, that I ſay, that 1 
have taken all imaginable care to repreſent 
things truly as I found them , and relate 
nothing but what is confirmed by the 
Offices uſed in the Service of that Church, 
and other Eccleſiaſticall Writings, as Con- 
fejſrons, and Catechiſms , and the like ; 
or by notoreity of praice and fad, there 
being a neceſſity to premiſe ſo much to 
make the following Narrative credible. 
In the contexture of which, I wholly aimed 
at truth without ſerving any Party or Hy- 

potheſis, and have dealt impartially in the 

caſe without the leaſt tin@ure of AﬀeFion 

or Prejudice. To which purpoſe 1 have 
ftudionſly endeavoured to conch things in 

a plain cloſe ſtyle, without enlarging upon 

them unneceſſarily , being more ambitions 
in a ſubjeF of this nature, of the reputa- 

tion of being accounted ax honeſt and care- 


= 7, A wv Oc 


a ACID 4 2 ATTEND | *> 


_—p 


a4 3 a. Ta Ai.. 


full, then ſpruce and elegant Writer, I 
have ſometimes indeed referred to the 
Judgment of Antiquity, but it was wholly 
in order to the better underſtanding the 
preſent praFice of the Greeks : and I can 
Jay moſt conſcientiouſly, that thoſe few 
reflexions, which I have made, are wholly 
owing to a juſt zeal and love for the ho- 
our of truth , and the advancement of 
firi® and diſcreet Piety , whereby my 

a 3 Reader 


To the Reader. 


the Scriptures, few having the leiſure and 
fewer ability to reade them. It was the 
piows deſign of that great man COD 
Lucaris, (of whom more at large hereaf- 
ter, ) in cauſing the New Teſtament to be 
tranſlated into vulgar Greek for the uſe 
and benefit of the meaner ſort, that they 
might be built up in the moſt Holy Faith, 
and thence be fully inſtru@ed inthe know- 
ledge and Do#rin of God our Saviour. 
But though they had cnrioſity and learning 
enough to conſult theſe Sacred Writings, 
the Copies are very rqre and ſcarce to be 

net with, and no care is taken to furniſh 

out a new Edition : and it is too too ap- 
parent , not without deſign, to keep then 
more in ſubjeFtion and awe, not to ſay, 
ionorance. They are bred up in the ſame 
perſwaſion as formerly, and ſo zealouſly do 
they retain the outward Services of Reli- 

gion in all its pun@ilio's and circumſtan- 
ces, that even the Biſhops themſelves, who 

would be content to relax ſomewhat of the 

ſeverities of their Faſts,dare not attemptto 
make any alteration in the leaſt, leſt their 

people,obſtinate toexceſs, ſhould be offended 

at it, and doubt of the truth of what they 

wonld have them ſtill profeſs and believe. 

And indeed , conſidering the preſent 


ſtateof things, there is little ſign or hope 
: a 4 of 


To the Reader. 


of a Reformation. For the miſery of it 
zs, that though it is manifeſt to all, who 
underſtend Atitiquity, how much the pre- 
ſent Greeks have in ſeveral points of Doc- 
trin varied from the Belief of their An- 
ceſtours, and have corrupted the ſimplicity 
and purity of Religion by a mixture of odd 
opinions and fancies , they pretend not- 
withſtanding ; that their Tenents are 
agrecable to the Fathers, and that they 
follow the Traditions of the ancient 
Church. But without looking back much 
beyond this laſt Century , whoever will 
compare the anſwers of the Patriarch Je- 
remias to the Letters of the Divines of 
Wittenberg in the year 1576. with their 
Confeſſion of Faith publiſhed in the year 
1662, and with the Bethleemitick Synod 
held inthe year 1671.will find ſuch a vaſt 
difference between the modeſty of that Pa- 
triarch, and their bold determinations, as 
will encline any ſober and conſidering man 
to believe, that they have of late more then 
ever been wrought upon by the ſly artifices 
and inſinuations and underband dealing 
of the ſubtile Emiſſaries of Rome , who 
watch continually aver the poor Greeks, 
and take advantage of their. poverty and 
diſtreſs to bring them to a further com- 
pliance, and in time, to a down-right 


"fab: 


To the Readcr. 
ſubjeFion. 1 do not doubt, but that 


time , which is the great revealer of ſe- 
crets , will diſcover the myſtery of the 
laſt Synod held by the Patriarch of Jeru- 
ſalem : who, when I waited upon him at 
Conſtantinople mot long before my de- 
parture, knowing me to be a Prieſt of the 
Church of England, and Chaplain to his 
Excellency , the Engliſh Embaſſadour 
then at the Port, entertained me very re- 
ſpectfully , and acquainted me , that he 
had ſeveral Papers againſt the Roma- 
niſts, which he would take care to tran- 
ſcribe, and put into my hands to be prin- 
ted in England : but he did not, I con- 
feſs, tell me the particular SubjeF and 
Argument of them, nor thought fit after- 
ward to ſend them, as he had at firſt de- 
ſigned. RefleFing upon this diſcourſe, 1 
was the more amazed at the determinati- 
ons of this Synod held by his Anthority : 
and perchance it would not be want either 
of good manners or charity to gueſs by 
what arguments they were prevailed upon, 
and how they were influenced. 

This deſign of the Romaniſts , which 
has been carrying on for ſo many years , 
was ſoon diſcovered by Cyrillas Lucaris 
Patriarch of Conſtantinople , 2 man of 
great parts and of an extraordinary cou- 
| | rage, 


To the Reader. 


rage , who was reſolved to give a check 
and put a ſtop toit , as much as in him 
lay, and by degrees to reform thoſe abuſes 
and errours , that had prevailed among 
the Greeks, and introduce a un alli | 
ance and union of the Eaſtern Church 
with the reformed Churches of Chriſten- 
dome. This drew npon him the indigna- 
tion of Urban the Eighth , then Pope , 
and the Congregation of Cardinals de pro- 
pagand fide, as they ſpeak at Rome, who 
knew no good could be done, while he ſate 
pon the Patriarchall Throne, and there- 
fore finding after ſeveral attempts to bring 
him over by fair means to relinquiſh his 
pretenſions , that he was too ſtout and too 
fone ſubmit to their overtures and pro- 
poſals, they made uſe of ſeveral evil arts 
fo dethrone him ; and in order thereunto 
blackened and defamed him with a thou- 
fand calumnies, and purſued him with un- 
wearied diligence and malice, and never 
deſiſted till they had got him ſtrangled. 
Out of reſpe& to the memory of this good 
man, who ſuffered ſo mnch in his life-time 
by the Jeſuits, the great inſtruments made 
uſe of in his Perſecution, and Tragicall 
end , and is ſtill moſt unworthily treated 
by Monſieur Arnaud, ( from a man of 
ſuch excellent Learning and Piety ſomnch 


diſ- 


To the Reader. 


diſingennity could ſcarce be expeFed in 
the beight of his zeal for the Roman 
Do@#rin of Tranſubſtintiation , and by 
the Latinizing Greeks , who contrary 80 
all laws of humanity, return him hatred 
for his good will, and tear his reputation 
jn pieces by moſt reproachfull language and 
flanderoms 1putations, to gratify, at this 
diſtance of time, not ſo much their Paſſzor, 
as 4 little baſe paltry worldly intereſt, as 
I have juſt reaſon to ſuſpe# and believe , 
I have added a ſhort account of the ſtate 
of the Greek Church under his Govern- 
ment : which I have drawn ont of authen- 

tick Papers and Memorials. 
After all theſe triumphs gained over the 
poor Greeks, who now declare ſo fiercely 
or a Melsoreow, let it be remembred how- 
ever, that, ( belides their ignorance of the 
tree ſtate of the Controverſy , the conſe- 
ques. of which they never thoroughly 
ſtudied nor yet underſtand, as appears by 
their ſilence and ſtupid amazement, when 
they are urged with them) they do not ex- 
poſe it publickly to be adored , that they 
have no tote di Dieu, or Corpus Chriſti 
Feſtival, which to me was the moſt morti- 
fying fight in the world , ( for who would 
not be confounded to ſee the moſt Holy In- 
ftitution of our B. Saviour turned into 4 
| pompous 


To the Reader. 


pompous piece of Pageantry £ ) and laſily, 
that they do mot as yet ſing in their 
Churches any thing like that , which the 
Romaniſts teach their people to (ing in the 
ſolemn Proceſſion of that day : Non eſt 


. panis ſed eſt Deus homo, & falvator 


meus: ot to mention the other d:fferen- 
ces at preſent in the matter of the Sacra- 
ment between the Greek aud Roman 
Church, as communion in both kinds , 
communicating Infants, and the like; 
which I chuſe rather to leave to the Rea- 
ders judgment and obſervation upon his 
pernſal of the following Diſcourſe. 
Notwithſtanding theſe errours and de- 
feds, we preſerve a great charity for this 
diſtreſſed part of the Catholick Church , 
and wiſh and pray heartily for their deli- 
verance from Turkiſh ſlavery; and that 
in the mean while they may ſee from what 
purity of Do@rin and Worſhrp they we 
faln, and may be reſtored to their ancient 
integrity and ſplendour. This Chriſtian 
compaſſion obliges us to doe. We leave it 
to the Jeſuits and the other fierce Religi- 
onaries of the Church of Rome to aſcribe 
the ruine of the Empire to their Hereſy, 
#s they term it , about the Proceſſzon, to 
their Schiſm and defeFion from S. Peter's 
See. Next to the juſtice and all-wiſe 


Provi- 


: 
\ 
1 
A 
e's 
o 
445 


47 
ju 

b 
f* 


a 


GS I» 


” © ® ww 


6 Ie tes IE 
wt SDS SF ns Pt, S- <f G 


To the Reader. 
Providence of God in the diſpoſal of Emre 


pires, and putting periods to Govern- 
ments, we can aſſign other more probable 
cauſes of their oppreſſuon, and among them 
chiefly, the want of timely alſaſtence from 
Italy, though two or three of the Empe- 
rours had been there in perſon to beg it. 
But this is properly the work of a Civil Hli- 

orian, and is beſides the intent of this 
Preface 5 which 1 ſhall ſoon put an end to 
after I have added this one thing ; That 1 
cannot refle& without horrour upon what I 
have read in Cardinall Pole's third 
( 4) Book pro defenſione Ecclefiaſticz 
Unionis , where he ſays , that if Charles 
the Fifth had been at that time unde ſail 
with his Fleet, and ſteering his courſe 
toward Conſtantinople, ke world never 
be at reſt, how great ſoever the difficul- 
ties of the Journey were, till he had found 
him out, and then being brought into his 


C 4 )) pag. 78. Fol. of the German Edition an. 1555. 
though no place be mentioned 1n the title page. $7 
Czſarem audirem cum omni ſud claſſe in altum jam pro- 


veum, curſum ad __ Turcarum Regiam Conſtantino- 
polium direxiſſe , etſs omnia mihi pericula proponerentur , 


nunquam quieſcerem, donec eum invenirem , ac ft jam Helle- 
ſpont1 fauces tenentem conſpicerem, ut primum comventendi 
Tanks daretur, in hec werba prorumperem : Czlar quid 
para, quid cogitas, (Fc. 


preſence 


To the Reader. 
preſence he would importune him to leave 
off that deſign , and employ his Armies 
againſt the Germans and againſi King 


Henry the Eighth (his natural Liege Lord | 


and Sovereign ) as being a far more glori- 
ous work. And all this out of a pretended 
love 10 his Country , and charity for the 
Church infuſed into him, as he ſpeaks , by 
the Son of God. Ard the more to ens 
courage the Emperour , in this eloquent 
harangue ( a ) he tells bim, that ſeveral 
Legions lay hid in England, that had not 
bowed their knees to Baal, that the Ergs 
liſh for leſſer crimes then Hereſy and [1- 
Juſtice to Catholicks had aepoſed their 
Kings, as for miſpending the publick Trea- 
fare, that they ſtill retain'd the ſame in- 
clination, and that nothing was wanting 
to execute their deſign , but his Imperial 
Preſence. (b ) Soon after he addreſſes 
to King Henry himfelf, and tells him in 
downright terms, that if the King of 
France would ſuppreſs his deſigns againſt 
the Church (that is, the Church of Rome) 
it would be no leſs glorious to him, then 
if Cxzlar had recovered Conſtantinople 
out of the hands of the Turks. At what a 


C 4 )) pag. 79 
C b ) pag. 80. 


bigh 


ug 
of 


\ 


re td abs 


w & 


DO 


A. 1. @. +7... a. 7 5 A 


l 


adn es A 


To the Reader. 
high pitch of indiſcretion and fury do men 


arrive by their intemperate heat and bi- 
gotry! They forget themſelves not onely 
to be Subje&s but even Chriſtians, at the 
Same time they would appear extraordinary 
zealows Catholicks; and care not, how 
far the great Turk prevails, provided that 
a pretended Hereſy, which conſiſted onely 
in a recovery of the eſſential Rights 7 the 
Crown from the uſurpations of the Papal 
See (which was the onely caſe at that time 
here in England ) had been extirpated , 
and the Germans reduced to the ſame 
ſubjeFion to Rome they were in before 
the appearing of Luther: which had been 
the readieſt amd moſt effecFnal way to 
have made Solyman Maſter of Vienna, 
which was one of his earneſt wiſhes, if the 
Emperonr and his Council had not been 
perſons of greater Policy and more Mode- 
ration, and had not foreſeen the fatall con- 
ſequences of ſuch Catholick advice. 
Certainly it is a more innocent and 
Chriſtian wiſh , that there were a happy 
end put to the differences now on foot , 
which diſturb the quiet and peace of Chri- 
ſtendom , that ſo ſome of the powerfull 
Princes of it may turn their Forces Eaſt- 
ward »por the great enemy of their Faith 


and Saviour, and reſtore the poor oppreſſed 
Chri- 


To the Reader. 


Chriſtians there to their eaſe 41d libert). 
This indeed is too great a good to be ho- 
ped for at preſent, and as things now 
ſtand, not to be effefed without a mi- 
racle, And may this miracle be wrought 


in our days. O Chriſt hear us. Amer, 


T. $ 


Magdalen College Oxon. 
Febr. 23. 1632. 


— — 


The Reader is deſired to mend the following Errata, moſt of 
which have hapned by reaſon of the haſty tranſcribing the 
Authour” s Copy for the Preſs. 


Ape 25.l1n.4. for call reade ſtyle. p.25.1. 5. Panteelemmn. 
So p. 128. 1. 10. p. 38.1. 3. and Patriarchs, adde, 
mn the matter of images. P. 41- I. 26, blot out, being. 
P. 55-1. 21. Tiphana. * 2. 1.5. for recovers,reade renews. 
P. 83.1. 10. He will. |. 24. expoſe. p. 88. 1. 8. Tia. 
P- 97+ |. 21. Sheichler, p. 127. 1. 2. reade life and ſalva- 
tion. P- 135. |. 13. fanned them. p. 150. Il. 27. for 
page 145. reade A. 1645. P. 179. I. 24. penance. 
p: 211. 1.17. little leſs. p. 241. I. 5. Pegs. Ps 242. 
« 8, Pope. p- 250-1. 4. for being, reade had been. p.260. 
I. 26. the titular P- 279-1. 5. but I. p. 288. |. 17. 
for xpon the Perſians, reade againſt— p. 202, 1. 2. for 
faith, reade religim. p. 294-l. 15.4 Greco. 
Page 22. lin. 26. p. 26. |. 29. Cict. Ps 23. 1. 27. ©t6- 
©1612. P» 27. |. 28, Agghoy, P. 28: Sronvpse, bis. 
P» 34+ |. 27. Il:rmzxocis. P. 129. þ I. *Aneio: ©. 
P- 139.1. 25.» iv. P. 145.1. 27. dayamands. P-127 
«26, lege vas T8 £20118 Conc x awTWidt Ps 184 1.35, 
diftus, BuAxond:xa;. P. 280. 1. 14. VarCor. negtacdion. 
In Appendice ocurrit pluſquam ſem?! Pſalterium $, Not- 
keri pro Antiphmario ſeu libry Hymnyum, 4 
A 


An Account of the Greek Church; 


as to its Doflrine and Rites of 


Vorſhip ; with ſeveral Hiſtorical 


Remargues interſperſed relating 
thereunto. 


HE Eaſter» Church antiently 

and ſtritly fo called, was onely 

that which, being in the moſt 
Eaſterly part of the Rowan Empire, was 
under the Jur!{diction of the Patriarch 
of Antioch, and was uſually ſtyled the 
Dioceſe of the Eaſt, containing Syria, 
Cilicia, Paleſtine, and part of Meſopota- 
mia and Arabia. But afterwards , upon 
the Diviſion of the Empire, and the 
Removal of the Imperial Seat from Rome 
to Conſtantinople, the Churches which 


held Communion with the Parriarch ot 


Conſtantinople , and acknowledged that 
the chief See; and looked upon him as 
their Head,and were ſubject to the Greek 


Emperours, had all of them the Title ot 


Eaſtern, by way of diſtin&ion and oppo- 

fitionto thoſe of the Latize or Veſt, In 

which comprehenſive ſente I uſeth= wor), 
Theſ: 


Tie Eaſtern 
Church what, 
and why (- 
called. 


2 


Governed 
by four Patri- 
atchs. 


Their Ju- 
riſdidtions, 
Limits, and 
Titles, 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


Theſe Churches are governed by four 
Patriarchs ; each of which has full power 
in his Patriarchate of calling his Metro- 
politans and Biſhops together, of recei- 
ving Appeals, of conferring holy Or- 
ders, of determining Controverſies, and 
of Excommunicating grievous and no- 
torious Offenders : a Primacy of Order 
being onely allowed to . the Patriarch 
of Conſtantinople , upon the account of 
his being ( 4 ) Biſhop of the Imperial 
City, and by Eccleſiaſtical right beco- 
ming and made next in dignity to the 
Biſhop of old Rome. 

The four Patriarchs are of Conſtanti- 
nople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Feruſa- 
lem : who, according to (b ) Socrates 
Scholaſticws, had the Limits and Boun- 
daries of their ſeveral Diſtricts and Ju- 
riſdictionsſet them by the Fathers of the 
firſt general Council held at Conſtanti- 
ople. But 'tis certain, from other Au- 
thorities, that they had not then the 
Power of the Patriarchs of the followin 
Ages, Nor was the word in common af 
( 1t being introduced to diminiſh and 


a ) 3. Canon Concilii Conſtantinopolitani, &F 28. canon 
Conciliz Chalcedonenſis, 
(b ) Hiſtir, Eccleſtaſtic. lib. 5. cap. 8. 


OVET= | 


= = ot ASA £& ada Eats 


2 


a ,23J 


L 4) 


An Account of the Greck Church. 


overtop the Title of Exarchs ) till the 
timesof the Council of Chalcedor, which 
(4) advanced Jeruſalem to the ſuper- 
eminent dignity of a Patriarchal See, 
and aſſigned the Aſzan, the Thracian 
and the Pontic Dioceſes to the Patriarch 
of Conſtantinople. It cannot be ſuppo- 
ſed otherwiſe but that theſe Boundaries 
and Limiis havein the ſeveral ſucceihons 
of Ages from that time to this been ſub- 
je to great alterations and changes. 
The Patriarch of Conſtantinople, as 
he is the chiefeſt in Dignity, ſo he hasa 
larger Juriſdiction than any of the other 
three. Ittakes in all the leſſer Apr, ex- 
cept two of the moſt Eaſterly Provinces, 
which border upon Syria, Thrace, Ma- 
cedonia, and all the other Provinces of 
Greece, and the J/lands that are ſcatter'd 
up and down in the Archipelago, Dal- 
matia, Albania , Walachia, and Molda- 
via, His uſual Title, when he ſubſcribes 
any Letter or Mithve, is, (6) by the 
mercy of God Archbiſhop of rew Rome, 
Conſtantinople, and Occumenical Patri- 
arch, But of this I ſhall have occafion 


_ (4) Vid. ationem 16. Concil. Chalcedon. (& 28. cant. 
ejuſdem Concil. 


(b) "Eriw ©: 'Apyerioon©- KorournroniAius 79 
vis Pauns, 4 omits ThdIpepye 


B 2 to 


Patriarch 
of Conttant!- 
nople. 


Alzxandiia. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


to ſpeak more diſtintly in another 
place. 

The Patriarch of Alexandria exerciſes 
his power over the Chriſtians through- 
out Aigypt, Libya, and part of Arabia. 
The Title which he (till retains, is this, 
( 4 )) by the mercy of God Pope and Pa- 
triarch of the great City of Alexandria , 
and ( b ) Occumenical Fudge. Some- 
times he ſtyles himſ{clf Oecumenical Pa- 
triarch ; 1t having been the ( c )) chief 
Sce before the times of Conſtantine, and 
founded by S. Mark, Hence Alexan- 
drizis called frequently the Throze, the 
Seat, the Chair of that Apoſtle. Some- 
times the Title runs 1n larger terms, 
C 4 ) Patriarch of Alexandria and all 


(a ) "E>4w Os T4795 # TizTetzppys 775 wears 
TAewe  AneZann peta; 4 KEMTHS TRE O1HrpICNS. 

(b) This Title of Occumenical Judge, Nicephorus 
Calliſtus Hiſt. Eccleſ. lib. 14. c. 34. ſays, has belonged to 
the Biſhnps of this See from the time f ,yrillus, who preſided 
in the Council of Epheſus , Pope Coeleſtine writing to him 
to ſupply his place there, Which does mt in the leaſt ſuppoſe 
a Supremacy in the See of Rome, but onely a Precedence 0 
a Primacy of Order. 

( c ) V. Epiſt. Cyrilli Lucaris, tunc temporis Patriarche 
Alexandrint, ad Johannem Vytenbogaert. in Epiſtol. Eccleſi 
aſtic. page 407» 

( d ) Naleagys Antfardgeicy, x) mions 'Arurts 
TT:y Tu mrAtws, AtCuns 5 x,  Athnomria;e Vide Tulsamy ad 
finem Codini de officiis oF officialibus Curie oF Eccleſie 
C. P. Pariſiis 1648. page 411» (F 419+ 


AX gypt, 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


Z#gypt, Pentapolis, Libya ard Athio- 
pia : the Aby/ſznes uſing from the time 
of their firſt Converſion, till of late 
years, to ſend their chict Biſhop or Me- 
tropolitan to be Conſecrated and Con- 
firmed by him. This Patriarch, for his 
own better eaſe and accommodation , 
and for the greater bencfit of the Chri- 
ſtians of his Communion , makes his u- 
ſual reſidence at Grand Cairo, where 
they are very numerous, and where, in 
caſe of any grievous oppreſſion, they 
may have recourſe to the Baf/a, who 
keeps his Court in that City. 

The Patriarch of Artioch governs the 
Churches of Syria, Meſopotamia, and of 
the two Provinces of Iſauria and Czlicia, 
which arein the /efſer Aſa. He writes 
himſelf thus, ( 4 )) by the mercy of God 
Patriarch of the great City of Antioch, 
called Theopolis , and of all the Eaſt : 
alluding to the ancient and reſtrain'd 
ſenſe of the Eaſterz Dioceſe. His uſual 
reſidence is at Damaſcus. 


5 


Antioch, 


The Patriarch of Feruſaleme has Pale- Jera/vlr. 


ſtine and part of Arabia within his Di- 
(trict. His Title is, (6) by the mercy of 
(a) 'Eaip O©t7 Nalerdpyus Ths wizzhns Oturminews 
AVvnoX ia, 1 mars AVATINAS- : 
E (b) 'Eaty ©4% TIalewd gon 775 dig; mates Tepromaly 
£ 7.015 TIaAeugiyn;. 
B 3 God 


6 


_ 


Frayers mad: 
fo; them. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


God Patriarch of the Holy City of Jeruſa- 
lem, and of all Paleſtine : and ſome- 
times he is ſaluted by the name and 
C 4) Title of Patriarch of Jeruſalem, 
the Holy Mount of Sion, Syria, Arabia, 
beyond Jordan, Cana of Galilee, and of 
all Pale(tine. | 
For theſe Four Patriarchs they pray 
in their Publick Liturgies, without any 
mention of the Biſhop of Rowze. Which 
omiſtion being look'd -upon as an argu- 
ment of diſreſpe& and ill will , among 
other heads and articles of Agreement 
and Union between the Churches of 
old and zew Rome, it was required by 
Alexander the Fourth, the then Pope, of 
the Emperour Michael! Palzologwus, that 
in their Publick Offces and Hymns the 
Pope ſhould be named at the ſame time 
with the Four Patriarchs, as (6 ) Ni- 
cephorszs Cregoras relates. And fince 
this, upon a diſuſe, the ſame was agreed 


(a ) V. iu3tay ad finem Codini pag. 419+ 

(b) m4 & Tas iepats Vaurwliacs F Viamas ois'm 
S178 wrworevee 611% mis emwogts megan Tie]ee- 
yer. Hiſtcr. Popwern. lib. 5. cap. 1. page 89. Colon. All- 
vrogum 1615. V. Phranſen. in hiſtor. lib. 1. cap. 6. This 
1s called by Cardinal Beſſarion 7 worudouror Ty Mdmo, 
1n rhe letter he wrote, to the Governour of the Sons of 


Prince Thomas Pataologus, in the vulgar Greek, publiſhed 
by Meurſtits. 


£0 


*—_ w mis |} # 


mv 0 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


to at Florence ; at leaſt the Inſtrument 
of Union in the cloſe, where the Five 
Patriarchs are reckon'd up in their Or- 
der, may ſeem to ſuppoſe it. But the 
Proceedings of that Council, and the 
Onioa which followed, being generally 
diſliked upon the return of the Greeks 
to Conſtantinople, they have not ſince 
pray'd for him publickly by name, but 

adhere to the old number and form. 
The other Sects of Religion have 
their diſtin& Patriarchs ; as the Arme- 
nians, Maronites, Jacobites, &c. And 
there is uſually a Titular Patriarch of 
Conſtantinople , the Pope pretending a 
power of conſtituting ſuch a one, not 
onely upon the account of his uſurped 
Oecumenical Paſtorſhip but becauſe 
the Latines were once 1n poſlefſion of 
that City , which they held between 
fifty and ſixty years 3 that is, from the 
year 1203. to 1260, at which time 1t 
was recovered out of their hands by 
Michael Palzologzs. And for the moſt 
part there reſides at Conſtantinople a Bi- 
ſhop ſent from Rowe , who has the 
power ofa Legate. In my time a Fran- 
ciſcan Fryer reſided there for this pur- 
poſe with the title of the Biſhop of Ca- 
lurmina , a City in India, upon the 
v B 4 Coaſts 


7 


Patriarchs of 
other Setts. 


8 


Extent of 
the Greek 
Church, 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


Coalts of Coromandel, where S. Thomas 
was martyred. 

The Greek Church, confider'd 1n it 
ſelt and with reference to the vaſt ex- 
tent of thoſe Countries, where the doc- 
trine and rites of it are profeſt and main- 
cain'd, 1s a very conſiderable part of the 
Catholick Church. All the Chriſtians 
of the vaſt dominions of the Emperour 
of Moſcovy, the Cofſacks , the Inhabi- 
tants of Podoliz, and of the black Rwſſzz, 
who are Subjects of Poland, the people 
of Ethiopia 1n the inner part of Africk , 
lying South of Egypt, of Circalſza, of 
Georgia, formerly ſberia, and of Mer- 
grel:a, the Colchis of the Ancients, and 
of the Iſlands of the Mediterranean un- 
der the Venetians, being of its Commu- 
nion, In all which places it may be 
juſtly ſaid ro flourith , being the eſta- 
bliſht Religion, and where the Chriſti- 
ans are either abſojute Lords and Ma- 
{ters, or elie onely make ſome acknow- 
ledgment to the Grand Signior or Sophy 
of Perſ#a for their peace and quiet, asdo 
thoſe Aſratick Princes, who live beyond 
the Exuxine Sea , and whoſe Country 
reaches towards Mount Caxcaſws, and 
ſo are as it were miferably harafled and 
2round between the two mighty Em- 


Mi 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


pires of the Eſt. But I am to confider 
the Greek Church, chiefly as it is con- 
taind in the dominions of the Tirks , 
where it is moſt ſadly afflifted, For 
though the Greeks have the free uſe and 
exerciſe of the Chriſtian Religion, and 
are allowed their Churches for the pub- 
lick Worſhip of Chriſf?, and in Molda- 
via and Walachia eſpecially which the 
Turks leave wholly to be inhabited by 
them under the Government of the re- 
{pe&ive Princes, ( who indeed are in 
cffe& but their Tax-gatherers, and who 
iwear Allegeance to the Port , and 
whom they prefer and degrade as their 
intereſt or covetouſneſs incline them, ) 
yet inall other reſpects they are noother 
than as Slaves, 

'Tis meerly out of intereſt and a ſenſe 
they have of the benettt of their ſervice, 
and not any regard to the laſt Teſta- 
ment of Mahorret, which commands all 
his followers to ſhew kindneſs to the 
Chriſtians ( tor to That they are ſtran- 
gers, it being molt probably the inven- 
tion of ſome good meaning perſons of 
our KReligzon , who hoped by this pious 
kind of fraud to take off the Conque- 
rours from that fury and barbarity 
wherewith their own rough temper _ 

tac 


2 


Oppreſſion of 
the Greeks. 


IO 


An Account of the Greck Church. 


the Chapter of the Sword in the Alcorar 
might inſpire them ) that they admit 
the Greeks to the favour of enjoying 
their lives and their Religion together. 
Which they dearly pay for, being ſub- 
ject to innumerable arbitrary taxes upon 
all occaſions, beſides their head mony, 
which 1s ſeverely exalted every year, 
even of boys, if above 14 years of age : 
(not to mention either the extortions of 
the Cadies, who ſuck their very bloud 
upon every {light miſcarriage , when 
they fall into their clutches, and often- 
times upon unjuſt and frivolous avanias 
or pretenſions , when they are wholly 
innocent, or the inſolencies of the Soul- 
diers, who enter their houſes, in the 
Country eſpecially , and rob and ſpoil 
and tyrannize over the poor people, 
theſe injuſtices, though too much con- 
nived at, being beſides the intent of the 
Government.) They are forced ſome- 
times into the wars to doe all the drud- 
gery of the Camp, or to ſerve as P1o- 
neers in working their Mines, or to 
look to their Carriages, and the like: 
expoſed daily to horrid indignities and 
injuries, againſt which they have no re- 
medy, every raſcally 1rk making uſe 
of his Privilege to triumph over them, 

often- 


An Account of the Greek Church. 11 


oftentimes out of zeal to his falſe Religi- 
on, but oftener out of wantonneſs and 
a proud inſolent humour. 

This wretched ſtate and condition of How height- 
life, though it cannot but ſtrike a hor- bans we 
rour into the minds of all, who enjoy © © 
the happineſs of freedom and a mild go- 
vernment , might be digeſted well e- 
nough and born with ſome kind of pa- 
tience, if they ſuffer'd onely in their bo- 
dies or in their purſes; it they were not 
upbraided with their being Chriſtians, 
if they could be free from either their 
menaces or invitations of renouncing 
their Faith and their Savory « it their 
Children were not ravaged and torn 
from their arms, and bred up 1n the 
falſe and bruitiſh Religion of Mahomet, 
to be afterwards their plagues and tor- 
mentors. | 
* For to ſupply their Seminaries , for- Clcfim of 
merly as often as the neceſlity of af- (piliren, 
fairs required, though of late years they 
have forborn to practiſe it, they ſend 
torth Officers into the ſeveral Provinces 
of Exrope (they yielding generally the 
moſt hardy and beſt Souldiers) whoco- 
ming to any Town command the poor 
Chriſtians to bring their male-children 
from ſeven or eight years old and = 

wards 


I2 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


wards before them. If any ſhould dare 
to conceal them at home, or ſend them 
away into the woods or upon the moun- 
tains, they are puniſhed. But of theſe 
they chuſe the beſt complexion'd and 
ſtrongeſt and the molt likely to anſwer 
the ends of their Collettion. Some of 
their Parents indeed out of natural pity 
and out of a true ſenſe of Religion, that 
they may not be thus robbed of their 
children, who hereby ly under a neceſ- 
ſity of renouncing their Chriſtianity , 
compound for them at the rate of fifty 
or a hundred Dollars, as they are able, 
or as they can work upon the covetouſ- 
neſs of the Turks more or lefs. Though 
others to the great ſhame and diſhonour 
of their Religion, Chriſtzans onely in 
name, part with them freely and readi- 
ly enough, not onely becauſe they ar= 
rid of the trouble and charge-+of ther, 
but in hopes they may, when they are 
grown up, get ſome conſiderable com- 
mand in the government. After ſome 
trial ſome of the moſt hardy are taught 
the uſe of arms in order to their being 
Janizaries ;, others, that are of a ſofter 
but more docile temper are bred up in 
the ſtudies of the Per/#az language and 
fitted for civil affairs, and advanced ro 

ſome 


An Account of the Greek Church. 12 


ſome place and office about the Empe- 
rour's Perfon : the more ſtupid are ſent 
into the Serae/io to be Cooks, Bakers, 
Gardiners, Confectioners, and ſuch hike 
inferiour ſervants ; or elſe are cut, that 
they may be the better qualitied to at- 
tend at the women's apartments, 

What a Gloriovs defign would it be, 4 Unim of 
and how much for the honour of our Ciriſtan 

> a os X rinces deſt- 
Religion, if the Chriſtian Princes would 74 in order 
unite and enter upon a Holy War, and ' the freeing 

. * {7} * the Grecks 

redeem the Oriental Chriſtians from the ;,,,,1, 1. 
burthen of this intolerable tyranny and +» of the 
ſlavery ! But alas! there is little hope **** 
of ſuch an Union in this great declenſi- 
on of Chriſtianity , when the iife and 
ſpirit of it ſeem to be loſt and fwallow- 
edup in thoſe horrid feuds and factions, 
that diſturb the peace of Chriſtendom, 
and expoſe it to the aflaults of the com- 
mon enemy , whenever he {hall be at 
leiſure to attaque it, and when intereſt 
ſeems wholly to govern ard 1»fluence 
all Publick Councils. 

However the Biſhops of. Roe, who 4 Hb Wir: 
then exerciſed an entire and abſolute 
dominionover the conſciences of all of 
their Communion, might have private 
deſigns of their own in Publilt.ing their 


Cruſades and putting the ſeveral Princes 
of 


14 


The Greeks 
quire diſpirt- 
ted , therr 
remper low 
and mean. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


of the Weſt upon the recovering the 
Holy Sepulchre out of the hands of the 
Sarazens 7 yet this ought not to dimi- 
niſh from the glory of their piety and 
generous Courage , who undertook 
thoſe long, painfull, and hazardous 
Voyages. This we may miſcall eafineſs 
of temper, and miſguided and 1l]-mana- 
ged zeal : but in the meantime do not 
the 1»fidels inlarge their conqueſts and 
gain ground continually, and advance 
their half Moors , where the Croſs be- 
fore was placed > Where have we re- 
cover'd for ſeveral ſcores of years ſo 
much as a village or flight fortification 
from them, except perchance one or 
twoin Dalmatia ? 

| The poor Chriſtians in thoſe parts of 
the World arein a deſperate and reme- 
dileſs condition, as to any help and af- 
fiftance they may receive fromus, who 
have not that compaſſion for them , 
which their condition deſerves. And 
indeed all they have to doe to make 
their condition tolerable is to flatter 
their Imperious Patrons, and ſcrape a 
little mony together, to buy their fa- 
vour and good will. For long {lavery, 
continued for ſeveral years, has broken 
their ſpirits, and quite alter'd their tem- 
pers, 


S An Account of the Greek Church. 


pers, and taken them off from the natu- 
ral courage and vigour and love of li- 
berty, wherewith their Anceſtors were 
inſpired. They are content ( not to 
ſay well pleas'd) with their {laviſh con- 
dition of life , they dare not entertain 
any generous thoughts of revenge, they 
are afraid to venture, thoughthere were 
probable hopes of gaining their hberty 
by it : They are ſo overaw'd and ſtupi- 
fied and loſt to all ſenſe of honour, that 
they have abandon'd all thoughts and 
hope ofa change, which uſes to be the 


poor and miſerable comfort and ſupport 
of the diſtreſſed. 


5 


'Tis fad to conſider the great number xenegadss. 


of wretched people, who turn Tarks : 


ſome out of meer deſperation : being 


not able to ſupport the burthen of {la- 
very, and to avoid the revilingsand in- 
ſultings of the [»fdels : ſome out of a 
wanton light humour, to put themſelves 
into a- condition of domineering and 
inſulting over others, or of wearing a 
pair of yellow ſhoes; which is the pe- 
culiar finery and gallantry of the Mz- 
ſulmans ;, the Chriſtians and Jews wea- 
ring either red or black ( though the 
Greeks, belonging to the Chriſtian Am- 
baſladours, relying upon their protec- 
tion, 


16 


The Turkiſh 
Empire how 


ſupplied by 


them, 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


tion, preſume to doe otherwiſe 3 a miſ- 
carriage which has ſometimes been com- 
plain'd of by the Tzrks and ſeverely pu- 
niſh'd with drubbing ) ſome to avoid 
the penalties and inflictions due to their 
heinous crimes , and to enjoy the bru- 
tiſh liberties, that Mahomet conſecrated 
by his own example, and recommended 
to his followers. Theſe are the great 
and tempting arguments and motives of 
their Apoſtaſy, meer conſiderations of 
eaſe, pleaſure, and proſperity , or elſe 
of vanity and guilt: for it cannot be 
preſumed, that any through conviction 
of mind ſhould be wrought upon to em- 
brace the dotages and impoſtures of 
Thurciſme. 

By theſe Acceſiions the Trki/h Em- 
pire and Religion are chiefly ſupported, 
the Reregado Chriſtians being to be met 
with every where ; the zatural Turks, 
not having ſuch numerous iflues, as 1n 
the Ages paſt (whether this happens by 
their laying re(traints upon themſelves as 
to the number of women to avoid ex- 
pence and charge, or by ſome other 
natural or ſupernatural cauſe I know 
not) would ſenſibly diminith, but for 
theſe ſuppliesand that of Chriſtian (laves; 
moſt of which change their Religion , 
who 


b; 


6 


m_ Vw Ur WF Oy TY You Gs Y FY was Y 


mo z 


An Account of the Greek Church. 17 


who are yearly brought into their Coun- 
try by the Tartars, or taken as prize by 
themſelves in the time of War. 

And indeed conſidering the great ny 
confuſion in which the Lay-Chriſtians Chriſtianity 
are, eſpecially the poorer ſort, how de- ##%* Levant. 
ſtitute of all helps of Learning, there 
being no publick Schools among them, 
how ignorant of the grounds of Religi- 
on, to what grievous temptations their 
Poverty and Perſecution do continually F 
expoſe them , how unacquainted with 
the Holy Scripture, how little inſtructed 
in the doctrine of Chriſtianity, not one 
in twenty being able to reade, and Ser- 
mons being very rarely preach'd , and 
oftentimes in the learned Greek, and 
thoſe onely in the Patriarchal Church 
at Conſtantinople, or where the Metropo- 
litans or Biſhops make their reſidence, 
and at particular times, as at Chriſtmas 
or Lent, &c. thepovidence of God is to 
be admired, that there is yet any Chri- 
ſtianity left in the Eaſ?, and that the 
number of Apoſtates is not greater, and 
that Mahometaniſn has not yet prevai- 
led in theſe Countries as abſolutely as it 
has done all along the coafts of Africk, 
and up the Main land, from the Szrtes 
beyond Tripoli Eaſtward, to the further- 

C moſt 


18 An Account of the Greek Church. 


moſt points of Barbary Weſt, where a | 
Chriſtian is not to befound, unleſs in ' 
the Ergliſh or Spaniſh Garriſons, or *' 
Slaves ſeiz'd upon by the Pirats, the 
very refuſe and dregs of all mankind, 
and carried into their Ports to the great | 
ſcandal and ſhame of Chriſtendom, which 
ſuffers thoſe Caraglia not onely to live, 
but to live in triumph. 

Next to the miraculous and gracious 
providence of God, I aſcribe the preſer- 
vation of Chriſtianity among them to 


owing t» the the ſtrit and religious obſervation of 


the Feſtivals and Faſts of the Church; | 


vation of te this being the happy and bleſſed effects 


of thoſe antient and pious Inſtitutions, 
the total neglect of which would ſoon * 
introduce ignorance and a ſenſible decay | 
of Piety and Religion in other Coun- 
tries beſides thoſe of the Levant. This 
certainly is the chiecfeſt preſervative of | 
Religion in thoſe Eaſter» Countries | 
againſt the poiſon oft the Mahometan | 
ſuperſtition. For Children and thoſe of 
the moſt ordinary capacities know the 
meaning of theſe holy Solemaities , at 
which times they flock to Church in 
great companies, and thereby retain 
the memory cf our Bleſſed Saviour's 
Birth, dying upon the Crofs, Refurrec- 
tion, 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


tion, and Aſcenſion, and keep up the 
conſtant profeſſion of their acknow- 
ledgment of the neceſſary and funda- 
mental points of Faith, as of the doc- 
trine of the Bl:fſed Trinity , and the 
like. And while they celebrate the 
ſufferings and martyrdoms of the Apo- 


ſiles of our Lord and Saviour Jeſ#s 


Chriſt, and other great Saints, who 
laid down their lives moſt joyfully for 
his name, and underwent with unwea- 


| ried andinvincible patience all the Tor- 


ments and Cruelties of their Heather: 
Perſecutors , they take courage from 
ſuch glorious examples, and are the 
better enabled to endure with leſs trou- 


> ble and regret the miſeries and hard- 
| ſhips they daily ſtruggle with. 


20 


Feſtivals. 


* B13: I 31 ovs 
page 13. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


The chief, fixt, and unmoveable 
Feſlivals are placed in this order 
in their Menolog y or Calendar. 


SEPTEMBER. 
They begin their year the firſt day of this 


month. 


VIII. The Nativity of the Bleſſed Vir- 
gin Mary, Mother of God. 

XIV. ( a) The Exaltation of the Holy 
Croſs. 


(a) XIV. The Greeks date this Feſtival from the times 
of Conſtantine and Helena, and fo ſeem to confound it 
with the invention and firſt diſcovery of it at Zeruſalem 
by a miracle, and derive the reaſon of its name from the 
Patriarch Macariws ; in placing and ſerting it on high 
above the Ambo or Pulpit * , uNlwnny my & mivo tis Thy 
&11Core, that it mightthe better be ſeen and adored by 
the people : But the Latines celebrate the Feſtival in 
memory of the Holy Croſs, brought back out of Perſia 
to Jeruſalem by Heraclins, A.C. 628. after the victory 
he had gained over Coſroes, which is the account given 
in the Roman Martyrohgy, but *tis certain jt was in uſe 
iong before, and might receive ſome additional honour 
from the triumphs and ſucceſles of that Emperour, 


XXVI. (5) The migration or death 
of S. John the Evangeliſt. 


Cb ) Mer'came Migratio. Tra enim planius reddenda 
erat iſta vox, de Eccleſie Grace hod. flatu, p. 16. mo 
idem 


kd 


= 9 = SS Gs <2 WU as vw oe CY ww 


er 


| 
: 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


idem innuebam per tranſlationem, nempe ex hic vita in al- 
teram. In the Latine Edition I rendred this word by 
two Latine words, tranſlatio ſeu obitus : alluding by the 
firſt to the opinion and fancy of ſeveral of the Brethren in 
the Apoſtle's time, (who from a miſ-apprehenſion of our 
B. Saviour's words, concerning this beloved Diſciple, to 
S. Peter in the 20. Chap. of S. John v. 22. If I will that 
he tarry till I come, what is that to thee 2 concluded, that 
he was nor to die, ds 7&7 vai mts meppalionuwe Sod 
Tyrey + Abgov abgmny, 3m © Twdvyns as Thy owutegy Sov 
eJoniunmn Samy wu) uimTim, Biol diy wile. 
Greca Venet. 1621. fl. 24. b. (which miſtake he corrects 
himſelf v. 23.) andin the Ages following, as we learn 
from Tertullian in his book de Anima, and ſeveral others. 
Others fancied, that when they opened his grave they 
found no body'or relique of it, p. 24-4. b. Bur that he 
died at Epheſus really and trucly, and was buried there, 
Polycrates Biſhop of that City diſcourſes in a Letter to 

Vitor Biſhop of Rome, which 15 preſerved by Euſebius in 

his Church-hiſtory, /zb. 3. c. 31. not to mention other 

Authours, who have confuted this errour about the tran- 

lation of S. John, who onely of all the Apoſtles ſurvived 

the laſt deſtruftion of the City and Temple of Feruſalem, 

when Chriſt came to take Vengeance upon his Murtherers, 

and lived to the times of Trajan, fixty eight | years after 

the Crucifixion of our Saviour, according to S. Hierom 

de Scriptor, Eccleſ. in Foanne, 


OCTOBER. 


VI. S. Thomas Apoltle. 

IX. S. James , the Son of Alphem, A- 
poſtle. 

XVIII. S. Luke Evangeliſt. 

XXIII. $. James the Brother of our 
Lord and Biſhop of Fernſalerr. 

XXVI. S. Demetrivs, Proconſul and 

C 3 Martyr, 


22 An Account of the Greek Church. 


Martyr, ( c )) pierced through with | 
lances at Theſ/alonica by the command 
of Maximian. 


NOVEMBER. 


VII. Archangels, Michael! and Gabriel, 

| and all Angels. 

| XIII. S. John Chryſoſtome. 

| XIV. S. Philip, Apoſtle. 

| XVI. S. Matthew, Apoſtle. 

| X XI. The Entrance of the Bleſſed Vjr- 
gin into the - Temple at FJernſalem, | 

1 S. Luke Chap. 2. 

| XXX. $. Andrew, Apoſtle. 


DECEMBER. 


ws. ed a en ia oe atk 


VI. S. Nicolas, Biſhop of Myra in Lycia, 
and Contfeſlor under Diocleſiarn and | 
* Maximian. 
XII. S. Spiridion, Biſhop and Confeſlor | 
under. Maximiar, having had his 
right Eye ſtruck out, and hamſtring'd | 
in his left Leg, and condemned to | 
work in the Mines ; afterwards pre- | 
ſent at the Council of Nice. | 
XK. $. {gnatizs, to whom they give the |þ 
Title of 5 ®©«&%&. 3 the third Biſhop 


( c ) Bris wiwn, Þ+ 71+ 5. 
of 


—— OPER i —_ 
. 


ho me 


aw 


| 
| 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


of Antioch trom S. Peter, thrown to 

the wild Beaſts in the Amphitheatre 

at Rome under Trajar. 

XXV. The Nativity of our moſt Bleſſed 
Lord and Saviour, Jeſs Chriſt. 

XXVII. S. Stepher, firſt Martyr. 


FANUARY. 


I. The Circumciſion of Chriſt : as alſo 
the Feſtival of S. Bap!. 

VI. ( 4) Epiphany, or Baptiſm: of our 
Saviour. Upon this day after they 
have celebrated the Holy Sacrament, 
they conſecrate and bleſs the Waters, 
and eſpecially for the uſes of Holy 
Baptiſm. 

XVII. S. Anthony, one of the firſt 
Founders of the Monaſtick Order in 
Eeypt under Decins, 

XVIII. S. Athanaſin and S. Cyril, Bi- 
ſhops of Alexandria. 

XXV. $S. Gregory Nazianzene, whom 
they ſtyle ©:02a2yA, or the Divine. 
XXX. $. Baſil, S. Gregory, and S. Chry- 
ſoſtome : the memory of which three 
great and famous Biſhops they cele- 

brate together. 
(4) Te dia empayric, or mt Sropdria (veogdiein) 


T4 Ewe Us Topliny, 
C 4 F E- 


24 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


FEBRUARY. 


IT. The Prefentation of Chriſt in the 
Temple by the Bleſſed Virgin, after 
the forty days of her Purification, 
when S7m#e0n met them there; there- 
fore called 577a77w71. 

XI. S. Blaſts, Biſhop of Sebaſte in Ar- 
menia , who having confeſt Chriſt 
there, obtained the glory of Martyr- 
dom under Diocletiar. 


MARCH. 


IX. The forty Souldiers, Martyrs, who 
being expoſed naked in a Lake or 
Ditch near Sebaſte in the leſſer Arme- 
77ia, were frozen todeath under Li- 
CInims. 

XXV. The Annunciation of the Bleſſed 
Virgin, S. Mary. 


APRIL. 


XXIII. S. George of Cappadocia,crown'd 
with Martyrdom under Diocletian, 
ſtyled peculiarly by the Greek 6 Tpo- 
UP 

XXV. $S. Mark, the Evangeliſt. 

MAT. 


—CE——— So I” —_— of --. —_ 
- 


"x 


An Account of the Greek Church. 25 


| MAY. 


# VIIL. S. Jobs, the Divine. 

XXI. Conſtantine the Great , and his 
| Mother Heleza , whom they call 
| "Joro5%As5 ,Or equal to the Apoſtles. 


7UNE. 


* MX. S, Bartholomew and S. Barnabas, 

, Apoſtles. 

| XIMX. S. Jude, Apoſtle, and Brother of 
our Lord. 

XXIV. The Nativity of S. Joh» Baptiſt, 
the forerunner of _ 

XXIX. S. Peter and. Pax, Apoſtles. 


Li Y MY WW 


7ULY. 


| XVII. S. Mariza, Virgin and Martyr, 
of Antioch in Piſidia, the Daughter 
of /Edeſiws, an Idol-Prieſt I ſuppoſe 


1 | him, between whom and J#liaz the 

vY Apoſtate Emperour, there was a great 

- intimacy and familiarity. The La- 
tines call this martyred Saint , Mar- 
garet. 


: | XV. (4a) E- 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


XV. ( 4 )) Elias the Prophet. 
XXVI. S. Paraſceve, Virgin and Martyr, 
had her Head ſtruck off ſomewhat a- 
bout the times of ( b ) Artoninus. | 
XXVII. S. Panteleemenon, Phyſician and | 
Martyr, who ſuffer'd at Nzcomedia in |. 
Bithynia under Maximian. The La-. * 
tines call him Pantaleor. 
AUGOST. 

VI. The Transfiguration of our Bleſſed 
- Saviour. ; 
XV. The Death of the Bleſſed Virgin : 
5 MeTzS zo; I xolprons, dormitio, This 
the Latines call the Aſſumption : 1n 
the relation of whoſe triumphal carri- 
age into Heaven by the Angels, 
( c ) the Greeks are very idle and 
fancifull, even to a great height and 
depree of credulity and folly. The 
inſlicucion of this ſolemnity (4d) Ni- 
cephorus attributes to the Emperour 
Maxritias, (ome little time before the 

year 600. 
XXIX. The beheading of S, John the 
Baptiſt. 


( 4) Decimotertio Kalendas Auguſti, quo die leves Gree? 
raptionem Eliz ad Celos ludis ſcentcts celebrant, Luit- 
prandus in legatione ad Nicephorum Imperatorem, p. 145. 


b ) page 317. Bids & 4wv- 


c ) Pag. 330. 4. 
d) Hiſtor. Ecclefiaſt, I, 17. c. 28. vide etiam 15.014 


Almoſt 


i a oa. Ao 6 R 


Almoſt every day has a peculiar Saint 
and Martyr , at whoſe commemoration 
the Religious in their Convents uſe a 
proper office, as in the Roman Breviary, 
which makes their Church-books ſwell 
toa great bulk. Theſe are the entertain- 
ments of their devotion in thetr retire- 
ments from the world, performed in- 
deed without that great ſclemnity as 
the above-mentioned Feſtivals are , at 
which the people are uſually preſent, 
and are obliged to keep facred by their 
z2yiz Or abſtaining from the ſervile works 
of their callings, according to the prac- 
tice and direction of their Church in 
the Rubrick of their ( 4 ) Meno- 
m -» | 
Their offices are long and tedious. 
The Prieſts and Deacons and other de- 
vout perſons obſerve the Vigils prece- 
dg the .great Feſtivals , ſpending the 
whole night in prayer and reading the 
Hiſtory ot the Goſpels , or the proper 
Leſſons for the Solemnity, without any 
interruption, taking their turns, and re- 
lieving one another when tyred, and fo 
keeping up the izeoN2xoiz or ſacred mi- 


( a ) See alſo the Aaggrrzimaey printed at Ve- 
ace 1626, 


niſtration. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


27 


Other Feſti- 
vals obſerved 
in Monaſte- 
Iiess 


Their Offices 
uſed in 
time of the 
Drume Ser- 
vice long. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


niſtration. 1 have been preſent for ſe- 
yen hours together at their ſervice upon 
a Feſtival day from between four and 


ward twelve. When there is a full 


Congregation, the ordinary prayers ap- | 


pointed for the Solemnity begin, and 


| 


five of the clock in the morning, till to- '. 


the life of the Saint is read to them in | 


the vulgar Greek tranſlated out of Sizzeon | 
Metaphraſtes, or the Synaxaria, which | 


are colle&ions briefly containing the 
moſt remarkable paſſages and accidents 
of the Saints lives, and the particulari- 
ties of their ſufferings and martyrdom, 
to which the people are very attentive, 
For this purpoſe among others they 
make uſe of the tranſlation of Maximus 
Biſhop of Cerigo, (4) a Book called ©;- 
o2ve 5 Or the Treaſure compoſed by Da- 
maſcen, of Theſſalonica, (Venice 1618, 
Brarto,) which contains Mora! diſcourks 
intermixed with the Hiſtorical, and in- 
deed are in the nature of Sermons; and 
a (6b) third Book, which they call 
by the name of 6 v5; Ozo2veg; or the 
new Treaſure. 


( a) Anciently Cythera , printed at Venice 1521. 
Nuarto. + 


( 6 ) Venice 1621, Nuarto. 


At 


£ 
l 


. vt AS 


OO OO TY "RF Lids thn. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


At ſuch ſolemnities the holy and au- 
ouſt Sacrament is always celebrated, and 
that with great pomp and ceremony : 
and indeed 1s not onely a neceſſary, but 
the principal part of the Feſtival. Every 
one ſtrives to bring his preſent or gift as 
he is able, according to the Primitive 
cuſtom, as Bread, Wine, Oyl for the 
Lamps, Wax-candles, Frankincenſe , 
and fuch hke , to be made uſe of in the 
following ſacred rites, or any other way 
as the ſervice of the Church may re- 
quire, * 

At ſuch times alſo they are very cha- 
ritable and liberal to the poor : the 
meaner ſort giving away what they can 
ſcarce ſpare from themſelves ; it being 
uſual for ſuch as are faln into any extra» 
ordinary diſtreſs to get Letters from the 
Patriarch ( I ſpeak of the places in and 
about Conſtantinople eſpecially) to re- 
commend their caſe, and to ſtir them 
up to compaſſion. And I have obſer- 
ved ſeveral Tzrks to bring their Chriſti- 
an {laves witha bolt or chain about their 
leg to the Church-doors of the Greeks , 


to beg their alms in order to their relict 


and maintenance : but this being the 
uſual artifice of their covetous Patrons, 
there 1s little notice taken of them. 


They 


29 
The Holy En- 
charift at ſuch 
times alwaies 
adminiſtred. 


Their Offe- 


rings and 


Charity. 


30 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


Their time of They go to Church always betimes 


going to 
Church. 


in the morning, and in the Winter time 
an hour or two before day, {which was 
the practice of the firſt Chriſtias in the 
times of Trajar according to the (4) re- 
lation which Plizy the younger , then 
Pro-Pretor in the leſſer Aſ;a made to that 
Emperour) and this they doe that the 
people may be preſent at the entire 
ſervice, and diſmiſt in good time to at- 
tend and look after their concerns : but 
chiefly , that they may perform their 
devotions more ſecurely and be leſs dif- 
turbed and moleſted by the Turks. If I 
may judge of others by my ſelf, I am 
perſwaded that no Chriſtian of what 
Communion ſoever can be preſent at 
their religious worſhip, but he will melt 
into tears and ſighs, and find great 
ſtrugglings and yearnings in his bowels, 
and put up ahearty prayer to Chriſt our 
common Saviour , that he would be 
pleaſed to deliver his poor diſtreſſed 
ſuppliants out of the hands: of theſe 
proud and inſulting Infidels , the ene- 
mies of his Croſs, and deſpifers of his 
Godhead. 


(4) 97. Epift, 


The 


Gs Gwa_dbkw_kQs QÞvwa Xu 89 wu uu a Ac ocuucc 


«4 net. lt. bf 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


and depend upon the great Anniverſary 
of our Bleſſed Saviour's Reſurrection. 
In the aſſigning of this, they make uſe 
of the old Paſchal Cycle, and limits of it, 
as they were eſtabliſht by the Fathers 
of the firſt general Council at Nice 
who taking no notice of the inequality 
and difference of the true Aſtronomical 
year from the Civil, then and till in 
uſe, which admits not of the nice cal- 
culation of the ſupernumerary minutes, 
made no proviſion for the przceſſion of 
the Xquinoxes, in the ſucceſhon of af- 
ter Ages : our account being the fame 
with theirs. 

Eaſter day is called (a) the holy and 
great Lord's day or Feſtival of the Paſt 
over, or (b) the Paſlover of the Re- 
ſurreion : and ſometimes ( c ) the 
Reſurrection day 3 hence the Lord's 
day or Sunday 1s called oftentimes by 
the ſame name, as being the weekly re- 


petition and celebration of the Eaſter 


Feſtival. Upon this and the two fol- 
lowing days at their firſt meeting, whe- 


F ) 'H &z/z x uizean Kueiar) oy (lcges 
b ) Tidga 'Avactoues 
( © ) "Hut avacntnus fire aragtou 


21 


The other Feſtivals are moveable , Moveable Fe- 


tvals. 


Eaſter. 


32 ' An Account of the Greek Church. 


ther in the Streets , if they can do it 
conveniently without any great obſer- 
vation of the Turks, and hindrance ; or 
in their Churches or Churchyards, to 
expreſs their mutual love and joy and 
beliet of this great Article of our Faith, 
the men kiſs each other, uſing the old 
form of words taken out of the Goſpel| 
of ( d ) S. Luke, Xei5% avicn, Chriſt 3s 
riſen; to which the aniwer is , 22198; 
avisn, He is riſen indeed. Sometimes it 
1s called Azwnes or the bright or white 
Sunday , alluding to the cuſtom and 
practice of the firſt Ages, the Catechu- 
21eni, upon their being baptiz'd at this 
ſolemn time , being cloathed in white, 
the whole week being thence called 
N2xawinuG, which name is (till retai- 
ned intheir publick Offices, andin other 
of their Eccleſiaſtical writings. 

The Sunday after Eaſter *Avrrmag2 
or Kuzizzh Nzxzvinu@, the fame with 
Dominica in Albis, the Albs being then 
left off, or ( e ) the new Sunday, or 
( f ) the Sunday of S. Thoxras, becaule 
of the Goſpell of the day taken out of 
S. John Chap. 20. relating to the hiſtory 


d ) Caps 20. v. 34: 
e ) Nic 4 Ka/vn, 
} ) Tos ©wus. 


of 


Tm ad ace tres ara 0 RS as. or ES ROE - 4 


Ss oy 
8 


13 


bes & TW Uo WY _gers ww OW 7 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


of his doubting , and of the confirmati- 
on of his faithin the ReſurreQion, done, 


as upon this day, the 'eighth day from: 


our $4viour's riſing out of the prave, 
verl. 26. 

The ſecond Sunday after Eſter , 
( q )) the Sunday of the Women who 
brought ,the Ointment , and of Joſeph 
the Juſt, of Arimrathea. 

The third Sunday, ( ) the Sunday 
of the man ſick of the Palſy, cured by 
our B. Saviour, 

The fourth Sunday, ( /) the Sun- 
day of the Samaritan woman. 

The fifth Sunday, (# _) the Sunday 
of the Blind man reſtored to light. Theſe 
four alſo ſo called from the ſeveral Go» 
ſpels read upon them, 

The Thurſday following is the (b ) Fe- 
ſtival of our Saviour's Aſſumption or 
Aſcenſion into the Heavens. 

The f1xth Sunday, the Sunday (c ) of 
the Three hundred eighteen divine Fa- 


C q ) 7 wvephgwy yuvautdy, 2 Iowng Ty egls. 
(Yr ) Tel[laggaurm 
C [ ®) 7 EapaponſC. 
( t )) Ts Tupas. 
C b ) h drapnilu ts EwngC vis fears, 
. (Cc) ff djioy TUaxdiu! rg ; 6x Stogigny 1 
UW Nia. 


D thers, 


33 


34 


Faſls. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


thers, who were aflembled at Nice. | 
They are particularly commemorated | 
and extolled upon this day , for their | 
Piety and Zeal in the defence of the | 
true Catholick Faith againſt the Impie- | 
tics and Blaſphemies of Ari# and his fol- | 


lowers, 


The Friday following,, AZ Soul: | 


day. | 
The ( d ) Sunday of the Holy Pen- 
tecoſt, 

The day following, -( e _) the Feſtt- 
val of the moſt Holy and undivided Tri- 
nity. 

The Sunday after Whitſunday, (f) Al 
Saints day. 

Another great inſtrument of preſer- 
ving the remainders of Chriſtianity a- 
mong them 1s, the {tirict obſervation 
both of the annual and weekly Faſts. 
They retain them moſt religiouſly, and 
think it a grievous ſin herein to tranf- 
grels the lawsof the Churchin the leaſt; 
partly out of a principle of Conſcience, 
and partly through long cuſtome and 
practice, which make the greateſt hard- 


d ) ii wuertuh 7 dia;Tlerlexoci. 

e ) © T4123ia; 4, edlaigers Terxd © frems 
E 1” © F 

tf ) n win 5 Alov miy muy, 


4 
C 
C 


ſhips 


ps 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


ſhips and ſeverities of life tolerable and 
ealy. They have gained a perfect ma- 
ſtery as it were over their appetite, and 
are ſo far from complaining of the tedi- 
ouſneſs and rigour of theſe Faſts, that 
they will not hear of any abatement and 
relaxation, bur would be the rather apt 
to entertain ſtrong jealouſies and miſap- 
prehenfions, that their whole Religion 
would be in danger, it there were the 
leaſt indulgence permitted in fo neceſſa- 
ry a part of it. 


Their ſolemn yearly Faſts are theſe 74:1 rajis 
four, which we may call ſo many Lexts. fo 

The firſt * great and holy Faſt, as Lent, » Fi 
they ſpeak, is that before Eaſter, accor- #*fvr* Ealter, 


ding to the ancient practice and exam- 
ple, and takes up full eight and forty 
days, beſides the Sundays : all which 
time (unleſs upon the Feſtival of the 
Anmunciation ot the Bleſſed Virgin, and 
Sundays, when they are indulged to cat 
ſome ſort of Fiſh which they may not 
upon other days of Lent) they wholly 
abſtain from all ſorts of Fleſh, and Fiſh 
too, except Shell-hiſh , as Cockles, 
Muſcles, Oyſters, Scallops, and ſuch as 
have no bloud ; (for of theſe they may 


= , "2 2 , 
n 15361 £ dziz Termegresn 


D 2 la bY 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


lawfully eat ; ) asalſo from Eggs, Cheeſe, 
and whatſoever is made of Milk; and 
uſe themſelves for the moſt part (2) to 
a dry kind of diet. On Sundays and 


Saturdays the uſe of Wine and Oyl is | 


| 
| 


permitted : but the devouter ſort of | 
people, and eſpecially the Prieſts and | 


they of the Monkiſh Order, refuſe both. 
Some are ſo ſtrangely devout, or rather 
ſuperſtitious, that they will not touch 
any thing that is forbidden : fo that if 
by chance a drop of Wine or Oyl ſhould 
fall upon their Bread, or any of their 
lawfull food, they think them polluted 
and profaned , and accordingly throw 
themaway 3 and had rather (out of ob- 
ſtinacy and deſperateneſs) periſh, either 
through hunger or by ſickneſs, then be 
guilty of ſo grievous a fin, as they e- 
lteem 1t. 

The Sunday before Septuageſima is 
called (6 the Sunday of the Publican 
and Phariſee , trom the Goſpell taken 
out of S. Like chap. 18. 

Septuageſima, ( c ) the Sunday of the 
Prodigal Son , S. Luke chap. 15. or 


C 4) Engozaia. ; 
Cb ) Ts Terdvex, bacon, 
Cc) 7 Aowrs 


cy 
[) 


oO =n T =< Ren formHd = © eu rm OO ko \f Wwy 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


# TIzopwmn or TIzzopwrn, and the whole 
week Ilzw9parinu@., becauſe notice is 
uſually given at this time of the nigh 
approach of the Faſt. 

Sexageſima , \ Kugizzm Ths amines , 
which we may render Dominica carniſ- 
privii, or the Sunday in which they bid 
farewell to Fleſh, which no longer be- 
comes lawfull to be eaten ; White meats 
being ſtill permitted. 

Onthe Saturday ( 4 ) they celebrate 
thememory of all who have been famous 
for their Retirement from the tumults 
and buſineſs and vanity of the world, 
and for their ſevere and Aſcetick lives. 

uinquageſima, hi Kvgizzm Tvgwn 1 T29- 
22y&.,lo called, becaule to this day in- 
cluſively they are indulged to eat Cheeſe, 
Eggs and White meats, and no longer. 
For on Monday (e )) the rigid and fo- 
lemn Faſts begin. On this day they 
reade ( f) the Hiſtory of the Expulſi- 
on of Adam out of Paradiſe, which 
they aſcribe to his Luxury and greedy 
wanton appetite. 


Quadrageſima, or ( g ) the firſtSun- 


Cd) win mirror off ou Aotrer Ae1t ly mwur 
C e ) 'Ammipune. 

(Cf D i" KGoeia 19 Adiius 

C £8) ff mum i pronar. 


D 3 day 


37 


33 An Account of the Greek Church. 


day in Let ; they call it alſo the Sunday 
* of Orthodoxy, celebrating upon it the | 
memory of Orthodox Kings and Patri- } 
archs. Upon the ſame day alſo they | 
excommunicate the Eizomuayo , Or 
ſuch as deny the worſhip of Images, in | 
compliance with the ſecond Nicene | 
Council, wherein that ſtrange doctrine 
(which was afterwards oppoſed and 
confounded by the Biſhops aſſembled at 
Francford by the command of the Em- 
perour C harlemaine) was eſtabliſhed un- 
der the penalty of an Arathema, 

The ſecond Sunday in Lezt. 

The third Sunday in Lezt is called 
C bh ) the Sunday of the preciows and 
life-producing Croſs, as they ſpeak z or 
KILN THS Slauermewowmvioww; according 
to ( 7 ) Codinws : becauſe on this day 
and the week following they kiſs the 
Croſs more frequently then at other 
times, and pay a reſpect to it which 
falls little or nothing ſhort of Adora- 
t1ON. 


The fourth, (4 ) Mid-lent Sunday. 


* 1 WuCiaKy 7 'OpSrHeLicge 1p P17 TH codnyErv 
Bennov 4; Tlaſeuapyor 

{hk ) Ts mwis &) Caom FM | 

f 1 ) de Officis Aule CP. cap. 9. 

{ b ) T3 uemvicioy. » venyinuCt wenn. 


The 


| dead. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


The fifth Sunday in Lezt. 
The Saturday following, ( /) the Sa- 
* turday of S. Lazarms raiſed trom the 


The ſixth, (- ) Palm Sunday , fo 
| called from their carrying branches of 
* Palms in their hands, in imitation of 
what we reade S. Mark 11. Chap. 
The week following is called (7) the The nl 
Week of the holy and ſalutary Paſſion, or *** 
the great and holy Week, Every day of 
which has the ſame title and denomina- 
tion given to itz as Monday 1s called 
the great and holy ſecond day , and 
ſo of the relt, in the order of their num- 
ber : for the Greeks have no proper 
and peculiar names for them derived 
from the Planets. * Sunday they always « +; 
call the Lord's day 3 the five next, the call the days 
ſecond, third, fourth, fifth, ſixth : though ? ran. 
they call this latter commonly TIzex- 
ox 9, or the Preparation, as Thurſday 
IT-5722%5zw), the day before the: Pre- 
paration, following the Jewiſh cuſtom, 


| and in alluſion to them, Saint Johr 


F244 TH 4318 A: (dps. 


pag. 110, 


tSouds. 


D 4 


Cm) 1 wucrnan F Batu 1 Pati 23, V. Luit- 
prand. 7n libro de Geſftis Imperat. 0 Regumn, lih. 6. cap. 5. 


(Cn _) 1 T4 owm1s mugs Sous. 1 aih 4, 13340 
{ / ho] 


chap. 


39 


Ss |} 


40 


The ceremony 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


chap. 10. 31. and in ſtead of the ſeventh, 
they generally ſay the Sabbath. 
On Thurſday in the evening , in the 


of waſving :he Patriarchal Church at Conſtantinople, is 


feer of twelve 
perſons. 


the Ceremony of the 5 vrr742 , or Wa- 
ſhing the feet of twelve Kalozrs,or other 
Officers belonging to that Church, per- 
formed by the Patriarch ; in imitation 
of that wonderfull a&t of condeſcenſion 
in our Bleſſed $4viour , who in this de- 
monſtrative inſtance took on him the 
form of a Servant, according to the Cu- 


ſtome of thoſe Eaſter: Countries. Each | 


of the twelve bears the name of the A- 
poſile whom he repreſents. And though, 
as they make it, it be but a meer mock- 
ſhow, and ſoon over ; to prevail with 
one to ſtand for the Traitour Judas, is 
no ſmall difficulty, this reproachtull and 
infamous name, for the moſt part, ſtic- 
king by him as long as he lives. But this 
being a neceſlary part, the Patriarch 1s 
torced to bribe ſome one or other with 
the promiſe of preferment z or elſe to 
interpoſe his Authority , that they de- 
cide it+by lot. All things thus prepared, 
and the Prayers and the Hymns ſung, 
which are preſcribed in the Offece, the 
Patriarch , having put off his Robe, 
girds himſelf about with a Towell, ac- 

cording 


ben Ot 


be, 7. 
Lo rp I 
<s; 


- - — SW ——_— p 
PIE Pg 24” 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


cording to the direQion of the Go- 
ſpell, which 1s then read by pauſes, by 
him of the number who repreſents 
Saint John , and pours warm wa- 
ter into the Laver: and as ſoon as 
he hears thoſe words read , S. Johr 
chap. 13. v. 5. Then he began to waſh the 
diſciples feet, he falls to his work. Ad- 
vancing towards Judas, whothrows out 
his Legs with ſome kind of haſt and dif 
order, in a very fooliſh and indiſcreet 
manner, the Patriarch, both by hislook 
and behaviour in the aftion , ſhews a 
manifeſt diſlike; which cauſes laughter 
and {port among the people preſent at 
the ſolemnity, who hitherto are uſually 
grave and ſerious. He who repreſents 
S. Peter is uſually the chief perſon in 
dignity among them, and is the laſt who 
has his feet waſht. He, upon ſeeing 
the Patriarch approach him, conteſts 1t 
for a time, and deprecates it in the words 
of S. Peter, verl. 8. and ſo on they dif- 
courſe it in the words of the Goſpell. 
The Ceremony being over, the other 
perſons being preſt dip their Hand- 
kerchiefs in the Waſh-pot , believing 
that there is a great deal of virtue 1n 
the Water which has been uſfcd in the 
Solemnity. This Cuſtome is not __ 
ne 


42 


Good Fri- 
day, 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


ned to Conſtantinople, but is performed 
elſewhere in their Monaſteries, and by 
Biſhops and Prieſts in their reſpeQtive 
Churches, where there 1s a conſiderable 
number of Chriſt;ans - ſuch fights tigni- 
fying little, and loſing much of their 
ſplendour , except there be crouds of 
ſpeQatours. 

Good Friday, (4 ) the great and holy 
Preparation, the Paſiover of the Cruci- 
fixion 5 but moſt commonly, the moſt 
holy Paſſuon-day. 

The ( 5b ) Vigil of Good Friday is 
ſpent in faſting and mortification, and 
prayer, and reading the hiſtory of, and 
meditating on our Lord's Paſtion, and 
the dolorous and ſhamefull circumſtan- 
ces of it, The Women ſubmit very 
readily to theſe rigoursz and Boys of 
fx or ſeven years of age endure as much 
as they are able, and care not to be ex- 
empt from theſe bodily exerciſes , in 
which they place a great part of their 
Religion : herein keeping up the prac- 
tice of the Primitive Chriſtians , who 
were wont to affli$ themſelves at this 


"TR % - 4 P , ' 
(4) 1 ajiz %, pan Pgarkevis TItgt mwpan- 
-v e ' - 
WV. 1 TH &310T1 T8 7a Iv5 WURER- 
£< » ' '& PY 
Cb) 1 dypumia 7 djioy m4. 389, 


ſolemn 


An Account of the Greek Church. 43 


ſolemn time, and ſhew an extraordinary 
Devotion; as ( c ) Euſebizs relates of 
the Therapente mentioned by Philo , 
whom he fanſics to have been Chriſt;- 
ans, and Diſciples of $S. Mark But 
whether that be a truth or a miſtake, 
he ſays the ſame ſeverities were uſed in 
his time. Great numbers watch all 
night in the Church :' the neighbouring 
ſtreets 1n the night-time are full of ſuch 
as paſs to and again. Thoſe who are 
} weak and lickly are allowed a little 
| bread and water,to prevent ſwouningin 
the day-time : bur generally, except in 
ſuch hike cafes, where an abſolute nece(- 
fity may juſtify the fa& , they abſtain 
from all fort of food till after Sun-ſet 
the next day. Others, of a more vigo- 
rous and athletick temper and conſtitu- 
tion , faſt four and twenty hours longer, 
and cat nothing till Ezfter-Eve, that 1s, 
at night, 

Toward the evening of Good Friday, An Image of 
they carry an Image of our B, Saviour oa | 
about the Church in proceſſion with tas jr their great 
pers and torches 3 and then they repre- Cover on 
ient the 27a, HAwn;, or the manner of qyy ,; nicht, 
taking our Saviour down from the 


'< C FO Hiſt. Ecclef. lib. 2. CAPs 17s 
Crolle : 


44 


Eaſter Eve. 


Faſt before 
Chriſtmas, 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


Croſle : in which they betray a great 
deal of ſuperſtition and folly, this being 
onely to gratify a childiſh and grols 
fancy. 

On the Saturday they eat but once, 
which 1s purely to ſuſtain nature. At 
threeof theclock in the afternoon, when 
their Veſpers begin, the devout people 
flock to Church; ſome continue there all 
night, and carry with them bread, dates 
and figs, and the like, to make uſe of 
upon occaſion of any fainting fit. To- 
ward break of day they fing the Hymn 
which begins, Glory in the higheſt. Af- 
ter which the Patriarch begins that ex- 
cellent Hymn, the Quire immediately 
following; ( 4 Chriſt is riſen from 
the dead, having by his death trampled 
upon death, and given life.to thoſe who 
were in their graves. Which they re- 
peat twelve times together. This Hymn 
15 ſung every day from Ez/ter-day to the 
Feaſt of the Holy Aſcenſ1on. 

The (5b ) ſecond ſolemn Faſt is of 
forty days, beginning on the fifteenth 
day of November , and ſerves to uſher 


(Ca J) Kew; avi f vivpay, Sadry Kiyaroy Nee 
Tious, #, & Tos Wiludn Conv rac tC. 
[4 , % [7 ww P 4 * 
(6 J) 1 viSert ky avry mango iu wes 7 x7 
ct TH Ear Foy Erviiougs. 


in 


* 
£ 
[i 
o 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


in the Solemnity of Chriſtzxas, The 
reaſon that ſome give for the determi- 
nate number of days appropriated to 
this Faſt , is no better then this , That 
as Moſes remained forty days upon 
mount Sinai faſting, in the way of an 
holy initiation, before he received the 
two Tables of the Law ; ſo it becomes 
Chriſtians, by the like Abſtinence, as 
much as humane infirmity will permir, 
to prepare themſclves to receive Chriſz, 
the true and great Law-giver. This 
Faſt is very mild and eaſy, in compari- 
ſon of the great Lenten Faſt before E- 
fter : for though they are obliged to ab- 
ſtain from Fleſh, Butter, Eggs, &c. yet 
there is a free uſe of Oyl, Wine, and 
all ſorts of Fiſh, as at other times. 

"The third ſolemn Faſt is ( c ) in ho- 
nour of the B. Virgin, and called by her 
name. It laſts fourteen days, that is, 
from the firſt of A»g»ſt to the fifteenth 
day of that month, the Feſtival of her 
Obit or ( 4 ) Dormition, or, as they 
ſometimes explain it more largely, of 
her ( e ) Tranſlation from Earth to 


( ©) n wioeiad Otonyr, 
( 4 ) n xdiunas  OzunnpC. 
* » < = \ F 
C © ) 1 & 7 yrivay vic woghes ETYFANS, 


Heaven : 


45 


The Faſt :f 
the B. Virgin. 


46 


The Faſt of 
the Apoſtles, 
S. Peter and 
$, Paul. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


Heaven: which the Ro» Church chu- 
ſes rather to call the Aſſumption of the 
Virgin. Onely there 1s ſome little re- 
laxation indulged upon the Feſtival of 
our B. Szviour's Transfiguration , that 
falls within this time. 

The fourth folemn Faſt is ( f) the 
Faſt of the holy Apoſtles, S. Peter and 
S. Paul. The duration of this Faſt is 
not fixed and certain, as the reſt are; 
for it is longer or ſhorter, as Eaſter falls 
higher or lower in the year. It begins 
on the Monday after AZ Saints day, 
which is with them the Sunday after 
Whitſunday , and is continued to the 
Feſtival day of thoſe two great Saints, 
which is on the 29. day of June. They 
find out the length of this Faſt by this 
ealy Method and Rule: Look how ma- 
ny days there are from Eaſter to the ſe- 
cond of May, ſo many make up the 
intervall or number of days allotted to 
this Faſt. As for inſtance, when this 
Canon or Rule was firſt told me at Cor- 


ſtantinople , in the _ 1649, by a 
e 


Greek Prieſt, Papas Feremias Germans, 
(who had travelled into Ezg/ard, where 
he met with conſiderable relief, and 


c "FF, 
Cf ) n meda O% ator Amgitay, 


partt- 


_ = __m0Þ-2Þ af. 2. 


—"*” 
WH 


as OD 


An Account of the Greek Church, 


particularly here at Oo, being a man 
of more refined parts and learning then 
the Kaloirs uſually are, ) Eaſter hap- 
pened to fall on the 11.0f April ; from 
which day to the ſecond of May inclu- 
ſively are two and twenty days : which 
was the number of the days they faſted 
that year, in memory and honour of the 
Apoſtles. For AZ Saints day falling con- 
ſequently on ' the ſixth of June, 1f we 
reckon from the day following to the 
Feſtival, in reference to which the Faſt 
isinſtituted, we ſhall find the ſame num- 
ber. But whether this Rule ( 2 )) holds 
in all other caſes, and 1s infallible, as 
he pretended, I am not at leiſure to ex- 
amine or enquire 3 nor is it worth my 
ſtudy or time, if I were. Thus much 
for the Annual Faſts. 

The Weekly Faſting-days are 
(6b) Wedneſday and Friday 5 which 
are ſtrictly ſti]l retained, in compliance 
with the ancient Cuſtome and Practice 
of the Catholick Churches in the firſt 
Ages of Chriſtianity. The reaſon and 
original of which may be aſcribed to 
the Zeal and Piety of the Chriſtians of 


C 4 )) 6 xav3y aT2436al@-. 
( b ) ined i; 1 myyonnais 


thoſe 


47 


Weekly Faſts. 


4.8 


Some days 
exempted out 
of the number. 


An Account of the Greek Church, 


thoſe times, either that they might not 
be behind-hand with the more religious 
ſort of Jews, who , according to the 
preſcriptionand tradition of their Elders, 
faſted twice a week, S. Luke chap. 18, 
verſ. 12. or that they _—_ with a due 
and becoming ſorrow retlet and medi- 
tate upon our Bleſſed Saviour's being 
betrayed and crucified, as upon theſe 
days, and afflit and humble themſelves 
under a ſenſe of their guilt, the merito- 
rious cauſe of his Sufferings and Death. 

Out of this number they exempt the 
Wedneſdays and Fridays of the three 
great and famous Feſtivals, that is, of 
Chriſtmas, ( c ) comprehending the 
whole twelve days, of Eaſter, and Pex- 
tecoſt, that there be no interruption of 
that innocent and ſober Joy, which de- 
ſervedly attends theſe Solemnities, by 
the interpoſition of Faſts uſual at other 
times 3 asalſo of Septuageſima and Sexa- 
geſima, that they may nor ſeem to agree 
in the leaſt with the Armenian Chriſti- 
ans, faſting moſt rigorouſly at theſe 
times, whom they look upon as Here- 
ticks, and hate mortally. The reaſon 
of which poſhibly I may account for 
hereafter at large. 

C © ) m3 dadtxaiiutesn, 


They 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


the Vigils of ſome peculiar Feſtivals ; 
ſuch as are the Vigll 

Of the Epiphany, that being purged 
and cleanſed from fin by faſting, they 
may drink with greater ſucceſs and be- 
nefit of the Waters which upon the fo]- 
lowing Feſtival are bleſled and conſe- 
crated : and this they doe very heartily, 
attributing great virtue to them. The 
antiquity of this cuſtom, of Bleſſing the 
waters upon this day, may appear from 
the (b)) Homily of S. John Chryſoſtome, 
Patriarch of Conſtantinople , upon this 
very argument. 

Of Pentecoſt, and the Monday fol- 
lowing, to prepare them the better to 
receive the influences of the Holy Spi- 
rt. 

Of the Transfignration. 

Of the Exaltation of the Croſs, the 
figure of which they kifs faſting. 

Of the Beheading of S. Johr: the Bap- 
t; 


on any Saturday throughout the year jet 


They are obligedalſo tofaſt ( 2 ) on '#% 


Tb. 
They hold it utterly unlawfull to faſt Unlowfut o 


days, ex 
excepting that of the Holy week ; fol- tha Zong 


C 4 ) mea regtipnouw 
( b ) oe} d1agui my uds' 


E lowing 


ro An Account of the Greek Church. 


lowing herein the ancient cuſtome : it 
being prohibited under the grievous pe- 
nalty of Depoſition to an Eccleſiaſtical 
perſon, and of Excommunication to a Þ 
Lay-man, by the ( c ) 66. Apoſtolical | 
Canon, which was renewed and con- | 
firmed by the ſixth general Council, as 
they reckon, held in Tru/o, Canon 
the 55. By which, ſays ( 4 ) Zona 
ras , they endeavoured to correct the 
Errour of the Latines. The alteration 
of one of the days of the weekly Faſts 
being, among others, a great occaſion 
of the breach and diſunion of the Eaſtern 

from the Weſtern Church. 
The end and But to put an end to this diſcourſe a- 
yy of theſe bout their Faſts , reſerving the conſide- 
ration of the ſeverities no reſtraints in- 
flicted and impoſed by the Kaloirs upon 
themſelves to a fitter place 3 I ſhall 
onely adde thus much , that whatever 
the preſent opinion or abuſe be about 
theſe Faſts, the deſign of the Catholick 
Church in the inſtitution of them, and 


C c ) El ms xaneinds wpelly mv xuere nts nugogy WH 
caviy, i 73 SalCanv, my oe 53s wire, xalapprion! 
# Ns Aaitds, &2001{42r. 

C d )) in Scholiis :* Jlogdwener, 7 ggdapea Tir od 
AaTivuwy Cm OHgevTis. 


cſpe- 


mm" Www FF wm oe wyFws —-*F Tr 


*S ww WW mw NE Ly 


An Account of the Greck Church. 


eſpecially of the Leiter Faſt before 
Eaſter, was truly pious and Chriſtian, 
that a publick check being thus given to 
the corrupt inclinations of nature, and 
the Body kept under by mortification 
and abſtinence, the Mind might be more 
at liberty to reflect upon it ſelf, and be 
taken up with thoughts of God and 
Religion 3 and that all, after ſuch ex- 
erciſes of Penitence, may be the better 
prepared to partake of the great Myſte- 
ries of the Body and Bloud of our Lord, 
eſpecially at Eaſter. 


OI 


In ſo great Confuſion , which has Their Chur- 
long ſince overwhelmed the outward ©** 


glory and ſplendour of the Greek Em- 
pire, 'tis not tobe expected, that their 
Churches ſhould be rich and ſtately. 
The Churches which now belong to 
the Greeks are narrow and mean , and 
without any rich furniture 3 whereby 
they become leſs liable to be made a 
prey to the covetouſneſs of the [»f- 
dels, who are wont toenvy the Chriſti- 
ans the uſe of any thing that is rich and 
beautifull : Chriſtianity here, as to the 
exteriour part of it , bring redu- 
ced to the fame ſtate and conditi- 
on, as it was in before the times of 
Conſtantine the Great , when their 


E 2 C4) Sa- 


02 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


( 4a) Sacred Conventions , ſometimes 
torbid by the cruel Edidts of the Hea- 
theniſh Proconſuls and other Magi- 
ſtrates, under moſt ſevere penalties, and 
made Treaſon againſt the Government, 
were kept ſecret in Grotta's and Caves 
under ground 3 and when tolerated 
and connived at, in obſcure and un- 
adorned Chappels, which had nothing 
to attract either envy or emulation, or 
to pleaſe and gratify the eye and fancy, 
but where God was worſhipt in the 
Beanties of holineſs, Theſe Churches 


\ they (till enjoy, by virtue of the Grant 


made them by the Emperour Mahomet, 
at his triumphal entrance into, and ta- 
king poſleftion of this Imperial City : 
(it being their intereſt not to depopu- 
late it wholly of Greeks : ) but 1m caſe 
of any ruine or breach cauſed by. Fire or 
Earthquake, or any other unforeſeen 
accident, they are utterly forbid to re- 
build or repair them without leave 3 
which 1s not obtained without great 
difficulty, and vaſt ſummsof money too: 
the Turks preſuming, I ſuppoſe, that if 


C 4 _) *Emuriey, Heteiie, Vid, Plin. 10. lib. Ep. $7. 
Suy2nxgs, V. Origenem adv. Celſum lib, 1, non procul ab 
mM7rtos 


their 


0 CWO 20 TP T7 SD 0 ST 3 2 


_- A 5. et REO 


An Account of the Greek-Church. 53 


their Churches were once demoliſht , 
their Religion would ſenſibly decay , 
and in proceſs of time be wholly ex- 
tinguiſht. It concerns the Greeks there- 
fore to be carefull (as indeed they are) 
of theſe Sacred Structures, upon the 
leaſt defe& in the walls or roof, as ſoon 
as 'tis viſible; leſt it being neglected, 
they be neceſſitated to purchaſe the 
good will of the Cadyes, with expence- 
full Bribes, to keep up and maintain 
the Fabrick. 

There are about ſix and twenty Chur- churches in 
ches in Conſtantinople , whoſe names Conſtantins- 
here follow, as they were communica- *® ® 
ted to me by a Greek Prieſt, when I was 
upon the place. 

The ( a )) Patriarchal Church, dedi- 
cated to the B. Virgin. 

S. Nicolas, not far from SanGaSophia, 
if I do not miſremember. 

S. George. 

C b ) The Holy Virgin. 

S. Nicolas. 

S. Carpxz. 

Theſe four are in the Streets towards 
the Propontis , not far from P/amathia- 

Gate. 
C 4 _) Malerapyroy. 


C b ) Timazia; ypurrangt vir * ; 
E 3 S Con- 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


S. Conſtantine , in Caramania-Street, 


hard by the Sever Towers. 


The Holy Virgin, in Belgrade-Street, ' 


The Holy Virgin, in New-Street. 
Another, near the Gyz-Gate. 

S. Demetrixs, inthe Street called Z2p- 
MhLLOVUWs 

S. George, near Adrianople-Gate. 

( 4 )) The Holy Virgin , Queen or 
Lady of Heaven, in the ſame Street. 

S. Demetrivs, near the Wood-Gate, 

The Holy Virgin, near the Crooked- 
Gate. 

The Holy Virgin, in Arabage Meidan, 
or Arabian Market-place. 

The Holy Virgin, near Balini. 

(b ) S. Nicolas of the Achridians. 

C c The Chappell of the Holy Se- 
pulchre. 

Cd ) The Holy Virgin 

C e ) S. George —-— 

S. Nicetas , near the houſe of the 
Prince of Walachia. 

The Holy Virgin , near the houſe of 
the Prince of Moldavia, 


( a ) Tleredziay Tis wueic; Ty vpgvs. 
C 6) *Axadavoy. 

Cc) Msmyoy T6 & 34s Tagus 

C 4) Navrazia; oy Neynais, 

(Ce ) "Apis Tewggis Tomes. 


> EE. 


An Account of the Greek Church. +55 


The Holy Virgin, near the Patriarchal 

Church, called, for diſtin&ion, 5 wes, 
or the little Church. 

S. George, near the Lantern-Gate. 

( 4 )) S. John, belonging to the Pa- 
triarch of Alexandria. 

There were about ſeven Chriſtian 
Churches burnt down in the diſmal fire 
that happened about fifteen or ſixteen 
years ago, near Condoſcali by the Sand- 
Gate 3 fome of which they thought to 
have re-built , having procured leave 
from the Caimacam or Governour of 
Conſtantinople : but the Imams and other 
zealous Turks remonſtrating againſt it, 
they were commanded todefiſt. 

They have likewiſe fix Churches at Galata. 
Galata, which are 

( b ) The Holy Virgin — 

( c )) Chriſt hanging upon the Croſs, 

S. Demetriws , near Sophana, the 
place where the Tzrks caſt their Guns, 
and where I have ſeen ſeveral Cannon 
and Field-pieces taken from Chriſtian 
Princes. 

S. Nicolas. 


( 4 ) Menyor Tis' AneZardpricye 
C b )) Tis mvazia; Kapzmaris. 
( © ) Ts X&f8 uptpasts 


E 4 (a) Chriſt's 


56 


Moſt of the 
ancient Chur- 
ches deſtroy- 
ed, or turned 
into Moſchs. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


( a )) Chriſt's — — 

S. Jobn. 

They have a ſmall Church in the 
Bagno, where a Greek Prieſt is ſome- 
times permitted to come and officiate 
before the poor Slavesof their Commu- 
nion , at ſuch time as the Armata of 
Gallies 1s returned from viſiting the Iles 
in the Arches, or any ſuch like Summer- 
expedition. Not to mention the Chur- 
ches _—_— to the Towns and Vil- 
lages near Conſtantinople, on either fide 
of the Boſphoras. 

Thoſe glorious and magnificent Piles 
of building mentioned by Procopiae, the 
Authour of the Survey made in the 
times of Theodoſizs Junior , Cedrenm, 
and Codinxs, (which latter lived a little 
before Conſtantinople was taken,) which 
the Piety of ſeveral Emperours had rai- 
ſed in honour of our Religion, at fo 
vaſt an expence, in Conſtantinople, Cand 
the like 1s to be ſaid of the other great 
Cities under the dominion of the Grand 
Srgnor ) are either levelled with the 
ground, and new Foundations built 
upon them ; or elſe ſeized upon by the 
Turks, pleaſed with the curious Archi- 


( 4) Xe £3 65 m15nvicn, 


tecture, 


An Account of the Greek Church, 


te&ure, and turned into Moſchs, upon 
the taking of that City, with ſome little 
alteration, the better to accommodate 
them to the Uſes of their Religious 
Worſhip 3 the Chance]ls being laid 
open, and the curious Images in Mo- 
ſaick disfigured, We may gueſs at the 
richneſs and beauty and glory of the 
reſt, by thoſe few which remain , of 
which I ſhall onely mention the Chur- 
ches of Saint Sophia and of the Holy A- 


poſtles. 


The former, which is now the chief 73- church 


57 


ſeat of the Mahowmetan Worſhip, as it .-- pad 
was before of the Chriſtian, was called 


ſo ( 4) in honour of our Bleſſed Sav;- 
our, who is the Wiſedow of the Father 3 
built by the Emperour J»ſtinian accor- 
ding to the contrivance and mode]! of 
the two famous Architects of that Age, 
Anthemins of Tralles , and Iſidorns of 
Miletum : upon which he had ſet his 


C a ) 5 ua Tis Ts Ots Abys Sopiay veds, Niceph. 
Hiftor, Eccl. 1. 7. Cc. 20. uizi5& vas Tis 18 Ots oye 
Seogiaz, Chronic. Conſtantin» p. 4- n £7" ovouan 7s Os 
Nite unSteio die orgia, 07s Os atewyuO yds, 
þ+ 12. Soglay xanZoy of BuCdyna + viay , emaretd= 
TY TT Op Ty emrovias uniguoutrory, Procopli- 
us de AFdificiiss Juſtiniani |. 1. c. 1. See the Praiſes of 
rhis glorious Church in the eloquent Letter of Manuel 
Chryſaloras to the Emperour Johannes Cantacuzenus. 


heart 


59 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


heart ſo much, that he judged no coſt 
oreat enough in order to the accom- 
pliſhment of his deſign, as if this had 
been the crown and perfection of all 
thoſe glorious actions, both in peace 
and war, for which his Reign is ſo de- 
ſervedly famous. At the Dedication 
whereof, ( after he had given ſolemn 
thanks to Almighty God, who had ena- 
bled him to finiſh it, and had continu- 
ed him alive to fee the holy Triumphs 
of that day,) he could not contain him- 
ſelf, but brake out into rapturous ex- 
preſſions of joy , ſaying, ( 4) O Solo- 
2401, I have got the better of thee. And 
if we may give creditto ( b ) Codinws, 
he cauſed the Statue of that King to be 
placed near the Regza Ciſterna, ſitting in 
a Chair, and, in a melancholick poſture, 
leaning upon his elbow, with his eyes 
turned toward Sana Sophia. By which 
kind of Emblem he deſigned to repre- 
ſent the great Grief that would ſeize 
upon him, if he were to be reſtored to 
life for ſome time, to ſee this Church ſo 
much out-ſhine the Temple he had the 


(C a )) revixnyg. ot, Soxouwy, Codin. de Origin. Con- 
Rant. p. 71. edit. Parif. 
(C b _) Codin. pag. 21. fine, 


honour 


An Account of the Greek Church. 59 


honour to build at Jersſalew. The 
Turks call this Church, with very little 
alteration from the Greek, Ara Sophia © 
the Greeks in their ordinary diſcourſe, as 
formerly in their writings, before it fell 
into the hands of the barbarous [»fidels, 
the great Church, or the great Holy 
Church, 

The Church of the Holy Apoſtles , The Church of 
( 4 )) where the Reliques of S. Andrew, A "=o _”— 
S. Luke, and S. Timothy were anciently 
depoſited, being before of Wood, was 
pulled down, and rebuilt of Marble 
(6b) by the Empreſs Theodora,the Wife of 
Jaſtinian, 1ncited by his example to doe 
ſomething worthy of her, to make her 
name known to, and admired by poſte- 
rity. This Church, according to the 
tradition of the Greeks, was firſt gran- 
ted by the Emperour Mahomet, upon 
his taking the City , to the Patriarch 
Gennadims Scholarins : but he ſoon revo- 
ked his Grant, and turned it into the 
Moſch which now bears his name. 

The Patriarchal Church formerly be- The Parriar- 
longed to a Convent of Nuns , where © ©: 


( 4a) Vid. Cedrenum ad 23. annum Fuſtiniant. 
(b) Vid. Procop. de Adif. Fuſtiniani L. 1.c. 4. & 


Codimum de Origin, CP. þ« 73- 


the 


60 


part of the 
Pillay to 
which our B. 
Saviour was 
tand, 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


the Patriarch has a convenient dwelling. 
It is fituated upon the riſing of a hill, 
near the Lartern-Gate, toward the Ha- 
ven ; of an ordinary bigneſs, and with- 
out any great Ornament, for the reaſon 
above mentioned. - The Emperour A- 
lexius Commenwus here lies interred. They 
ſhewed me here alſo theReliques of S. 
Euphemia, and of ſome other Martyrs, 
lockt up in Cheſts, which they open 
with great ſolemnity, to gratify the cu- 
riofity of Strangers, who reward the ci- 
vility ſufficiently. But that which they 
moſt eſteem is a piece of black Marble, 
as they pretend, part of that Pillar 
which formerly ſtood in the Pretorinm 
or Hall of Poztizs Pilate, to which our 
Blefled Saviovr was tied, when he was 
whipped 3 about two foot long, and 
three or four inches over; (if my me- 
mory ſerves me right, for I did not think 
it worth my pains, though never ſo 
ſmall, to take the exa&t dimenſions of 
t;) incloſed in braſs lattice Grates, 
thatit may not receive prejudice either 
from devout or facrilegious perſons. 
For they have aſtrong imagination, that 
the duſt raſed from it, and put into 
wine, or any way conveyed into the 


ſtomach, cures Agues and Fevers almoſt 
infalli- 


— _ 


Py, AO Fo *# mo A MY 0 pw A wh, A A 


An Account of the Greek Church. 6&1 


infallibly. In a braſs Plate under it I 
found theſe ſix Verſes engraven, alluding 
to the tradition I juſt now mentioned , 
which they believe as undoubtedly as if 
it were Goſpel. 


N&7w Jtiuxaes es wars, Tlavmagy a, 
Kai me gownrv His fam paetTuy UBgw. 
Sv mc lywov Feaptes Why UxTICUAN 
OY, 5 T ſ y / f 

Iv iAt%5; wo cn Azlgwon on, 

Kai wa5inas os if tus drminons, 
TIaveyizry; NixinG @ YeD) 


Near hereunto, the Emperour Selr2, ,,,;4e of the 
emulous of the glory of his Anceſtours, Greeks in di- 
once intended to have built a Myſch, -aeg tn 
for the advantage of the fituation. The Gere. 
Greeks, fearing leſt their Church ſhould 
be demoliſht for the enlargement of the 
Area of it, play'd a maſter-game of cun- 
ning, by bribing the Yzzzr and the other 
Baſſa's , who had a mighty Aſcendent 
over him. They accordingly diverted 
him from his purpoſe, and perſwaded 
him to build it at Adriarople, to the 
great joy of the poor Chriſtians, who 
were thus happily delivered from their 
fears. 

. The Churches are of different figures 7% fo ane 


figure of their 
ſome Churches, 


62 An Account of the Greek Church. 


ſome (4 ) rifing up with Cppola's in 
the midſt, as Sana Sophia : others are 
built ( 5 )) Croſs-wiſe, like our Cathe- 
drallsz ( c ) others ſquare and oblong. 

A particular That the Rites and Ceremonies , 

_ 9 which I ſhall have occaſion to mention 
hereafter, may bethe better underſtood, 
I will briefly deſcribe the make and 
faſhion of one of their Churches, with 
the ſeveral parts of it ; (for where any 
of them is wanting, it is wholly for want 
of room, or ſome other convenience; ) 
refcrring the curious Reader to the Lu- 
tine Copy. 

In the firſt fabrick and conſtitution, 
they had regard to the ( d )) threefold 
condition and order of perſons admitted 
within the Church-doors: which are, 

( e ) Eccleſiaſtical perſons, or Prieſts, 
and other inferiour Miniſters belonging 
to them. 

( f Lay-perſons, which lie under no 
Church-cenſure, but enjoy the privile- 
ges of their Baptiſm, and have the liberty 


(a ) punt 1 wknordh. 
b , 02//Pro Tthe 
c ) Tilegyure x, Jeowyd. nn 
( 4 ) See Symem Theſſalonicenſis , nn his trat Te? 
TY V4. of Actor 9 euniCay ers TERS: deupapduors 
e ) lepric, hot TEANWTIKA, 
- f ) « T1591, 0 08 THACN- 


ot 


a ©&- F WF CC RR PPT IE 


PoOo<OQO Lo BPM wu w£o 


An Account of the Greek Church. 63 


of ſerving God in the publick Congre- 
gation 3 or the Faithfull. 

( 4) Penitents and Excommunica- 
ted perſons , deprived of the uſe of the 
holy Sacrament in the way of a ſpiritual 
Puniſhment : among whom, anciently, 
the Catechnmeni , and perſons poſſeſſed 
with Evil Spirits, were placed. Accor- 
dingly every compleat Church conſiſts 
(b ) of an Entrance, Nave, and Chan- 
cell, diſtinguiſht by the ſeveral uſes to 
which they peculiarly belong, and ap- 
propriated to particular perſons. 

Before you enter. the Church , 1s pub. 
C c ) a covered Porch, uſually arch'd , 
running out at each fide the Portall 
with Seats againſt the wall, upon which 
are painted ſeveral Images, as of our 
Bleſſed Saviour, the Virgin Mary, S. John, 
S. George, and the like, (theſe two laſt 
being the great Saints of the Eff, and 
of that Saint particularly, to whoſe me- 
mory the Church is conſecrated z but 
very wretchedly , and without beauty 
or. proportion : Painting , as well as 
the other ingenious and polite Arts, ha- 


Ta G9 TE var, dyais, T2 Cle 


E Cc WCAG, PEIWgr 1 Eg TVACUY y i TEM ANY 
Tv yay. 


£ ) of aymns &v wt revolt. 


ving 


64 An Account of the Greek Church. 


Outward 
Gate. 


Narthex. 


ving been long ſince baniſht Greece and 
the Leſſer Aſza. 

The outward Gate, which they call 
( 4 ) the great or Silver Gate, opens 
into a long narrow ſpace, which they 
call ( b ) Nz2ant , diſtinct from the 
Body of the Church , and ſeparated 
by a half partition. In the inner- 
moſt part ſtood the ( c _) Penitents, to 
hear the holy Scriptures read ; next to 
the Gate were the { 4 ) Candidates of 
Baptiſm; and between both, thoſe who 
were (e) poſſeſſed : this being their 
proper place, beyond which it was not 
lawfull ro advance one ſtep forward. 
But theſe uſes long fince ceaſing , 
the rooms are taken up by the Women, 
who never fit promiſcuouſly with Men, 
there being Lattices at the farther end, 
through 'which they look into the 
Church, without being ſeen themſelves. 
Here they leave the Coitin of the perſon 
who is to be interred , (unleſs he be a 


(4) n vezaAn x, drwes mA 
b ) N:p215. Tlgtyacys 
f c ) o *Anv5%uWo, Sec the Commentary of Zonaras 
on the 9. Canon of the Council of Nice. 
(4) Ker $8. This place hence called KamysuÞe 


Or Kam xuurad. 
(ec ) evipyigpWob 1hd{* hue 


Church- 


An Account of the Greek Church. 65 


Church-man, and then they carry it 1n 
farther, )while they perform ſomeFuneral 
offices in the Church; which ended, they 
carry it intothe Church-yard. In this place 
the Fort is placed, of which I ſhall ſpeak For. 
more diſtin&ly, when I come to ſhew the 
Ceremonies which they uſe in Baptiſm. 

The middle Gate, which they call Middle Gate, 
the (a) Beantiful/ Gate, opens into — 
the (b ) Nave or Body of the Church, 
which lies open, unlels almoſt toward 
the upper part, where there are ſome 
few ( c )) Stalls, as in the Patriarchal *-#- 
Church, where is one higher then the 
reſt for the Patriarch , and others for 
the Princes of Walauchia and Moldavia, 
or for the Metropolitans and Biſhops, 
when any happen to be preſent. Above 
which, but more toward the Wall, in 
little oblong Squares, thoſe who belong 
to the Quire have their ſtation ; and a 
little higher in the middle 1s the Desk, pe. 
where they reade the Holy Scripture to 
the People. In the great Churches a 
(4d ) Pulpitis uſually placed inthe mid- paizr. 
dle, but which they very ſcldome make 
uſe of. You advance onely from a ſingle Partition b-- 
ſtep to the wooden Partition. Which Ju 7, 

C a ) TIvmn wpd'a. 

(b ) © yats. 

C c ) 529idz, 

( 4 ) "Aupoy. 

t inter- 


66 


_ 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


intervall I ſuppoſe to be the Soleas, a- 
bout the meaning and right placing of 
which ſeveral learned men have conte- 
ſted at large. This reaches almoſt from 
the roof to the pavement, and takes 
up the breadth of the Church. It is 
full of Piftures done at large, eſpecially 
thoſe lately mentioned 3 ſometime 
daubed over with Gilt, as I have obſer- 
ved in their Monaſteries, which, being 
either inthe Iflands, or in the Country 
in by-places, out of the fight of the 
Turks, are better and more richly ador- 
ned. Three Doors open out of it ; 
whereof the middlemoſt , called the 
( 4 ) holy orroyal Door, is not open, 
or paſſed through, but upon ſpecial oc- 
caſion: ( b ) as in the ſolemn introitme 
of the Veſpers of the great Feſtivals ; or 
at ſuch time as they celebrate the Com- 
munion , when the Deacon goes out 
thence to reade the Goſpell to the Con- 
gregation: or when the Pricſt, after the 
Procethion, immediately enters in order 
to conſecrate; or when ſuch as commu- 
nicate approach thither to receive the ſa- 
cred Symbols from the Prieſt or Dea- 
con, who ſtands juſt in the entrance of 

C 4 ) Tuan a3ie v Com. 

(C 6b _) See the Diataxis of Philotheas Patriarch of 
Con7artinople. 


it 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


it. There are two leſſer Doors at each 
extremity , the one at the North, the 
other at the South fide of the Church ; 
by which at all other times they paſs in- 
to the Sacrarium or Chancell, 

This enclos'd ſpace they moſt fre- 
quently call ( a) Bema: ether becauſe 
of the little rifing and aſcent to it; or ra- 
ther becauſe it 'is look'd upon as the 
Throne and Tribunal of Chriſt , which 
is the ſignification of the word in 
the New Teſtament, ( for ( b ) this 
and ſuch like honourable appellations , 
as the Holy of Holies, the Seat and Place 
of God, and his Reſt, &c. they beſtow 
upon it,) it being the holieſt and moſt 
venerable part of the Church, pecuhar 
to the Prieſts and others who ſerve at 
the Altar ; it not being permitted the 
Laicks to enter there during the Com- 
munion-Service, according to anexpreſs 
(c ) Canon of the Council of Laodt- 
cea, Outof reſpe&t to which, and the 
Cuſtome of thoſe Times, founded upon 
it, ( d )) S. Ambroſe thought fit to ad- 

( a ) 40v bra. __ 

C b _) See the above-cited Symeon Theſſalonicenſis. 

C c ) Canon 19, 

( d ) Theodoret. Hiſt. Eccleſ. L. 5.c. 13, The curious 
Reader may ſee this more at large in the Latine Copy, 
þ+ 59, 60, GT. 


F 2 moniſ(h 


67 


C hancell > : 
within whic! 


E8 


three Tables. 


The holy or 
myſtical Ta- 
ble. 


Prothehs, 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


moniſh the Emperour Theodoſz9, upon 
his ſtay there in order to receive the Sa- 
crament , after he had made his -Offe- 
rings : which the good Emperour took 
very patiently and quietly, and readily 
ſubmitted to. Hence it 1s called izex- 
1c ſometimes iaz5#puoy or the Propiti- 
atory , becauſe of the Holy Euchariſt, 
the repreſentative Sacrifice of the Death 
of our Saviour, who once offered up 
himſelf upon the Croſs, for the fins of 
the World ; and ſometimes Ivunzz#zy, 
for the ſame reaſon: ( 4 ) as I have 
elſewhere proved at large. 

Within this place, in the greater 
Churches , there are three Tables ; 
which differ much in uſe and dignity : 
it being onely lawfull to conſecrate up- 
on the middlemoſt, which is of Stone, 
faſtned to the Wal], -which they call 
( b ) the holy, Divine, and myſtical! 
Table ; where, as in their proper place, 
the Goſpels lie, and over which there 
is a Croſs, as a memorial of the Death of 
Chriſt, 

On the left hand of it, toward the 
North, 1s a little Table, called TTe gras, 


C a ) de Grace Ecclef. hodierno ſtatu, þ. 61, 62+ 


' FH i s "A \ \ 
C 6 ) 1 ain, i222, Sric & vari Te TECH 


where 


———__ 3#wuuw£« £ Xx i,vwo wm _ _ oc 


An Account of the Greek Church. 69 


where they depoſit the holy Gifts or 
Preſents, ( as under the Moſaick Law, 
the Shew-bread, which the Greek In- 
terpreters of the Old Teſtament call 
6 221. Ti; n25%74m;,) and where ſeve- 
ral things are done preparatory to the 
Holy Communion. 

On the oppoſite fide 1s the (4) Mes $aifs, 
oxTwew , Or Exawguazrua, Or Sacriſty, 
that has a Table alſo. Here they put 
their Books and holy Veſlels and Veſt- 
ments, which they uſe in the time. of 
Divine Service. This 1s properly the 
place of the Deacons and other infe- 
riour Miniſters ( hence called Aizoy;- 
xo» ) employed in lighting the Lamps 
and Tapers, and in heating water to 
pour into the Chalice, and the like. 

The Sacriſty was not always ancient- 7%» $c//f5 
ly within the Church , but ſometimes 
without ; hence called TIzezxAfnm as Cur, 
the round Stone-building within the 
firſt Gate of the Seraglio 1s ſuppoſed to 
have been to Sarda Sophia 3 and the 
like I obſerved till ſtanding hard by 
the great Church at Pergamnus. They 
burn Lamps for the moſt part before the 
Altar, and fometimes in the Nave of 
the Church. 


C 4 ) called alſo Miramwerey. 
F 3 In 


70 


Seats with- 
in the Chan- 
ell, 


A wo.den 
Bord 67 tron 
Plate mn ſtead 
of a Bell, 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


In the Patriarchall, Metropoliticall 
and Epiſcopal Churches, thereare Seats 
in the Concha or ſpace about the Altar : 
the chief Seat higher then the reſt, 
which they call by the name of iz-2» 
o9yvSeovr, Or holy Throne, to diſtinguiſh 
it from the other Seat of the Patriarch, 
Metropolitan, or Biſhop, below in the 
Church: in both which ( 4) heis pla- 
ced at his Inauguration ; which 1s never 
omitted, as being a neceſlary Ceremo- 
ny, and gives them a full poſſeſſion of 
their Dignity. 

They-are forbidden the uſe of Bells, 
But to ſupply that defeR, in the Villa- 
ges which they enjoy to themſelves, 
to call the people together to Church, 
they make uſe of (b) a wooden Board, 
or iron Plate full of holes, which they 
knock with a Hammer or Mallet. As 
the ſound 1s greater or leſs, or more or 


( 4 ) Uſeerife iepy ouv9Ipores V. Syropult Hiſt- 
riam concilti Florentinz pag. 3. Symeon Thellalonic. in 
Euchologin, p.223s *» 78 Jett 3ye) Ny uy Fegvee, Orc. and 
afterwards , »yg$172; Tw ovfeivy, + Xergdy rnpyuut- 
wey ©, Cc. ſpeaking of the Biſhop, %; x, 87 3c x#96Jpa; 
xe SIX 12528 ) Te X-158, pag. 217, Hence the phraſes 
&%g"i/e8% and dydya9% vis + Gegyor , to be created Pa- 
triarch ; and x2Tzy42% oy 3544, the ſame with xe gu 
p&37; or to be depoſed, 

C b ) Eiparrerv. 


lels 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


leſs repeated, thoſe who are diſpoſed to 
go to Prayers, knowing the meaning 
and diſtintion of the ſeveral blows , 
prepare themſclves accordingly. 

But of the figure of the Greek Chur- 
ches hitherto, 

The Greeks retain and keep up the 
ſame form of Ecclefiaſticall Government 
under the Tyranny of the Turks, which 
they had formerly in the flouriſhing 
times of the Empire; there being (till 
the ſame Orders and Degrees of the 
Clergy, diſtin& in office and dignity. 
So that there is a face of a Church , 
though ſadly diſtreſſed and harafled , 
every-where viſible, and a due Subor- 
dination obſerv'd among the Miniſters 
of holy things, and Diſcipline exerci- 
ſed : by which, the mercifull Provi- 
dence of God ſo ordering it, they have 
prevented that Confuſion which other- 
wiſe had overwhelmed them, had they 
levelled all Titles, confounded different 
Orders, introduced a Presbyterian Pa- 
rity, and relinquiſhed the Canons of 
the ancient Church , by which their 
Anceſtours ' were governed, I will 
give a brief account of the ſtate and 
condition of all forts of Ecclehiaſticall 
perſons among them and, for method 

| F 4 ſake, 


71 


Their Eccleſt- 
aſticall G9- 
vernment, 


72 


Patriarch of 
Conſtantino- 


ple. 


Hu Primacy 
mn the Eattern 
Church. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


ſake, will begin with the ſupereminent 
Dignity of the Patriarch. 

All the Eaſter» Chriſtians of the 
Greek Communion look upon the Pa- 
triarch of Conſtantinople as their Chief 
and Head , upon whole wiſe Conduct 
and Government the Happineſs and 
Quiet of the Church moſtly depend. 
And though he does not conſtitute the 
other Patriarchs, yet they pay him ex- 
traordinary Reſpect ; and, carrying on 
the ſame common and joint intereſts , 
often conſult him in Perſon, and fre- 
quently by their Deputies , in caſe of 
any difhculty that may happen 3 as be- 
ing unwilling to determine any thing 
of moment without his advice and ap- 
probation. 

This Right he ſtill claims by virtue 
of a Canon made in the Council held at 
Chalcedon, and retains, in the mid(t of 
his poverty and aftliction, the pompous 
Title of Oecumenical Patriarch, as ifrea- 
dy to diſpute it with the Biſhop of 
Romz, with the ſame eagerneſs as Joar- 
es and Cyriacus, and others of his Pre- 
deceſlours : the ſame Ambition cleaving 
alſo to the ſeveral Metropolitans under 
him, who value themſelves as much 
upon the ancient dignity and preemt- 

nence 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


nence of their Sees, as if they enjoyed 
the ſame Revenue and ſtate, and exer- 
ciſed an equal Power, and had the ſame 
number of Suffragans ſtill under their 
Juriſdiction, 

The Patriarchate of Conſtantinople (as 
I mentioned inthe beginning of this Dit- 
courſe) comprehends under it all the 
Leſſer Aſia,except the Provinces of I/au- 
riaand Cilicia , as alſo Thrace, Macedo- 
ia, and the other Countries of Greece, 
the Iſlands of the /Egear and Ionian 
Seas, Dalmatia, Albania, Walachia and 
Moldavia. But as for thoſe Countries 
that lhe North of Thrace, toward Mount 
Hemws on the one hand, and bounded 
by the Danube on the other, they re- 
main exempt from his Juriſdiction, and 
enjoy the privilege of being indepen- 
dent on any other then their own Me- 
tropolitans, according to the Conſtitu- 
tions of the Emperours, who raisd 
them to that dignity. Such are the 
Archbiſhop of Juſtiniana Prima or A- 
chride, (who claims this privilege from 
the times of the Emperour Juſtiniar , 
(4a ) who, todoe honour tothe Coun- 
try where he was born, equalled it in 


C a) See Authent. Collat. 2. tit. 6. novel. 11. 


dignity 


73 


The extent of 
his Turiſdice 


t19n, 


What places 
exempt. 


74 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


dignity to an Apoſtolical See, and made 
it altogether abſolute and free.) He is 
Primate of all Bulgaria, and has under 
him about eighteen Biſhops : though it 
mult be acknowledged, that ſome, who 
have enjoyed this Title, have come to 
the Patriarch of Conſtantinopleto be con- 
ſecrated. But this can no more be al- 
leged as a prejudice and bar to their 
juſt liberty and power, then 1t might 
be tothe Patriarchs of Alexandria, who 
have ſometimes received their Conſe- 
cration in the ſame place. Next, the 
Archbiſhop of ( 4) Pecinm, a City of 
Servia, who governs that whole Coun- 
try with the aſfiſtence of ſixteen Biſhops. 
Theſe two Countries make up the 
higher and lower Mzſj2 of the Ancients, 
Then the Archbiſhops of Georgia and 
Mizngrelia. And laſtly the Archbiſhop 
of the I{Jand of Cypras, who has three or 
four Suffragans, being free from the 
pretenſions of the Patriarch of Conſtan- 
tinople, as well as of Antioch. But not- 
withſtanding theſe immunities , all of 
them yield a mighty deference to the 
chief See, and upon occaſion , accor- 


(C4 ) Thiowey. Ita ſcribitur & Ti ves, cfow ad 
rem Coduu, pag. 419. 


ding 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


ding as they are able , contribute to 
ſupport the neceſſities of it. 

For beſides the Preſent they are obli- 
ged to make upen the Preſentation of 
a new Patriarch, who is always to be 
confirmed by the Grand Signor or Vizir, 
(who indeed do oftentimes impoſe ſuch 
as they think fit ; ) a yearly ſumme is 
now exacted in the way of Tribute. 
Emanuel Malaxws, in his Hiſtory of the 
Patriarchs of Conſtantinople from the ta- 
king of the City to his own time, that 
js, to the year 1577, tells us, that the 
EleCtions of the four firſt Patriarchs were 
freez and how that afterward, upon a 
Preſent of a thouſand Ducats of Gold 
made in favour of a certain Kaloir of 
( 4) Trapezond, named Symeon, whom 
his Countrymen eſpecially defird to 
make Patriarch, the Trks took advan- 
tage of their forwardneſs, and made it a 
ſtanding rule and precedent for the fu- 
ture : and the ſumm was ſoon doubled 
and trebled, and not long after turned 
into a yearly Tribute, And this has 
been encrealing ever ſince, by the cove- 
touſneſs and rapaciouſneſs of the Trxrks, 


C4 )V. Hiſtoriam Politicam Conſcantinopoleos in 
Turco-Gracia, pag. 22+ 24+ 39+ 


to 


75 


The expence 
of the Patri- 
arch for the 
maintenance 
of the Chriſt: 
an Religion. 


76 


The Revenue 
ef the Patri- 
ar h, 


An Account of the Greck Church. 


to which the horrid Differences and 
Diſſentions among the Greeks have gt- 
ven too great an occaſion., as I ſhall 
have occaſion to ſhew immediately by 
late examples. The Sultana, and the 
Favourites and great Officers of the 
Port, belides the yearly Preſents made 
to them alſo, are to be bribed luſtily 
upon all occafions : fo that the ſtanding 
and accidental Charge of the Patriarch, 
put both together, make a great ſumm, 
for which he is reſponſible. 

For the raiſing of this mony , with 
which they buy the liberty of their Re- 
Iigion, there is a certain Tax or portion 
of mony payable by every Metropoli- 
tan and Biſhop, beſides what 1s given 
at their Conſecration , (for he uſually 
makes them, ) every year, which they 
receive from the ſeveral Prieſts under 
their — according to the va- 
Jue of their Incomes, To collect theſe 
ſumms, or ( 4 )) honourable Preſents, 
he deputes one of his Dependents eve- 
ry year, as his Legate, whom they call 
EZz2y6.* and ſometime upon occaſion 
he goes himſelf in perſon to viſit for 
the ſame purpoſe. Mony comes 1n alſo 


( a) T3 qinucy: 
from 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


rom the Ordination of Prieſts, that are 
within his particular Dioceſe, who pay 
him ſo many Dollers a year as their Li- 
vings are worth; from granting Licen- 
ces of Marriage , and Diſpenſations ; 
and from Law-ſuits judicially heard be- 
fore him. For, to prevent the 11] con- 
ſequences of running to the Tirks for 
Juſtice, they uſually appeal to him as 
to their Judge 1n Civil cauſes, and are 
concluded by his ſentence and determi- 
nation , under the grievous penalty of 
being excommunicated 5 which they 


dread more then death it ſclf. For it 


they refuſe to ſtand to his arbitrement 
and deciſion , they are 7p/o faFo depri- 
ved of the benefit of the Sacraments : 
and in caſe any ſhould be fo hardy and 
obſtinate, as not to endeavour quickly 
to be reconciled to the Church, ( un- 
leſs he has a mind to turn Tyrk to gain 
his pretended right, by ſuing his Adver- 
ſary before a Cady or in the Divar, ) 
the Patriarch and thoſe about him will 
{pare for no charge to get ſuch a one 
condemned to the Gallies for a certain 
time, till they have conquered his re- 
fraftorineſs of humour, and brought 
him to terms of ſubmiſſion ; this being 
the main pillar and ſupport of their Go- 

vern- 


T7 


The Patrt- 
arch Fudge tn 
civil affatr's. 


78 


Hu Aſſiſtents. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


vernment. But they ſeldome make uſe 
of this rigorous and expencetull courſe, 
a Principle of conſcience in the perſons 
concern'd hindring the proſecution of 
it, and making them afraid to tranſgrels 
therein 3 while they remember that chi- 
ding expoſtulation of S. Paul, in his 
Epiſtle to the Corinthians, 1 Epilt. 6. 1. 
as if it had been particularly direQed 
unto them, (' 4 ) Dare any of you, ha- 
ving a matter againſt another , go to law 
before the unjuſt, and not before the 
Saints £ 

The Patriarch , in the determination 
of cauſes brought before him, has the 
afſiſtence of twelve of the chief Officers 
belonging tothe Patriarchal Church and 
dignity. Theſe allo afliſt the Archbi- 
ſhop of Heraclea, in veſting and crow- 
ning him at his Inauguration, and ſtill 
retain the ſame high titles as they did 
before the Tirks came among them. 
Theſe are as it were his ſtanding Coun- 
cil, to whom he refers the great affairs 
and concerns of Religion. Laſtly, ſe- 
veral devout perſons, that by their hand- 
labour and frugal way of living , or 
otherwiſe, have advanced their fortunes, 


( 4 ) 1. Cir. 6. Ie 
and 


An Account of the Greek Church. 79 


and have ſcraped ſome mony together, 
leave it oftentimes in the way of Legacy 
tothe Church, to ſerve the needs of it. 
By all which ways and means the Patri- 
arch, as I was made to believe, may re- 
ceive between thirty and forty thou- 
ſand Dollers a year. But this being 
matter of conjecture, and wholly uns 
certain, I lay not any great ſtreſs upon 
it, and determine nothingin the caſe, 

The Patriarch moſt commonly 1s cho- 71 Patri- 
ſen out of the number of the Biſhops, 47 #49 
who, according to the preſent conlti- - ener th 
tution and practice of that Church, are Biſbps, and 
Kaloirs of the Order of 8. B2ſ/ , and * —_— 
bred up for the moſt part at mount A- 
thos, and conſequently under a vow of 
Celibacy. 

To derive a greater luſtre upon the 7 rerinue 
Epiſcopal Dignity and Function, their 4 ##e, 
menial ſervants and ſuch as attend them = _ 
are uſually in Deacons Orders. When 
they addreſs to him, the uſual ityle is, 
TIzvamierzre, moſt Holy Father ; or 5 
ITavzmirn; os , Or 5 Aywourn os , your 
Holineſs 3 and Max2eo7tre, Or 5 Ma- 
x2giTru; os, moſt Bleſſed Father, or 
your Bleſſedneſs : that they may not 
be behind-hand with the Romaniſts in 
expreſſing the great eſteem and venera- 

tion 


Go An Account of the Greek Church, 


tion they have of the Patriarch, whom 
they make equal in all reſpe&s with the 
Pope. 
Diſſentions 'm. = As formerly ambition and greetly 
—_ * thirſt after the higheſt Dignities and pre- 
ferments in the Church occaſioned great 
diſorders and diſtrattions among(t the 
People , according as they took part, 
and ſometime introduced a Schiſm , 
whereby Altar was ſet up againſt Altar, 
to the great ſcandal of Religion and 
breach of Chriſti» Communion , the 
Heathen making ſport at theſe Diviſions, 
and taking advantage hereby to opprels 
and ruine both parties: So 1t 1s ſtill ; 
the Peace and Quiet and the great and 
real Intereſt of Chriſizanity being often- 
times ſacrificed to this reſtleſs Paſſion. 
The oppretiion which the Greeks lie un- 
der from the Turks, though very ſad 
and diſmal in it ſelf, becomes more un- 
eaſy and troubleſome by their own hor- 
rid Quarrels and Difterences about the 
choice of a Patriarch : there being ot- 
tentimes ſeveral Pretenders among the 
Mectropolitans and Biſhops, and they 
too making an intereſt, by large ſumms 
of mony, in the Vizir, or the other Baſ- 
ſa's, to attain their ends. He who by 
his mony and his friends has promenrny 
an 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


and has defeated his Competitors, will 
endeavour to reimburſe himſelf, and 
lay the burthen and debt , which he has 
contracted , upon the Church, which 
muſt pay for all : while the reſt, who 
envy his preferment, and are vext at 
their diſappointment, unite their inte- 
reſt and ſtrength to get him diſplaced, 
by remnnſtrating againſt his injuſtice 
and ill management of affairs, and put 
up freſh Petitions to the Tirrks , and 
bribe luſtily to be heard. The Turks, 
glad of ſuch an opportunity of gain, 
readily enough admit their Complaint, 
and put out and putin, as they ſee oc- 
caſion, In the mean while, large ſums 
of mony are uſually taken up at a great 
intereſt by the contending Parties, to 
carry on theſe fooliſh and «z-chriſtiar 
Quarrels. Sometime, beſide the reign- 
ing Patriarch, there have been three 
others alive at the ſame time, who have 
. enjoyed the Title. Such were in the 
years 1669, 1670. Paiſtws, Dionyſins , 
and Parthenizs : the Patriarch then be- 
ing the moſt Reverend Father Metho- 
dins, before Archbiſhop of Heraclea. 
But I concluded from the murmurings 
and diſſatisfattions I obſerved among 
the Greeks, that he would not continue 

G long 


SI 


82 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


long in that dignity 3 and the event 
ſoon juſtified my fears. For Parthenixs, 
being a man of an urquiet temper, and 
not able to brook his former diſgrace, 
makes in with the Vizir, and recovers 
his former pretenſions, and by the uſual 
arts prevails, and was reſtored to the 
Patriarchal throne : Methodizs being 
thrown into priſon by the Caimacam or 
Governour of Conſtantinople. But he 
being after ſome time reſtored to his li- 
berty by the new Governour , and 
thinking himſelf not ſafe from the ma- 
lice and revenge of Parthenizs, who 
had got him diſplaced, takes ſanctuary in 
my Lord Embaſladour's Palace at Pera, 
where he had all manner of good ac- 
commodation. Parthenizs by his im- 
perious carriage and cruell exaCtions 
grew hatefull to the Biſhops of his See, 
and to the generality of the Greeks; 
whereupon they accuſe him of fraud 
and injuſtice, and that he had detained 
for his private uſe the yearly tributedue 
to the Emperour, which had been col- 
lected : whereupon the Txrks were con- 
tent to diſplace him, provided that they 
made good the ſ>me fumm. Thus after 
cight months fitting he was baniſhed to 
the Iiland of Cypr#s, and Djonyſeas Arch- 

biſhop 


j 


—_— 


4 Y FF 3} Y WF WW 7  SILDINRE 


An Account of the Greek Church. 83 


biſhop of Lariſſa made Patriarch. In 
this ſtate of affairs I left Tirky + what 
has happened ſince, I leave to the rela- 
tion of others. While I refle& upon 
theſe Revolutions and Changes, I am: 
filled at the ſame time with amazement 
and pity, and cannot but put up this 
hearty prayer to Almighty God, (and I 
doubt not , but that whoſoever ſhall 
calt his eyes upon theſe Papers, will 
joyn with me as heartily in it, ) that 
He would be pleaſed to inſpire the Gre- 
cian Biſhops with ſober and peaceable 
counſels, that, laying aſide all partiality, 
and the conſideration of baſe worldly 
intereſt, they may ſtudy the good and 
quiet of their Church, and ſee at Jaſt in 
this day of their moſt ſevere Viſitation 
the things which belong to their peace, 
before they be hid from their eyes, and 
before their name and Religion be 

uite loſt and extinguiſht. To which 
fie doom theſe horrid Differences ſeem 
fatally to encloſe them. 


The State of the Greek Church, as to The {ererat 


the number and order of the ſeverall J*ropuitar- 
Metropoliticall and Epiſcopal Sees now eepricks un 
ſubje&t to the Patriarchate of Con- "nx" 
ſtantinople , is vaſtly different: from ED 


G 2 (4) what 


84 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


( 4 )) what it was 1n ancient times 3 as 
may eaſily appear by comparing the fol- 
lowing Liſt, which I received from a 
very able and learned hand , whilſt I 
lived in Conſtantinople, with any of the 
ancient Notitia's or Surveys. For, alas! 
beſides the Alterations and Changes , 
which happen in the ſucceſſion of ſeve- 
ral Ages, fince the ruine of their Em- 
pire , ſuch great Confuſions have fol- 
lowed , that there ſeems to be a new 
face of things. Some Eccleſiaſticall 
Dignities being loſt in the ruine of 
thoſe Cities from whence they were de- 
nominated; others retaining onely the 
Title ; ſeverall Metropolitans being 
without Suffragans, as the Archbiſhop 
of Ceſarea, to whoſe Juriſdiction for- 
merly eight Biſhops were ſubject z 0- 
thers having onely two or three; ſome 
few retaining a greater number, accor- 
ding as the Chriſtians are more or leſs in 
the ſeveral Diſtricts. 

(4a _) See the Notitia of the Emperour Leo, who 
lived about cight hundred years fince, in the Jus Greco- 
Romanum , publiſhed by Leunclavins : —_ alſo 1s a 
Conſtitution about the Preeminence of the ſeveral Sees, 
as to their Seſſion in Counc1!s : ) the "ExSror5 of the 
Emperour Andronicus Funior at the end of Codinus 3 as 
a'ſo that publiſhed by Carolus 2 Sano Paulo in his Ge- 


ographia Sacra , and more fully by Mr. Beverege in his 
Notes upon the 36, Canon of the Council held in Trul, 


A Ca- 


4 
4 
Ll 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


A Catalogue of the Metropolitanſhips and 
Biſhopricks at this day ſubje® to the 
Throne of Conſtantinople 5 which 
conſiſting onely of bare Names, when [ 
received it, I have inſerted a few ex- 
plications, to make it the better under- 
ſtood. | 


Ceſarea. 
Epheſus. 
eraclea, The Archbiſhop of this 

( 4 )) See challenges a right of conſe- 
crating the Patriarch : which cuſtome 
is ſtill continued. He writes himſelf 
Exarchus of all Thrace and Macedonia, 
and has five Biſhopricks under him 3 
which are, Ca/ipolis, a maritim City 
on the Propontis, Rodeſto , fituated 
upon the ſame Sea, Tyriloe, Metra, and 
Mjriophyton up in the Continent of 
Thrace. 

Ancyra. 

Cyzicus, 

Philadelphia. 

Nicomedia , (before which formerly 

C 4 ) Vid. Nicephor. Gregoram lib. 6. Hiſtorie p.117. 
This honour being done to his See, as having been the 


Metropolis of the Thracian Dioceſe, before Conſtantinople 
was made the chief Scat of the Empire. 


G 3 was 


35 


36 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


was Sardes, now utterly extinguiſh. 

Chalcedon, now a poor Village, one- 
ly with one Church 1n it, "dedicated to 
S. Euphemtia. In the whole Province 
there may be about ſixty Churches, and 
no more. 

Theſſalonica. This Archbiſhop has 
Juriſdiction over all Theſſaly, and has 
for Suffragans the Biſhops of Cztros, an- 
ciently called Pydna, ( a ) Servia, Cam- 
pania, Petra , Ardamerion , Hieriſſus , 
and Mount Athos, Plantamon, and Po- 
leanina. 

Athens. Under this Metropolis are 
the Biſhopricks of Talantinm, Scyrros , 
Solon, and Mendinitz.a. 

Pruſzca. 

Trapezond. 

Philippolis. 

Philippi and Drama. 

Thebes. 

Methymna. 

Lacedemon ; under which are the 
Biſhopricks of Cariopolis , Amicle, and 
Breſtena. 

Lariſſa ; under which are the Biſho- 


" pricks of Demetrias, Zetonion, Stagor, 


Thaumacus, Gardicion , Radobiſdion , 
C4) Er:Crior. 
Sciathus, 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


= y_ Loidoricion, Letza, and Agra- 
pha. 

Adrianople to which onely belongs 
the Biſhoprick of Agathopolis. 

Smyrna, 

Mitylene. 

Serre. 

p Chriſtianopolis ; the ſame with Arca- 
ia. 

Amaſta, in Cappadocia. 

Nan F 

Tconinm. 

Corinth; under which the Biſhoprick 
of Damalor. 

Rhoda. 

New Patras, in Theſſaly. 

FEnm, 

Dryſtra. 

Tornobws; under which are the Biſho- 
pricks of Lophitz#s, Tzernobus, and Pre- 
ſulabe. 

Joannina, a City of /Etolia, former- 
ly called Caſſzope 3 under which the Bi- 
ſhopricks of Bothrontus, Bella, Chimar- 
ra, and Drynopolis. 

Exripus. 

Arta, the ſame with Ambracia, a City 
of Epirus. 

Monembaſia , the ſame with Epidan- 
rus , a City in Peloponneſus : under it 

G 4 the 


v7 


88 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


the Biſhopricks of Elos and Marina , 
Rheon and Andruſa. 

Nauplium. 

Phanarion and Neochorior. 

Sophia. 

Chios, now called Scio. 

Paronaxia. 

Tria. 

Siphnus. 

Samos. 

Carpathus, now Scarpanto. 

Anadros. 

Lexcas. Theſe eight are Iſlands in 
the Archipelago. 

Varna, near the Danube. 

O14 Patras ; under which the Biſho- 
pricks of Olene, Methona and Corona. 

Proconneſus. 

Ganys and Chora, 


In the ſame Paper, that was put into my 
hands, theſe Biſhopricks were added. 


Media, towards the Exxine. 
Sozopolis, not far from Adrianople, 
Prelabus, ſomewhere toward the Da- 
ube. | 

Capha, in the Cimmerian Boſphorus, 
a City of Tartaria Precopienſes. 

Gotthia, in the ſame Country. 


Bindana, 


WW 0 Sed a + 4 tfaAaoa ic ac 6 oa a 4 V oc 


An Account of the Greek Church. $g 


Bindana, near Sophia, 

Didymotichum, 

Lititza. 

Byſia. 

Selybria. 

Zychne, in Macedonia. 

Newrocopus. 

Melenicus. 

Berea. 

Pogogiana, in IWyricum. 

Chaldea. 

Piſidia. 

Imbrus. 

Mjra. 

Santorina, an Ifland near Melos. 

HEgina. 

Walachia : for this I ſuppoſe is meant 
by OdyſagoBaann. | 

In Moldavia are four Biſhopricks 3 
as in Candia there were lately three un- 
der the Metropolitan of that Iſland. 

Several of the ' Biſhops mentioned in ow ſome Bi- 
the Catalogue being freed from the Ju- {*%* ware 
riſdiction of the Metropolitans to which z;6;. 
they formerly belonged, andſo become 
in reſpe&t of them AJrexipzAs, free and 
independent , and onely ſubject to the 
Patriarch, are called , by way of di- 
ſtinction, Archbiſhops 3, as he of Samos , 
for inſtance, who before was under 

Rhodes, 


90 


Frieſts. 


Their poow 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


Rhodes, and fo of thereſt. The Archbi- 
ſhops which have Suffragans under them 
ſtill, or had formerly at leaſt, being ge- 
nerally called Metropolites. But of the 
Metropoliticall and Epiſcopal Sees thus 
much. 

Conſidering the Poverty of the Greek 
Church, and the ſcanty provilions made 
for ſuch as enter into holy Orders, there 
being no rich Livings to invite them to 
doe ſo, it muſt onely be a principle of 
Conſcience at firſt, that makes them 
willing to take up that holy Calling, 
which deprives them of all other ways 
and means of getting a ſubſiſtence. For 
the Clergy muſt be content with their 


Alhwanceand Allowance, and not think to better their 
Maintenance. condition by buſying themſelves in any 


Secular employment, as being altogether 
inconſiſtent with their holy Profeſſion, 
But cuſtome and long uſe make things 
moſt troubleſom , and difficult to be 
born , eaſy at, laſt, It is accounted a 
good Preferment , if in a Country-vil- 
lage the poor Prieſt can make in the 
whole year forty Crowns, out of which 
he pays a proportion to his Biſhop. For 
there being no Lands belonging to the 
Church , beſides the ſmall allowance 
agreed upon at firſt by him and the 

people, 


 H* J-” = RE WI FF © Er ey ye A en or ra 0 0 re ng ay 8 _ 


An Account of the Greek Church. g1 | 


people , they pay him ſo many Afpers 
for Chriſtening their Children , giving 
them the Sacrament upon extraordinary 
occaſions, Burying their dead, and per- 
forming other Funeral rites, and the 
like. And on the great Feſtivals they 
preſent him with mony, or what is mony- 
worth , that he may expreſly mention 
their names, or their relations, whether 
alive or dead , when he comes to that 
part of the Liturgick-ſervice in the ce- 
lebration of the Sacrament, where ſuch 
Commemorations are uſed ; as belie- 
ving ſuch a Recommendation, made by 
the Prieſt at that ſolemn time, to be of 
great force and efficacy. Marriage does ,,,,,;,e no 
not hinder any perſon , it he be not impediment to 
otherwiſe unqualified, from being put * 94 
into holy Orders: nor 1s ſuch a one ob- 
liged to live from his Wife. But the 
general practice of the Church is againſt 
Marriage after Orders. So that if any 
Prieſt , once married , ſhould marry a 
ſecond time, much more, if a Prieſt not 
before married ſhould enter into this 
ſtate, they are liable to cenſures, and, 
as if the charaQter imprinted upon them, 
when they were he > Prieſts, were by 
this aG raſed out, they are eſteemed as 
meer Laicks, and accounted TIzevo yu 
Or 


92 


Their Habit. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


or flagitious perſons, and tranſgreſſours 
of the Laws and Canons of the Church. 
They have a diſtin& Habit fromthe peo- 


-ple, whichisblack ; wearing a Caſlock, 


and having a Felt-cap upon their heads 
of the ſame colour , over which they 
throw a kind of Veil , which hangs 
down behind their back, if they be K4- 
loirs ; and are permitted by the Turks 
to wear their Hair long, and over their 
Shoulders. Which the other Greeks of 
late years preſuming to imitate , the 
chief Vizir Achmet, upon his return from 
Candia, fearing that it might be of ill 
effe& and conſequence, if this Innova- 
tion were any longer indulged, com- 
manded them under a grievous penalty 
to ſhave their heads as Rr : which 
they with haſte and trembling ſubmit- 
ted to, well knowing, that ſuch orders 
were not to bedallied with. They are 
in great veneration among, the people 
every-where, who have a juſt opinion 
of the neceſlity of their Order, and of 
the dignity of their FunGtion, that they 
are ſet apart by God for his more imme- 
diate Worſhip and Service, and that 
withorit their Miniſtery theC wn Re- 
ligion would ſoon be at an end in Tyr- 


ky; and falute themalways by the n__ 
(9 


= Ad EG tn 


An Account of the Greek Church. 93 


of Tlz7z; or Father,giving them Reſpect 
where-ever they meet them, and often- 
times kiſſing their hands, and then put- 
ting them to their foreheads : which is 
one of the greateſt ſigns of Reverencein 
that part of the world. 

Next to the Prieſts are the Deacons, þ.,.,,, 55. 
of which there are great numbers be- deacons, and 
longing to the Biſhops, who are never 
advanced to the Prieſthood; and Sub- 
deacons, which affiſt in the ſervice of 
the Church; and-Readers, whoſe office 
is in the great Church to reade the 
Scripture to the people. But of theſe 
inferiour Orders I ſhall have occaſion 
to ſay ſomewhat hereafter. 1 ſhall one- Suerinw 0r- 
ly adde thus much of the ſuperiour, that ; - mA 
they are never conferr'd together and* 
at the ſame time; but there 1s to be ne- 
ceſlarily the interpoſition of a day at 
leaſt. And therefore if, upon a Capric- 
cio of the Grand Signor , any ſimple 
Kaloir ſhould be deſign'd to be Patri- 
arch, he 1s to be advanced by degrees, 
and not immediately placed in the Pa- 
triarchal Chair , till after ſome little 
time. 

Ro _ and ſevere courſe of = —_ 4 
which the Religious lead is greatly ad- 3" 9.5 
mired by the Greeks, as the beight of nn 
per- 


34 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


perfetion in this world , and what 
equals them to Angels. Of which fort 
are great numbers in Greece and the Leſ: 
ſer Aſia, which follow the Rules and 
Conſtitutions of $. Baſt! the Great; as 
thoſe do of S. Antony, who live upon 
Mount Sina: and Libanus, and are dil- 
perſed up and down Eg ypt from the 
Deſart to the Red Sea. The name 
KaMiyieG., or Kaloir, (the Greeks in 
their ordinary diſcourſe mightily hu- 
mouring this pronunciation ) was at 
firſt, I ſuppoſe, appropriated to the old 
men of the Order ; but now it lies in 
common among all, and is the general 
name by which they are called. They 
have their Convents in ſeveral By-places 
out of the publick roads, or inthe I{lands 
of the Arches, that they may the bet- 
ter enjoy their ſolitude and devotion 
and are indeed not onely in their Re- 
tirements, but manner of life, divided 
and ſeparated from the reſt of the world. 
And indeed their innocency and ſtriQ- 
neſs of life have procured them ſuch an 
eſteem among the Tyrks,. otherwiſe bar- 
barous and inſolent , as that they ſel- 
dome givetheſe poor men any trouble, 
who, abandoning all ſecular buſineſs , 
give up themſelves wholly to the ſevere 

EXET- 


An Account of the Greek Church. 9g 


exerciſes of Religion, and having nei- 
ther will nor power to doe the leaſt in- 
jury to others, deſerve well of all by 
their inceſſant prayers for the peace and 
proſperity of mankind. 

There are three degrees of them, ac- 77,e degrees 
cording to their age and ſtanding, and & them 
the progreſs they have made 1n the 
Aſcetick diſcipline , to the higheſt of 
which they advance and proceed in due 
order. ( 4 The Novices, upon their 
firſt admiſſion into the Monaſtery, are 
immediately ſhaven, and oblige them- 
ſelves by vow to continue in this ſtate 
of Religion all their lives long, to lead 
a chaſt life, and to be obedient to their 
Superiours , and to all the reſt of their 
Brethren in Chriſt, and willingly and 
chearfully to undergo all the mortifica- 
tions and fſeveritics of a Monaſtick life 
for the Kingdom of Heaven. After they 
have compleated their Novitiate , in 
ſtead of the courſe Hair-cloath they 
have worn hitherto, they put on the 
Mzy9vz; or Coat , which they call 
(b) the lefſer Habit, and hereby be- 
come compleat Monks. But the holy 


C 4 ) "Agee, 
( 6) 7 witedv vin. Mixggoyuct 


and 


96 


New names 
gruen them, 
when Profeſt, 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


and Angelicall or Divine habit, (2) as 
they variouſly word it, is reſerved for 
ſuch as are more eminent in piety and 
auſterity of life. Hence they are called 
prozAtynu , ſuch as are admitted to 
put on the great Habit, which 1s onely 
a Hood thrown over their heads and 
ſhoulders. Some of theſe I have ob- 
ſerved to have a little ſquare piece of 
cloath ſewed in the inward fide of their 
Caps, or elſe worn next to their hearts 
under their woollen Shirts, upon which 
is the figure of a Croſs, with theſe let- 
ters at each fide, IC. XC. N. K. that 
Is, *Ino8; Xewg%; VIX& , Teſus Chriſt oVer- 
comes 5 Which they look upon as an 
holy Amulet to preſerve them from evil 
and miſchief. 

At the time of their being Profeſt , 
new names are uſually given them : 
examples of which we have frequently 
in the Writers of the Byzantine Hiſtory. 
Thus ( 4) the Emperour Manuel Com- 
ena, upon his receiving the Habit, was 
called Matthew ; and fo his Wife, the 
Empereſs, Mary, when ſhe became a 


C4) nee, dyenrty , Lion giuas of Mita 
A9MUO 
Fo b ) Codin, de Origin, Conſtantinop. p. 80. 


Nun, 


An Account of the Greek Church. 97 


Nun, was called Xene - and fo (4) Jo- 
annes Paleologus was called afterward 
Joaſaph, 

The chief Seat of theſe Religt- nt Arhos, 
ous is upon Mount Athos, which is 1n- ket Riſe 
deed the principal Seminary of the Greek, dence, 
Church, which is hence uſually fuppli- 
ed with fit perſons to ſucceed in the va- 
cant places and Dignities 3 to theaccep- 
tance of which ſome have been forced 
out of their Cells, I am molt aflured, 
that Kaloirs bred up here have a grea- 
ter fame and reputation for piety and 
learning , then any others throughout 
the Empire. Upon which account it 
is known by no other name among the 
Greeks , then that of 2148» 22&., or the cated the Haly 
Holy C b ) Mountain : and the Turks , Mountain. 
in way of compliance with the fame 
that paſſes generally of that place, call 
it Sheicher dag, or the Mountain of 
Prieſts or Religious. 

Here are about one and twenty or 
two and twenty Monaſteries, whereof 
ſcveral belong to the Bulgarians, and 
one peculiarly to the Kſſzans. They 


( 4a )) Pag. 82. 
C b ) Hence @ziceins for a Monk, who 1s profeſſed 
and lives there, 


H who 


98 


The behavi- 
os and em- 
ployment *f 
the Raloirs. 


An Account of the Greck Church. 


who ſpeak moſt moderately ſay, there 
may be in the whole about four thou- 
ſand conſtantly reſident 5 no Woman of 
what quality ſoever being permitted to 
come among them, or indeed to ſet her 
foot within fight of any of theſe Reli- 
gious houſes : whereof ſuch as are near 
the Sea-ſhore are fortited , to prevent 
the Robberies of the Pirates, who 
ſometime land, and doe miſchief. But not 
having been my ſclt upon Mount At hos, 
for reaſons mentioned in other Papers, 
I forbear writing any thing upon hear- 
ſay, but refer the Reader to the deſcrip- 
tion of it written by the Archbiſhop of 
Samos, who lived ſeverall years there, 
in the vv/gar Greek, and tranſlated into 
French at Paris, and publiſhed in E- 
gliſh almoſt two years fince at Lox- 
don. 

The behaviour and employment of 
the Kaloirs is generally the ſame in all 
Monaſteries. They are excceding in- 
duſtrious, painfull, and ſevere in their 
lives, and ſeem to keep up the credit 
of the firſt Inſtitution, and fall not 
ſhort of the great examples of ſome of 
their Predeceſlours. ſo much admired 
in the Apes paſt. They are ſtri& and 


diligent in their publick Devotions, as 
the 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


the appointed hours both of day and 
night. The ſpare time from their De- 
votion they employ in the necetlary bu- 
fineſs of the Convent, each according to 
his quality : for every one has his em- 
ployment. The Monks who are not in 
holy Orders, are ſome of them Mecha- 
nicks, and underſtand Iron-work or 
Building 3 others look to the Fields and 
Vineyards that are about their houſes; 
others make their Cloaths, and the like. 
Such Convents which lie toward <cither 
of the Bays at the end of the 1/#/,2u5 of 
Mount Athos, or are upon the Boſpho- 
r#s , Or in any of the Iflands, maintain 
Boats, which they put to Sea in totake 
Fiſh. Though ſometimes, for want of 
fit perſons, in the lefler Monaſteries 
eſpecially, they provide themſelves 
with ſuch things as they want with 
their money 3 but with ſome kind of 
regret, ſcarce caring to beat any expence 
for any thing that may be procured by 
labour and induſtry. The Prieſts and 
Deacons among them are, by reafon of 
their charafter and fundion , exempt 
from all ſuch ſcrvile employments, and, 
by way of diſtintion from ſuch Eccle- 
ſraſticks as are not profeſt, and fo not 
under the obligation of any Rule or 

H 2 Vow, 


100 An Account of the Greek Church. 


Vow, are called, the former, "I:294u4- 
v2.0, Or Ov?) morzyo,, the latter , "I+- 
eoNzxovu. The leifure-time they en- 
Joy after they have performed their Of- 
fices is ſpent in reading, or collating or 
tranſcribing old Greek books, or elle in 
viſits, according as their Superiour ſhall 
dire&, and as civility or buſineſs ſhall 
require. Notwithſtanding this good 
husbandry and parfimonious way of 
life, in an il] year, when their cornand 
vines are blited, they are not able to 
ſubſiſt, and are forced to ſend out ſome 
of their number to beg the charity of 
others in order to their relief. But this 
is done very ſeldome, and onely when 

a real neceſiity urges. 
Their ſevere We may juſtly ſuppoſe thoſe, who 
way of living have renounced the pleaſures and deli- 
cacies and vanities of the world, not to 
be over-curious and nice in their Diet. 
They never touch any kind of Fleſh, or 
Fiſh that has bloud in it. Their chief 
food is Shell-hſh , Olives, Beans and 
Pulſe, Onions, Melons , Raiſins, and 
what their Fields and Gardens afford. 
With this dry diet they make hearty 
meals , and enjoy good health, and 
find the happy effe& of moderate and 
thin feeding in a laſting vigorous old 
age. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


age. Their Bread is courſe and hard, be- 
ing uſually twice baked. Thrice a week, 
that is, on Monday , Wedneſday and 
Friday, they do not end their Faſt till 
after three a clock in the afternoon. Af 
ter Evening-prayers they are content 
with a cruſt of bread and a draught of 
water. On other days they eat the 
Fiſh that they account lawtfull , and 
White-meats, and then allow themſelves 
to drink Wine. In the great Lenten 
Faſt before Eaſter, ſome will eat but 
once in eight and forty hours ; others 
will forbear all kind of ſuſtenance for 
two or three or four entire days. 


IOI 


There are ſeveral of theſe Monaſteries 16nafteries 


in the Iflands, which in the Sea-charts #n the [lands 
not far from 


are called 7 Iſole rofſe, or the Red Iſlands, co hruming- 


about fix or ſeven leagues from Cor ple. 


ſtantinople, divided from each other by 
little Streights : whereof the five which 
lie toward the Bay of Moztagnia (which 
I take to be the ſame with the S77us N;- 
copolitanus ) are uninhabited , being 
little, and very rocky ; their names not 
worth mentioning. Pyrgos liesdiredtly 
over againſt the Bay of Nicomedia. 
The Ifland which lieth nigheſt to Con- 
ſtantinople is called by the Greeks TNzz- 
7, by the Turks Kinali, where is a 

H 3 fingle 


\ fYo2 An Account of the Greek Church. 


ſingle Monaſtery. The greateſt Iſland, 
called Prencipe , ( the Aztigonia, if 1 
miſtake not, of the Ancients,) may be 
about ten or twelve miles 1n compaſs , 
where are two Convents, and but one 
Town at preſent ; the other having 
been conſumed by fire. Nextto this 1s 
Chalce , which the Turks call Heibil:, 
about half as big as the former ; where I 
found three Convents. Inthe ground 
before the Monaſtery dedicated to the 
Holy Virgin, (to the South-weſt of the 
Ifland ) which maintains about thirty 
Kaloirs , is the Sepulchrall Monument 
of Mr. Barton, ſent Embaſladour from 
Queen Elizabeth to the Ottoman Port ; 
by whoſe wiſe conduct the Trade of 
the Levant-Company of Merchants was 
firſt eſtabliſhed in thoſe parts : For the 
good ſucceſs and proſperity of which I 
acknowledge my ſclt very much obliged 
to pray. To doe right to the memory 
of this Honourable. Gentleman, I pre- 
fume the Reader will pardon me, it I 
here put down the Inſcription, as I 
tound it ſomewhat taultily engraven up- 
on the upper Stone, which the worthy 
Factory take great care tokeep in good 
repair. 


Edvardo 


CCC IE 


An Account of the Greek Church. 103 


Edvardo Barton, 1uſtriſſemo Anglorum 
Regine Oratori, Viro Preſtantiſſumo, 
qui poſt reditum 4 bello Ongarico , 
quto cum invico Turcarum Imperatore 
profes furrat, diem obiit, 

Pietatis ergo. 
FEtatis An. XXXV. Salutis vero anno 
1597. XVIII. Cal. Jar. 


The Greeks , who live upon theſe The Greeks 
Iſlands, get a good livelihood by Fiſh- 17% 7. 
ing, being free not onely from the co- hw maintai- 
habitation, but from the viſits of Turks, 4 
who, very fearfull of ſtorms and foul 
weather, hate the Sea, and ſeldom care 
to go thither for pleaſure or curioſity, 
but when they colle&t the Haratch or 
Head-mony of the poor Chriſtians. 

The Monaſtery fituated upon the 4;mys 16- 
Thracian (ide of the Boſphorus , at a naſtery ſitua- 
place called Mabro Molo, or the black _ — 
Rock, is of a mighty reputation among he Boſpho- 
the Greeks of Conſtantinople and the 
neighbouring Villages, and frequented 
by them in great companies on the Fe- 

{tival of the Aſſumption of the H. Virgin, 
to whom it isdedicated. Between fifty 
and fixty years ſince, a certain Kalorr 
belonging to Byjukdere, a neighbouring 

H 4 Village 


104 An Account of the Greek Church. 


Village upon the ſame fide of the water, 
either by chance or curioſity, walking 
up and down among the over-grown 
buſhes, at laſt lighted upon an*Ayzous 
or holy Fountain, where was engraven 
the figure of the B. Virgin 5 which as 
ſoon as he had diſcovered to thoſe of 
his own Nation and Religion , they 
grew fatisfied of the truth of an old 
Tradition which paſled current among 
them, that formerly there ſtood in that 
melancholick Receſs a Church or Con- 
vent. Whereupon, with great expence 
and diſhculty , they obtained leave to 
raiſe the preſent Building, The ground 
on which it ſtands belongs to the Mo/ch 
of the Emperour Bayazid in Conſtantino- 
ple , for which they pay a yearly rent 
of thirty Dollers. And to procure the 
proteQion and favour of the Boſtange 
Baſhi, or chief Gardener of the Grand 
Signor, a great Officer in the Seraglio, 
whoſe juriſdiction reaches to the 
mouth of the Black Sea, to whom they 
have recourſe in caſe of any injury and 
oppreſſion , they preſent him every 
month with ten Oaks of wax, ( each 
containing between two and three 
pounds Ergliſh,) with ſheep and kids 
for the uſe of his family, The "__ 
arc 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


arch once a year makes a viſit to this 
Convent, and celebrates the Sacrament 
in their Chappell : for which honour 
they make him a Preſent of five hun- 
dred Aſpers. Here aremaintain'd about 
five and thirty Kaloirs, whereof onely 
ſeven Prieſts, as the good man Macarizs 
the "HyzwwG. or Superiour acquainted 
me, when I was upon the place with 
him : from whom alſo, at the ſame 
time, I received this following Narra- 
tive, Thatin the year 1661. or 1662. 
(for I have forgot the exadt year) the 
preſent Emperour Sultan Mahomet Char, 
hunting not far from the Exxine, (to 
which kind of exerciſe he is very much 
addicted,) in the purſuit of his game, at 
laſt, wearied and tired, lighted to reſt 
at a Fountain at ſome little diſtance 
from their Convent. Upon the news 
of which, they conſulted, whetherthey 
ſhould wait upon him with ſome poor 
Preſent or no : at-laſt one of the pert 
Monks undertook it. Advancing to- 
ward the Emperour , having made his 
reverence after the cuſtom of the Coun- 
try, and making an excuſe for the pre- 
ſamption he was guilty of, he preſented 
him with a little Cheeſe and a basket of 
Cherries ; then which latter nothing 

could 


Iog 


106 An Account of the Greek Church. 


Women Pi 3- 


fe/t. 


could have been more welcom to him , 
being thirſty and over-heated with ex- 
ceſſive riding, and who yet in ſuchan 
extremity abhorred the leaſt thought of 
Wine. Atter ſome little time he calls 
the poor Kaloir, and very calmly asked 
him, whether he would become a Mz- 
ſulman , out of delign queſtionleſs to 
have preferred him, But he, no way 
wrought upon by this powerfull tempta- 
tion, continued ſpeechleſs inhis humble 
polture, with his eyes fixt upon the 
ground, The Emperour no way dif- 
pleaſed with his behaviour, which he 
lookt upon as a modeſt denial, We/ , 
ſaid he, I perceive you have a mind to 
continue 4s you are 3 and then bidding 
him look up, made a halt circle with 
his hand, telling him, he gave the 
grounds lying about, which he thus 
markt out, to the Convent; and then 
commanded one of his favourite-Atten- 
dants to give the poor man thirty pieces 
of Gold. | 

There are ſeverall ( 4 ) Women, 
which wear a Veil, but moſt of them 


Widows and old, and forced by po- 


C 4 ) Mepagerr, 'Amiirers, Kihoyeic five Kane 
3 *þ4Us 


verty 


An Account of the Greek Church. 107 


verty to take a Vow upon them 3; this 
way getting a tolerable ſubſiſtence from 
the Church , which they attend upon 
the Feſtival-days: and they are often- 
times employed in looking to the fick, 
and ſuch like pious and charitable drud- 
geries. I was told of ſome few Con- 
vents of Virgins profeſt, and particu- 
larly of one 1n Scio - as alſo of Ancho- Ancdviers. 
rets, living 1n deſolate Hermitages upon 
herbs and water , and ſuch like courſe 
fare 3 but out of the ſight of the world, 
and far from any company. But theſe 
matters not being within the compals 
of my own obſervation and knowledge, 
I chuſe rather to be ſilent, then venture 
to relate uncertain Stories and Hear- 
lays. 

The preſent Greeks reckon up Seven Seven Myſte- 
Myſteries, which with them is another 7 $44 
name for Sacrament : but this limited 
and ſet number, in the defence of which 
in the laſt Century they were very per- 
tinacious , as they arc now in this, was 
unknown to the Greek Church for above 
a thouſand years after Chriſt, and was 
afterwards in all probability taken up 
in compliance with the Latines. Of 
theſe they admit onely two, Baptiſuz 
and the Supper of the Lord , as 


(4) ge- 


108 An Account of the Greek Church. 


C 4 ) generally neceſlary to Salvation, 
and as inſtituted by our B. Saviour : 
the reſt, as delivered by the Church , 
and as founded in Scripture, and in the 
praQice of the firſt Times. The word 
Myſtery , formerly in a large ſenſe ap- 
plied, in the Writings of the Ancients, 
toany ſacred or religious Rite or uſage 
whatſoever, that, beſides the bare out- 
ward a(t of Ceremony, may have ſome 
farther hidden meaning, (in which ſenſe 
S. Paxl calls Marriage (and the neceſ- 
fary adjunds and conſequences of it) 
4 great Myſtery, becauſe it is a type and 
repreſentation of the near relation which 
is between Chriſtand the Church, as he 
explains himſelf 5 Epheſ. 32.) in after- 
times became appropriated to theſe Se- 

ven: 

(6 Baptiſm. 

( c ) Unguent of Chriſm. 

( 4d )) Euchariſt, 

C e }) Penance. 

( a ) Reſponſe. 2. Patriarche Feremis , pag. 240» 
*Av 38 Tt werrtes TH puvcneſor 79 Cdr710un x; 1 kouts 
vovie 1 ria hv, x, wv dia owtnvarddVyamy and 4 
5 mighoxay 1 CHXANTIG, , TH Aol QHgu Der 

b ) mn Bamltout- 
£ c 3n len ew) 


C 4 )) neva. 
( © ) n wenvaids 


(4) Holy 


An Account of the Greek Church. 109 


( 4) Holy Orders. 
(b ) Matrimony. 
(c ) Oyl with Prayer. 
Of all which I will diſcourſe particu- 
larly in the ſame order as they are here 
mentioned. 
Although there beno time preſcribed zaziſn. 
for the Baptiſm of Infants, yet they ſel- 
dom either defer it beyond the eighth 
or tenth day , or haſten it before, un- 
leſs in caſe of violent ſickneſs, and for 
fear of ſudden death. For they believe 
ſuch an abſolute neceſlity of this Sacra- 
ment , which they ground on thoſe 
words of our Saviour, S. John 3. 5. Ex- 
cept a man be born of water and of the 
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom 
of God, as that they entertain hard and 
cruel thoughts of the ſtate of Infants, 
which by ſome misfortune and caſualty 
are deprived of it, To prevent which  caſ of re- 
miſchief, and ſecure their fears, where 9 £»- 
there is a real and certain danger of im- = ” 
minent death, in the abſence of a Prieſt, 
who 1s at all other times the onely law- 
full Miniſter of this ſacred Rite, it is al- 


C( 4) 1 14pe9 why, 
( 5 ) 3 z<u@. 
( ©) T8 evylnauy. 


lowed 


I10 


Baptiſm pu- 
blick and in 
the Church, 


Font, its ſe- 
veral names. 


An Account of the Greek Church, 


lowed to Lay-perſons of either Sex, as 
it 1s expreſly laid down in their publick 
Confefſiion of Faith, written in the v#/- 
garGreek, and printed in theyear 1662. 


( 4) Ut is not lawfull and proper for any” 


one to baptize , but a lawfull Prieſt, ex- 
cept in time of neceſſity : and then a Se- 
enlar perſon, whether man or woman, may 
doe it. 

At all other times the Infant, if well, 
is to be brought to Church : in the en- 
trance of which toward the Narthex is 
the Font , uſually large, and about a 
foot and a half deep, which they call 
by ſeveral names, as 5 Az7zy2, or the 
Laver, BzTli5hewr, Þyli5f oi, and K9- 
avpitz or Pool, (alluding to that in 
Jeruſalem mentioned in the 5. chap. of 
S. John, whoſe waters had a miraculous 
virtue in them of healing divers diſea- 
ſes 3 or to that other in Siloam, S. John 
9. 7. where the blind man by the com- 
mand of Chriſt waſht, and received his 
ſight; the waters of Baptiſm having 
the ſame effe&t upon the mind by virtue 


C 4 ) Te Mamrrryulor Cdrmrrua Sy mire, vs 
zive) Sno &\mov mi macs Yr) + youu itgphdy wi 
tis Kgueiv mes Gray nuns &1rmmeel v3 vdun 73 WUSHELV 
Tim #, xermuniy aginwTry aids i yunards » 
Page 118. 


of 


—— De oe 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


of our B. S4aviour's inſtitution , as they 
had upon the body.) 

The Water made uſe of isuſually con- 
ſecrated for this purpoſe on the Feaſt of 
the Theophaniz, or Baptiſm of our Svi- 
our, and that with great folemnity, after 
the celebration of the other blefſed Sa- 
crament : for which there 1s a peculiar 
office. This they call 6 uz3zs ayizowmss, 
or the great Sandification. But becauſe 
a ſufficient quantity of water for the 
whole year may not be blefled at that 
time, and ( belides ) what 1s referved 
may be apt to putrefy, and fo be unfit 
to be uſed, every month, or ſooner, in 
greater Cities, they turniſh themſelves 
with more. 


In the Winter, that the tender body 
of the Infant may not ſutter by cold , 
they for the moſt part warm the water, 
(perfumed with ſweet herbs ) upon 
which the Prieſt breaths, and makes 2 
Croſs, and then poureth Oyl upon it in 
form of a Croſs three times 5 with 
which having anointed the Child , 
and holding him upright with both 
his hands, and his f:ce turned to- 
ward the Eaſt, he performs the my- 
ſticall Rite with this form of words , 

(4) The 


IIT 


The Bapt(- 
mal water 
when conſe- 
crated. 


Tie mannes 
» oats f{ awe 
of Bapt:; V 


I12 


Threefold Im- 


I0hs 


Though ſome- 
times Pouring 
or Afﬀuſion. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


( 4) The Servant of God, ſuch a one, is 
baptized in the name of the Father, and 
of the Son , and of the Holy Ghoſt, now 
and for ever. Amen. At the mention 
of each Perſon of the Trinity the Prieſt 
dips the Child under water : at which 
time ( b ) the Godfather, if it be a 
Male-child, who is here always fingle , 
anſwers, Amer, in all thrice. (.c ) Which 
threefold Immerſion they for the molt 
part rigidly retain, according to the cu- 
{tom and praGtice of the firſt Ages 
though they donot ſcruple to vary from 
It upon occalion, being content ſome- 
times to pour water upon the face of 
the Infant three times, in acknowledg- 
ment of the Myſtery of the H. 1rinity , 
in whoſe name the Infant is Chriſtened, 
But whether the Sacramental Rite be 
either by Immerſion or by Afuſton, the 
effect of the Sacrament 1s the ſame, that 
is, (4) the waſhing away of Original 

C 4 ) Baile) 6J7a@ 74 ©1486 dtive og m3 oyous 
% [laless, x 58 Tis, $74 Als Olvivuer, vor t 48 
x; tis 765 aiava; of aiuyuy. * Apis. 

C b) *AreJoy@ ſeu Swnxv@ , Compater , ſer 
Pater Spirituals, qui infantem & lavacro ſuſciptt. 

(Cc _) The $0. Canon of the Apoſtles, as that Col- 
letion 1s ealled, commands Teia SamJiouam mids wi 
o+@- emmeaoy, that is, as it is there explained, 7xeis 
Aa xa m Jr on evi Cangiouan. 

(4) Vid. *Opencye Page 117. 


fin. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 113 


ſin derived from the firſt Parent of man- 
kind, (which they call 7 euamomnuce 
@29772702i,) and an undoubted ſeal 
of eternal Life, the Baptized perſdns be- 
ing regenerated and made members of 
the Body of Chriſt. 

The form of Baptiſm 1s always PrO- The formof 
nounced paſhvely in the way of decla- #945 pane 
ration, The Servant of God, ſuch a one, 
be or ſhe, is baptized, &c. not actively, [ 
baptize thee. For which(a ) Gabriel Arch- 
biſhop of P//adelphia aſligns theſe two 
poor reaſons, or (hifts rather : the one, 
that although our Þ. Saviour, at the in- 
ſtitution of this Sacrament, uſed the 
active voice, when he ſaid, Go teach al/ 
nations, baptizing them in the name, &c, 
yet it is read paſlively in S. Mark, 
chap. 16. 16. He that believes and is bap- 
tized ſhall be ſaved : the other, that this 
way of expreſſion ſavours more of mo- 
deſty and humility; which he pretends 
to fetch from S. Chryſoſtomre. Whereas 
there is but little difference in the forms, 
and none in the ſenſe: Such 4 one is 
baptized, that is, as he adds by way of 


explication , >" tus) I 6s, by me , 


C a ) mopuſculy mwi  dyiney x, iepay won ers 
Fenetizs A. C. 1600. þ. 24. 4+ 


j being 


=> we 


I14 


The ſame wa- 
ter not uſed 
twice. 


An Account of the Greck Church. 
being indeed the very ſame with, [ bap- 


tize ſuch an one. The zealous men of 
both Communions are certainly toblame, 
while they are ſo eager and fierce in de- 
fence of their own form, and ule bitter 
and ſevere Invectives one againſt ano- 
ther for a matter of ſo ſmall moment, 
as this variety of expreſſion ſeems to be. 
But as to the latter words, i» the name 
of the Father , and of the Son, and of 
the Holy Ghoſt, in which both agree, 
the Greeks univerſally hold them fo ne- 
cellary and eflential to the Sacrament , 
that unleſs they are entirely and di- 
ſtinly pronounced, they think that it 
1s not ſo much the Sacrament of Baptiſm 
Which 1s celebrated, asa ludicrous imita- 
tion, or heretical and profane abuſe of it. 
They never uſe the ſame water a ſe- 
cond time: but if two or three Infants 
are to be baptized at the ſame time, fo 
often they empty and fill the Laver. 
But the water which has been made uſe 
of for this or the like ſacred purpoſe, 1s 
not thrown away into the ſtreet, like 
other common water, but poured into 
a hollow place, which they call Se- 
AzesiRty , Or ya, under the Altar, 
where it is ſoaked into the earth, or 

finds a paſſage. 
Soon 


An Account of the Greek Church. 115 


Soon after, a Prayer or two beingin- Vneent of 
. *  Chriſm, © 
terpoſed, the Prieſt proceeds to anoint (,,;;,.+;wr, 
the newly-baptized Infant, lately cove- 
red with its Mantle and Swaddling- 
cloaths: for in the Greek Church Chriſ- 
mation is inſeparable from Bapti/nr, and 
though reckoned as a diſtin Myſtery, 
as indeed jt 1s, 1s in a manner a necella- 
ry appendage and complement of it ; 
according to the 48. Canon of the 
Council of Laodicez, which orders 
EaSegvim v2 fe92 Wen TH Polo mars, 
the baptized perſons to be anointed with 
the heavenly Chriſm. ( a ) Which Chriſm, 
as Matthews Blaſtares explains it out of 
Zonaras and Balſamon , whoſe words 
forthe moſt part he retains, being ſan@7- 
fied by Prayer and the invocation of the 
Holy Spirit, ſan@ifies the perſons anoin- 
ted with it, and makes them partakers of 
the heavenly Kingdom of Chriſt 5 unley; 
impenitence and impiety of life after- 
wards alienate and render them unworthy 
of it. 
Confirmation among the Greeks CON- confirmation: 

(4) Tas euydis x, The emxaion ts Ayis Tire wel 
a ualouuor, TOI 2810us died Cers Nh ATE, 6 7 GT ge 
tis oy Xercs Gambeics Ko Fino 6 un 79 Ty Bis nuvhn- 


Wivoy x # of Wgyeoy gauroms nuas Tens dNndlews- 


OF/6y 


1 2 filts 


116 An Account of the Greck Church. 


fiſts of this one ſingle Ritez and isthere- 
tore called by them 70 pwweg h yeloun, 
Onguent or Chriſm, or joyntly, 70 ww- 
ew Ts yeloualg., or the unguent of 
Chriſmz , and peculiarly opexyic or E£+:- 

o7ex3171un;, the Seal or Obſignation. 
In this wim- This being practiſed onely upon In- 
wary fants newly baptized, and that with- 
out Impoſition of hands, (this material 
part of the Rite having been for ſeveral 
Ages negleCted by the Greeks, and not 
reiterated and repeated when they 
are adult and grown up , ſome Zelots 
of the Roman Communion, (making no 
diſtinction between the myſticall Rites 
of the Chriſtian Religion, neither ma- 
king allowances for different cuſtoms 
and uſages, which ſeldom keep at the 
ſame ſtay , but alter and vary in the 
whole, or in patt at Jeaſt,) as if every 
punctilio and circumſtance in the Cere- 
monial part were <flential , hereupon 
have objected the want of it to the 
Greeks, and maintain with great zeal 
and fury, that they have no ſuch thing 
as Confirmation among them. Theſe 
differences have been carried on with 
great animoſities on both ſides, and have 
helped to make the Schiſm irreconcile- 
able 3 the Greeks, upon the reproaches 
made 


An Account of the Greek Church. 117 


made them by the Latines , that the 
Chriſmation uſed by their Prieſts is un- 
lawfull, and a meer ufurpation of Epi- 
ſcopal right and power, growing - more 
and more obſtinate: as may be ſeen 
from the Encyclica/ Epiſtle of the Pa- 
triarch Photizs, who does as ſharply re- 
fle& upon the Romar prattice, fomen- 
ting and keeping up the controverſy , 
which had been ſtarted long before with 
great heat, For that he was not the 
firſt, who by his wit and power intro- 
duced the preſent cuſtom among his 
Greeks, as ſome have imagined, I could 
demonſtrate by undeniable teſtimonies, 
if it were agreeable and proper to mix 
controverſies in this preſent Compendi- 
um and Narrative. 

This Anointing and Obſfignation is ,,,;uting how 
made upon the forehead, eyes, noſtrills, made. 
mouth, ears, breaſt, hands and feet, the 
Prieſt repeating theſe words, Epezyis Su= 
2izs Thi ual, Ay. *Aurv. The Seal 
of the gift of the Holy Spirit. Amen. 
Which torm they derive from the A(- 
{e{ſors of the Council of Conſtantinople 
held in 1ru4o, and thus explain: (a) as 

(4 ) Owenoy. p+ 120-45 av ve Yntyt, Me my ogiov 
T&T% T# 4318 ups GRE2 Hi CEmm X; CeCaumvert tis TH Xo 


cigars 74 Aziy NlruelG-,ims miphis 5 Cilalums Ths 
X219721Kns ov TIRGS. | 
I 3 if 


118 An Account of the Greek Church. 


if the Prieſt had ſaid at large , With the 
anointing of this holy Ointment thou art 
ſealed and confirmed in the graces of the 
Holy Spirit, which thou receiveſt for con- 
firmation of thee in the Chriſtian Faith, 
The reaſon of which form is aſſigned in 
their *OcA%4iz or Confellion. (a) ds 
the Holy Spirit formerly deſcended upon 
the Apoſtles in the ſhape of fire, and pou- 
red upon them his Gifts : in like manner, 
when the Presbyter anoints the baptized 
perſon with holy Oyl, the Gifts of the Ho- 
ly Spirit are poured out upon him from 
above. And to this they apply the 
words of S. Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 21, 22. Now 
be which eſtabliſheth us with you in Chriſt, 
and hath anointed us, is God, who hath 
alſo ſealed us, and given the earneſt of the 
Spirit i our hearts, But as for the 
anointing part, they quote no higher 
authority then the writings which bear 
the name of Dionyſtzs Areopagita. 

This Ol nely Though this Oyl be uſed by Presby- 

Janthfied by ters in the performance of this Rite, yet 


the Patri=> . _. , 
archs and 1t 1s onely bleſt and ſantified and made 
Biſhops, 

C a ) ibid, Katwgs mas 77 Tihrtrua Tm Azey 


C:.4hTUNAY 655 703 S359) 85 &n Gidts TYESS, X, Cu TW ig 

» % my - my £ 
e763 To N aeiouari TY Terucd; AYyig th Twety fry 0 
* ” v . % *; F # 
6epeus peter + CarfiGoulor wi T7 d 100 Wyesy, Xoverres 
» A 


6 Tur 65 aWTey To paAeiopara Te Agie Tl 8Yudl ot. 


fit 


An Account of the Greek Church. 119 


fit for uſe by the Patriarch or Biſhops ; 

as is expreſly aflerted by Gabriel Phila- 
delphienſis , and in ( 4 ) the Cateche- 

ticall Confeſſion , and Cb) in the 
Bethleemitick Synod. This is done on 
Thurſday in the Holy week. Theyare 7h comp 
wonderfull curious in the compoſitionof # 9 
it, it being made up of Storax, Balſam, 
Caſſia, Myrrh, and the decoQtion of 
twenty ſeveral Drugs, Seeds and Plants 

added to and mixed with Wineand Oy]: 

a Catalogue of all which Ingredients 

you may tind in the Exchologion. This 

is afterward diſtributed and put into 
round bottles or vialls, either glaſs or 
glazed over, called Buziz, but often 
"AdzBz5ez or Alabaſters, 1n alluſion 

to the any; or box of ointment, which 

S. Mary Magdalen brake: and poured 

upon our $4viour's head. 

When they deny the reiteration of 7%: Rite mr 
this Rite, it is with an exception of one {;7.,c in ow 
particular caſe : (c ) for when Here- particular 
ticks or Apoſtates , ſenſible of their er- 


GG ) page 121, 
b) 6 Appatptugm—7? 4x00 wwzgy uorarel ome 
THAG. page 247+ 

(c) Temn uurievy Sy dif) Sumner aacs os 
tives, Os HaAuny empin.oy Sno THY & privy Th oy 2p = 
1S rm Xe. Opoary, page 122 


I 4 rours 


120 An Account of the Greek Church. 


rours and impleties, are re-admitted , 

after juſt proofs of a hearty and fincere 

repentance, into the boſome of the 

Church, they are confirmed again, after 

the ſame manner as when they were 

firſt Chriſtned, by the grace of the Holy 

Spirit , 1n the holy Faith, which they 

now profeſs. And herein they follow 

the 7. Canon of the Council above- 

mentioned. But this 1s ſcarce ever prac- 

tiſed of late, it being death for a Rexe- 

gado to renounce Turciſ#:, and embrace 
Chriſtianity. 

Euchariſt Before I mention the Rites and Cere- 

as v7" monies uſed at the celebration of the 

the wird a+. holy and auguſt Sacrament of the Body 

og and Bloud of our Lord, it will be neceſ- 

7 -oxthy M ſary to premiſe ſomewhat concerning 

and 7; 7 i: their Liturgick Books. The word A- 

{9 645" . Ts24z, though in the general it is uſed 

of Prayer, or any part or office of the ſa- 

cred miniſtery of Religion, is reſtrained 

tothis great and tremendous Myltery , 

called ſometime,for diſtin&tion-ſake, 5 z- 

yiz, ieeg x24 Seiz Merlezya, Or the holy, 

ſacred and divine Liturgy or Miniſtrati- 

on : and the Prieſt, from this principal 

and eminent prerogative of his Function, 

being ſet apart to offer up this comme- 

morative Sacrifice , is pecuharly called 

At 


ad as" 


R— 


An Account of the Greek Church. 121 


aulezye; or Liturgiſt , as well as mr2z- 
nspy%5 and 7:Az5;, the Miniſter of the 
ieegi TzArTR, Or the molt ſolemn Rites 
of the Chriſtian Worſhip. 

Theſe Liturgick Books or Oifices are Their Litur- 
onely three : for though there be Li- #4 5% 
turgies that gounder the names of S. Pe- 
ter, $. Mark ,S. Matth.and S. James, &c. 
they , being confelledly ſpurious, are 
rejected by the Greeks, as well as by 
ſome of the ſober Rommniſts, The pre- 
tended one of S. Peter was ſcarce heard 
of for fifteen hundred years and more : 
it is ſtuffed up with Interceſtions and 
Prayers to the Virgin Mary, who is 
there called O:572x&., and other Saints, 
Where is allo the Ave Maria, the Glo- 
ria Patri, and other notorious and ma- 
nifeſt proofs of its Jate invention, the 
Forger having contrived it to agree 1n 
many things with the Roar Canon of 
the Maſs. $S. Mark's Liturgy is equally 
ſuppoſititious, there being mention 1n it 
of the inferiour Ecclefiaſtick Orders, of 
the T7i/agion, of the Nicene Creed, of 
the titleand appellation of ©:o7zx@. de- 
lervedly given to the B. Virgin, of the 
Diptychs, and of the Imperial City of 
Conſtantinople, iis ayia; Xeiws Ts Os 
10g TeAews x2) Ths andduems, _— 

ike 


122 An Account of the Greek Church. 


like ſigns of its noveltie. If it be faid, 
that theſe are onely inſertions and 
interpolations , but the body and con- 
texture of the Liturgics may be juſtly 
referred to the Apoſtles as to their Au- 
thours 3 they cannot expe , either 
wiſely or civilly, that this ſhould be 
yielded to them meerly upon the 
ſtrength of their fancy, (for they have 
not the Authority of any ancient Wri- 
ter to countenance it,) that every Apo- 
ſtle made a diſtin& Liturgy : for this 
does not ſuit with the ſimplicity of the 
celebration of it in the Apoſtles times, 
and in the ſecond and third Century , 
according to the account we find 
of (4) itin Juſtin Martyr, More in- 
deed may be faid for the pretended Li- 
turgy of S. James, as being mentioned 
in the 32, Canon of the Council in Trul- 
lo, and by (6b) Proclis: but it was 
not received among them, as appears 
from Balſamon's firſt anſwer to Marces 
Patriarch of Alexandria, and from Je- 
remtias Patriarch of Conſtantinople, who 
lived in the laſt Century, in his anſwer 
( c ) tothe Divines of Wittenberg. Nor 

C a ) V. Apolog. 2. verſus finem. 

( b, ) de Traditione Divine Miſſe. 

C c ) V. Reſponſe 1. pag. 98. 103. 
could 


An Account of the Greek Church. 123 


could I ever learn, that it is at any 
time uſed by any of the Chriſtians of the 
Eaſt; though ( 4) A/atiws tells us it 
is one day in the year recited at Jer- 
ſale, out of reſpect to the memory of 
S. James, the firſt Biſhop of that City : 
that is, 1 ſuppoſe, on the twenty third 
day of OFober , which is the day of his 
Commemoration. 

The three LiturgiesI was mentioning one three.” 
are thoſe of $, Baſi/, S. Chryſoſtome, and 
S. Gregory Biſhop of Rowe, whom they 
diſtinguiſh from the reſt of that name by 
the additional title of 5 AizaZy&., or 
the Dialogiſt, trom the Books he wrote 
in that form and ſtyle. For he is com- 
monly ſuppoſed to be the Authour cf 
the Aulsgyz 7 memo utrer, of Li- 
turgia PreſanGificatorum ; though, I 
think, it ought to be aſcribed to Ger- 
manus Patriarch of Conſtantinople , as 
{hall be proved elſewhere , his Junior 
by ſome hundreds of years. All of 
which, but.eſpecially the two firſt, (by 
the cunning contrivance of thoſe who 
governed the Church , to advance the 
ſuperſtitious fancies of their Times, un- 
der a pretence of ancient Piety recom- 


( a )) de Libris Eccleſiaflicis Gracorum, pag. 16. 
mended 


124. 


Theſe Litur- 
gres read at 
ſet times , 


and when. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


mended by thoſe holy men, whoſe 
names they have in great veneration,) 
tem horribly altered and corrupted 
from what they were anciently ; as is 
demonſtrable from thoſe many and va- 
rious interpolations, which plainly fa- 
vour of Novelty; and from that great 
variety of manuſcript copies, two of 
which ſcarce agree, unleſs in ſome of 
the moſt ſolemn Prayers. 

For the better eſtabliſhment of de- 
cency and order in the Worſhip and 
Service of God, and for prevention of 
all confuſion , there is a certain and 
fixt rule appointed to be obſerved eve- 
ry-where 1n the reading of theſe Litur- 
gies at ſet times, it not being left to the li- 
berty and humour of any Pricſt to make 
uſe of which he thinks fit. 

The Liturgy of S. Baſ/ is read onely 
ten times in a year; that is, on the five 
Sundays of the great Lent, from Yua- 
drageſima to Palm-Sunday excluſively, 
on Thurſday and Saturday in the Holy 
week, on the Eves of Chriſtmas and E- 
piphany, and on the firſt day of Jannary, 
which day is devoted to the memory of 
the great Saint. 

The Liturgy of S. Chry/oſtome, which 
!s more contracted then that of S. Baſe, 

is 


An Account of the Greek Church. 125 


is recited on all other Sundays and Fe- 
ſtivals, and other days, when they cele- 
brate the Sacrament 3 ( 4 )) except in 
Lent, at which time , except Saturdays 
and Sundays and the feaſt of the Annurn- 
ciation, they uſe the Liturgy of the Pre- 
ſanFificata, But of this I ſhall ſpeak 
| * morediſtinRly hereafter. 

C 4 ) V. $2. Can. Synod: Trullane. 

The Sacrament of the holy Euchariſt The mane 
is performed after this manner. The | bay og 
Prieſts and Deacons, having waſht their crament. 
hands, (by which Ceremony they de- 
lign to ſhew, with what Purity of Soul 
and Body they ought to approach theſe 
holy Myſterics,) carry the gifts of Bread 
and Wine preſented by the people to 
the Altar of the Protheſis ; by this obla- 
tion ( which they call 72:9z0mgy or 
T2291) ſeparating them from pro- 
fane and common uſe. 

The top of the Loaf is marked either +, ;,;, 
witha Square in a Circle,or Square only, Bread mar- 

' | withtworight lines croſling each other, &* ##* 7 
| With ſeveral letters in each quarter,thus, 


126 


and cut into 
ſeveral parts. 


An Account of the Greck Church. 


Which being pierced in ſeveral pla- 
ces, is at laſt cut and divided from the 
reſt into various Particles by a Knife, 
ſet apart for this purpoſe, which they 
call 241z >5yyn, or the holy Lanunce, al- 
lading to the Launce which pierced our 
Saviour's fide. With this Launce he 
makes a Croſs upon the Seal , ſaying 
thrice, ( a )) in memory of our Lord God 
and Saviour Jeſus Chriſt, Then he 
ſtrikes his Launce upon the right ſide of 
it, and cuts it, ſaying, (b ) He was 
led as a ſheep to the ſlaughter + afterward 
upon the left, ſaying, ( c ) and as an 
innocent ſheep before the ſhearer is dumb , 
ſo He opened not his meuth : then upon 
the upper part, ſaying, ( 4 ) His jude- 
ment was taken away in his humiliation ; 
and upon the lower, ſaying, ( e ) But 
who ſhall declare his generation « After 
this he lifts up the Bread, thus cut off, 
ſaying, ( f_) For his life is taken from 
the earth ;, and lays it in the Patin, fay- 

( 4 )) ts avapumay Ts Kuets 1; O28 £& Ewnip® nuw 
"1198 Xetfs. 

C b ) as aeg*amwv 63 032y)0 ny 2m 

Cc ) & 6: 4w6t; argx& Eytrmicy Te kmggy|& aums 
agovCr, um uh 41015 ec T6 crpurt WT. 

Cd ) eyTij Tunavwor are 1 xeiog WT6 WS. 

(Ce ) Tir ds yevidy aurams dyes ©) 5 
Cf) in ap) mms yin Con WT 


ing, 


Em 


7 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


ing, (4) The Lamb of God, which takes 
away the (in of the world, is offered for 
the life and ſin of the world. Then thru- 
ſting his Launce into it, he ſays, Ad 
one of the ſouldiers pierced his ſide with a 
launce , and ſtraitway there iſſued forth 
bloud and water : upon which the Dea- 
con pours wine and waterinto the Cha- 
lice. This bleſſed Bread is onely de- 
ſign'd to be conſecrated. Afterward 
the Prieſt, out of the ſame or another 
Loaf, ( for it is indifferent, ſeveral be- 
ing offered by the people for theſe pur- 
poſes, ) takes a ſmall piece ,/ ſaying, 
(b ) In honour and memory of our moſt 
Bleſſed and glorious Lady, the Mother of 
God, the ever-Virgin Mary 3 by whoſe in- 
terceſſion receive, O Lord, this Sacrifice 
upon thy ſuperceleſtial Altar. Then he 
elevates the Particle, and lays it on the 
right ſide of the Holy Bread. Then he 
takes another piece, and ſo to the ninth ; 
which are placed on the left fide: all 
which he offers up in honour of S. Joby 


( 4 ) Ove) © aurds 33 Org, 5 algery 790 duteriar 
TE Kg, U78p 7 T4 K47 48 db atp772;s 
Cb) E 3s wy WIN  ugetvnrymAre enivzu 
Sominns 1p) ©407!x2 v eonagtirs Macia , ns 7 
TpicColaus agyod\£av, Kucts , Ty voizy 7awmy 6ig 76 
Vas v64ptiy 0% Ives news 
Baptiſe, 


I27 


128 An Account of the Greek Church. 


Baptiſt, the Apoſtles, S. Baſil, Gregory 
the Divine , Chryſoſtome, Athanaſius , 
Cyrillas, Nicolas, and all holy Biſhops; 
S. Stephen, George, Demetrius, Theodo- 
r#4, and all holy Martyrs ; S. Antony , 
Euthymins, Saba , Onnphrins , Athana- 
{as of Mount Athos, andall holy Monks; 
holy Phyſicians, who cured gratis , 
Coſmns and Damianus , Cyrus , John , 
Panteleemenon, Hermolans, Sampſon , 
Diomedes, Thallalens, Tryphon, and the 
relt ; S. Joachim: and Anna ; and of the 
Saint of the day, and all Saints; (a) for 
the ſake of whoſe prayers and ſupplications, 
O God, proted us: and in behalf of the 
Biſhop of the place, and of the whole 
Hierarchy, of BenefaCtors, and Friends, 
and Relations, living and dead, (here he 
names the perſons whom he is defired 
particularly to commemorate) (6) that 
the mercifull God would indulge them par- 
don, Then he puts a little {1]ver inſtru- 
ment upon them, that the Coverings 
may not touch the Particles, (whichare 
put in three rows, ) and fo diſorder 
them, it being made of two ſhort arches 
croiling each other in the figure of a 


(4 ) av + ixenias emgrelasluaiy 6 O10; 
( b J—7payIpum Kut, oy xugnmp 


ſtar, 


An Account of the Greek Church. 129 


ſtar, hence called *A5z219w:5 repeating 
theſe words, (' 4) And the ſtar came 
and ſtood over where the young child was. 
And then they cover tfe Patin and the 
Chalice diſtintly with linen or filk, 
ſaying at the firlt, The Lord 3s King, 
and hath put on glorious apparel, &c. and 
at the ſecond, (6) Thy power, O Chriſt, 
hath obſcured the heavens, and the earth 
is full of thy glory now and for ever : and 
afterward both together with a larger 
covering, or vet], which they call 22, 
ſaying, ( <_) O our God, hide us under 
the ſhadow of thy wings now and for ever. 


HECM., 
All which, that is, both Bread and 7h 0batim 


Wine, makingthe Oblation, are bleſſed 7, 575-4 an- 
me hw 


ſoon after ( 4 ) by this ſolemn Prayer, (4, 


(4a ) S. Matth. 2. - 
C b_) <nanulty vearts 1 agery 1, Xewrg— 
(Cc) EuiTamy iuds i Th owtoy of epuyur Ty 
6 O:6: ne 
( 4 )©O ©t%;, Ozls 14/7, © mv v-grrov dgmv mv 
TegQnv TH 124705 t40 ms, * Kyztoy x, Orhy 'Tnaty Xercds, 
Eamon na; owrh oo x, AVGomir, cunoy ive X; L147 o0mH 
nudsy 21s evniynmy Thy a23 TrAV TI%TH", X F290 Tee 
Ca awThy is T8 \Pregi hy Gs untrue Huh eury, 
6 aza 22; 5 pindyFrunF, 1H meTuty arms, x; oY 
&5 TEITHEY, Xt hues drgrenpiTys dierunatoy oy TH 
$:ps: 24g. i Stiwov 08 (auonplon* ET721 on 1212 cat X4 
NSECacm T6 miynyoy x, 5,ahoanpterts Grohe Guy Th 
HlaTes:, "I oc, 


K which 


1309 An Account of the Greek Church. 


The firſt or 


ey Proceſ- 


in. 


which they call 5 Wy) Tis meow, 
O God, our God, who haſt ſent our Lord 
and God, Jeſus Chriſt, our Saviour and 
Redeemer, (who does bleſs ws and 
us) tobe the heavenly Bread and nouriſh- 
ment of all the world 5 do thou bleſs this 
Oblation, and receive it upon thy ſuper- 
celeſtial Altar. Remember, O gracious 
and mercifull God, thoſe who offer it, and 
thoſe for whom it is offered, and preſerve 
us blameleſs in the celebration of thy Di- 
vine Myſteries : (this being ſaid by the 
Prieſt in a ſoft and ſtill voice, as it 
were to himſelf, he afterwards fays a- 
loud) For thy moſt venerable and glorious 
Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghoſt, 
is ſanGified and glorified now and for 
ever. Amen. 

This Prayer of Benediction being 
pronounced , the Elements , though 
barely bleſt and yet unconſecrated, be- 
come ( 4 )) venerable and divine Gifts 
or Oblations, as they ſpeak. The Dea- 
con having received the book of the 
Goſpell from the hands of the Prieſt, 
holding it on high, that the people may 
the better ſee it, goes out at the North- 
door of the Chancell, the inferiour Off- 


C 4 ) Joeg nw x, Sic 
CETS 


*%. OI. IS DA 


_—_ EN gr YO vn ny 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


cers catrying Tapers before him, and is 
followed by the Prieſt: and fo havin 
made a ſhort Procefſion in the Body o 
the Church , they enter into the Chan» 
cell at the middle door , and depofit 
the Goſpell upon the middle Altar, 
where the Confecration is always made. 
(This they call (2) the firſt and leſſer 
[ntroitus or Entrance.) Then the Prieſt 
ſays this Prayer ſecretly. O Omnipotent 
Lord God, who onely art holy, who re- 
ceiveſs the ſacrifice of praiſe from thoſe 
who call upoz: thee with their whole heart, 
receive our Prayer, who are Sinners, and 
bring us to thy holy Altar, and make us 
fit to offer up to thee Gifts and ſpiritual 
Sacrifices for our Sins, and the Treſpaſſes 
of the people : and grant that we may find 
favour before thee, and that our Sacrifice 
may be acceptable unto thee, and that the 
good Spirit of thy grace may dwell in us, 
and in theſe Gifts thus offered, and in all 
thy People. Next, the Quire ſings the 
Hymn, which begins, (6b) Come let us 
ore and fall down before Chrilt : ſave us, 
thou Son of God, &c. and the other ſhort 


( 4) i mean 4; wes ind. 
( b ) Nin Teo wrnowlp x; meant TY Xerfs 
ey nuas ys Org, Fc. 


K 2 Hymn, 


131 


132 


The ſecond or 
great Proceſ- 


ſion. 


/ 


An Account of the Greek Church. 
Hymn, ( which they call Tez116., ) 


(a) Holy God, holy and powerfull, holy and 


immortal, have mercy upon us. Glory 
be to the Father, and to the Son, and, &c. 
Which being ended, the Deacons reade 
the (b ) Epiſtle and Goſpell appoin- 
ted for the day. So far, in ancient 
times, when the Diſcipline of the Church 
flouriſhed and was kept up in its per- 
fetion and vigour, the Catechumeni 
were admitted to be preſent in their 
proper place, (this being the Miſa Ca- 
techumenorum, ) and then were diſmiſled 
with a peculiar Prayer , the Deacon 
crying aloud and making proclamation, 
C © ) Whoſoever of you are Catechumeni, 
depart; (and this was repeated thrice ) 
let none of the Catechumeni ſtay : you who 
are of the number of the | wa. or Com- 
pleat Chriſtians, ſtay. Let us more and 
more call upon God in peace. 

Then the Prieſt ſays ſeveral private 
Prayers to himſelf : yk which he, ad- 


C a J "AG 0 ©4925, a31& bowesc, 110 « SvalG, 
eninoey nuas. DE Meet, x, (fc. which may be ren- 
dred declaratively, God s holy, he is holy and, &c. 

C b ) it @errighor ts Ang X, T4 Evayytnle, 

Cc ) Oo namgeuler wept dnTe, of 114% wper 
ae in2t7e, Go xaTyy Luo: men ITE pul m5 7%] Kel 
Wy wr, Foot miei. im 4 in oy eipihiny Ty Kuels Site 


"” 


vancing 


— 


* Om 


np en ogg on 


Lead at... Aa 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


vancing towards the Altar of Protheſes, 
takes off the Chalice, which he holds 
in his hand covered, and is attended by 
the Deacon carrying the Patin, in which 
is the holy Bread, that 1s to be confecra- 
ted, upon his head, and that covered too 
with a piece of (11k, that it may not be 
ſeen; and by the other inferiour Mini- 
ſters, going before in order with the 
Launce , the Sponge wherewith they 
wipe the Diſh and the Chalice, gilt 
Croſſes, Incenſe , Pots, Tapers , and 
little Bells, and the like. They all paſs 
out at the little North-door, and pro- 
ceed {lowly into the Nave or Area of 
the Church , about which they take a 
compaſs : the Quire in the mean while 
ſinging the Hymn which they call Che- 
rubicus. The people during this Pro- 
cefſion ſhew all imaginable reverence , 
bowing their heads, bending their knees, 
and ſometimes proſtrating themſelves 
upon the pavement, and kifling the 
hem of the Prieſt's Stole , as he paſles 
by, beſides croſling themſelves continu- 
ally during this pomp , and repeating 
theſe words, ( 4 ) Remember me, O 
Lord, in thy Kinedome ; the Prieſts 


( 4) Mriann wi Kyct, oy Th Canneig Os 


K 3 and 


133 


134 


The undue ve- 
neration 
ſhewn by the 
Greeks here- 
in, 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


and Deacons interceding for themſelves 
and the people in this form, ( a ) The 
Lord God be mindfull of us all in his 
Kingdom now and for ever. Thenthey 
enter in at the 2142 Tan, Or middle 
Door, and place the Elements upon the 
Altar direaly oppoſite to it, in orderto 
their conſecration. This Proceſſion they 
call ( 6 ) the ſecond or great [ntroitus 
or Entrance or acceſs tothe Altar. 

This ſeems to be , and really is, as 
they order the matter, the moſt ſolemn 
part of the Grecian Worſhip , and at 
which they expreſs the greateſt devoti- 
on, if we may judge of it by theſe out- 
ward and viſible figns. A practice that 
really gives great offence, and is wholly 
unjuſtifiable, notwithſtanding all the 
little and trifling excuſes and pretenfi- 
ons made by (c ) Smeon Theſſaloni- 
cenſis and Gabriel Severus in favour of 
it : as, that @gxoxumns fignifies any A- 
doration and Reſpett in general ; and 
that the Elements, by their being bleſt 
and ſeparated from common uſe, are 
already fſanftined and dedicated to 


( 4 )) Ildymwv nw widen Ker O49; ts 75 bar 
Mee. 9s may TTE vuil X 615 163 alava; fs aituywy. 

( 6b) ndwri22 4 wexdtnn tlomS 

{ © ) & Ti8&nynmon tis my Acileppians 


God, 


An Account of the Greek Church. 135 


God, and fo ( 4 )) are in a readineſs 
and diſpoſition to be conſecrated and 
made the Body and Bloud of Chriſt ; 
and that they are fit matter prepared 
and determined to this Sacramental end 
and purpoſe. Therefore , ſay they , 
this Adoration is juſtly due to them. 
Whereas after the Conſecration, when 
the Symbols are expoſed and ſhewn to 
the people, the Reverence is not halt 
ſo great 3 onely a little bowing of the 
body, which is ſoon over. But the 
miſcarriage ſeem'd to me, when I was 
preſent, 1o groſs and ſcandalous, as that 
it needs no other confutation then the 
bare relating. 

When the Prieſt conſecrates , the 73, cmpecra- 
Door of the Bewa or Chancell is ſhut tion. 
up, Or at leaſtthe (*b Veil or Curtain 
drawn before it z the people being 
wholly debarred from the fight of the 
Prieſt's conſecrating the holy Elements, 


C a )) Un Udxtuun x, dvayugir x; werd lun mess 
79 Wb xrupios ompe 1; olpect Xe Es 

C b )) Bnniveey, janue adyti velum : quandogque ſcrt- 
bitur Cnuduegy , ſed male 3 Binney enim in ſequioribus 
Grecte ſeculis pro velo ponebatur : antiquitus <pgidves 
& »vammimoue. Bur this latter alſo ſignifies the Al- 
tar-cloath, in whoſe four corners the names of the four 
Evangeliſts are embroidered. id. Symeonem Theſlal. 
Fl T4 vas, þ. 215. in Eucholog. 


K 4 and 


136 An Account of the Greek Church. 


and no perſon of what quality ſoever 
ſuffered to be preſent, but ſuch as be- 
long to and attend upon the holy ſer- 
vice. After the recital of ſeveral Pray- 
ers and Antiphons, and the Conſtantino- 
politan Creed, ( the ſame with that 
which is commonly, through a miſtake, 
called the: Niceve Creed, -unleſs in the 
Article of the proceſſion of #he Holy Spi- 
rit from the Son, which 1s inſerted by 
the Lative Church, ) the Prieſt pro- 
ceeds to the conſecration of the Ele- 
ments, (the Deacon having tanned with 
a little Fan, called Pim.) laying 
ſoftly to himſelf. ( after the Quire has 
ſung the gyuri £3744, or triumphant 
Song , Holy, holy, foly Lord God of 
Sabaoth, Heaven and Earth are full of 
thy glory : Hoſanna in the higheſt 5 Bleſ- 
ſed is he that cometh in the name of the 
Lord ; Hoſanna in the higheſt.) With 
theſe bleſſed Powers, O merciful Lord, 
we cry aloud and ſay, Thou art holy, alto- 
gether holy , and great is thy glory; ſo is 
thy onely-begotten Son, and thy Spirit. 
Thou art holy, altogether holy, and great 
3s thy glory; who ſo loveſt the world , 
that thou gaveſt thy onely-begotten Son , 
that whoſoever believes in him ſhould not 
periſh, but have everlaſting life 5 who , 


when 


* An Account of the Greek Church. 


when He had come and fulfilled the Diſpen- 
ſation which He undertook for us, in the 
night in which He was betraged, or rather 
in which He delivered up himſelf for the 
life of the World, took Bread into his holy, 
pure and ſpotleſs hands; and when He had 
given thanks, and bleſſed it, and ſaniti- 
fied it, and brake it, He gave it to his 
holy Diſciples and Apoſtles, ſaying, (here 
he inclines his head,and, laying his hand 
upon the Bread, ſays with a loud voice) 
Take, eat, this is my Body which is broken 
for you for the remiſſion of ſins : likewiſe 
alſo after ſupper , He took the Cup, 
(which taking up in his hand he ſays 
aloud ) Drink you all of this; this is 
my Bloud of the New Teſtament , which 
is ſhed for you and for many for the re- 
miſſro of ſins. 

Afterwards he ſays ſecretly, Mindful 


therefore of thy ſaving 60mmand, and of 


all things done for us, of thy Croſs, Re- 
ſurreFion the third day , Aſcenſion into 
Heaven, Seſſion at the right hand of God, 
and of thy ſecond and glorious Coming 
again, ( then with a loud voice ) we 
offer to thee thine of thine own, in all 
things and through all things the 
Quire ſinging, We praiſe thee, we bleſs 
thee, we give thanks to thee, O Lord, and 

xe 


137 


138 An Account of the Greek Church. 


we make our ſupplications to thee, O God. 
Then the Prieſt prays again, We tf 
offer to thee this rational and unbloudy 
worſhip and ſervice 5 and we beſeech thee, 
and pray thee, and make our ſupplications 
to thee, ſend forth thy Holy Spirit upon us, 
and upon theſe Gifts that lie before us, 
After ſome Adorations and ſhort private 
Prayers, (as, ( 4) O Lord, who ſenteſt 
thy moſt Holy Spirit upon the Apoſtles at 
the third hour, do not, O mercifull God, 
take this thy Spirit from us; and, Create 
in me a clean heart, O God, and renew 
a rieht ſpirit within me , which he re- 
peats thrice to himſelf, ) the Prieſt, 
ſtanding upright, ſigning the holy Ele- 
ments with the fign of the Croſs three 
times, ſays privately, ( b ) Make this 
Bread the precious Body of thy Chriſt ; 
and then, ( c ) Make that which is in 
this Cup the precious Blond of thy Chriſt ; 
(laying both his hands upon them 3; ) 
( d ) changing them by thy Holy Spirit: 


C 4 J) Kvees, 0 + Tavayoy Tivedue w Th rity Yps 
Tels STYeAULs ket Tu WR ah, 750, 22495, (uh avrayirys 
«a2 nw, 

C5) minny 2 + dpny Tsny T4wer owpc Te Xet 


ce Ty. 
C e 133 & Td Topic TET(G TI0Y a_ TS XpIS8 0%» 
(4 ) uiraBandy TW TIywuar 0% Tied & Ji” 


and 


SEPT II PR urn EPI wo, : 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


and ſoon after, that this Sacrament 
( 4) may be to thoſe who partake of 
them for the health and ſobriety of the 
Soul, the remiſſzon of Sins, the fulneſs of 
the Kingdom of heaven, and aſſurance in 


thee , and not for our ſin and condemna- 


139 


tion. Then it follows, We offer alſo this The Comne- 


rational ſervice for thoſe who reſt in Faith, 


moration of 
living and 


for our Anceſtours, Forefathers, Patriarchs, 1,4 


Prophets , Apoſtles, Preachers, Evange- 
liſts, Martyrs, Confeſſours, Virgins, and 
for every Soul made perfe® by Faith ; 
and eſpecially for the glorious and ſpotleſs 
ever-Virgin Mary, S. John Baptiſt, af 
the holy Apoſtles, the Saint whoſe memory 
we now celebrate, and all thy Saints, &c. 
Here he names ſeveral of the living and 
dead. For the dead he ſays, _ the 
reſt and eaſe of the Soul of thy Servant 
in the bright place, ( b ) whence all grief 
and ſighing are baniſh'd 5 and make it to 
reſt where the light of thy Countenance 
ſhines. Then he prays God to remem- 
ber all the Orthodox Clergy: and then, 


( 4) 9 oi mis pimatuCdruny ws view {us 
2s tn ce ] 

(6) iv3e dnides ava 4 avayes So in the 
Liturgy of S. James.—vais era mwnius oy who tor 
uivroy. in Bibliath. Patr, edit. Parifſ. pag. 9, 11, 17. Of 
S. Mark , pag. 34, 35. and of Gregoriss Dialogus, ps 129+ 


We 


I40 


Elevation. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


We offer alſo this rational ſervice for the 
whole world , for the holy Catholick and 
Apoſtolick, Church, for all Chriſtian Prin- 
ces, their Courts and Armies, that God 
would grant them a peaceable reign, that 
we may live a peaceable and quiet life in 
all godlineſs and honeſty, &c, Several 
other Prayers and Reſponſes follow , 
together with the Lord's Prayer. 

The Prieſt comes to the middle door 
of the Chancell, and elevates the Bread, 
which he afterwards breaks and divides 
into four parts, and lays them down in 
the figure of a Croſs : one of which he 
puts into the Chalice, ( 4 ) wherein 
1s poured again ſome warm water ; after 
which he himſelf communicates. At 
the reception of the Cup , he drinks 
thrice , ſaying, at the firlt ſip, I» the 
name of the Father , at the ſecond, and 
of the Son, at the third, and of the Holy 
Ghoſt. 

The Prieſts and Deacons reccive the 
Elements apart and diſtintly in this 
form. * At the delivery of the Bread , 


C 4 ) They mix Water with the Wine before the 
Conſecration at the Protheſts, and then again after Con- 


ſecration, as is plain from the Liturgy of S. Chryſoſtmme. 


See alſo the *Exwlwiiz Awilepin; of ggnzia0 wy IN 
Euchol. pag. 190. 


C a) The 


» > OT 5 ” Eee rs mr, of 


2. or wn” AAS Eun 44. 


—  —__” eo 


* An Account of the Greek Church. 


( a )) The precious , holy, and undefiled 
Body of the Lord God, our Saviour Jeſus 
Chriſt, is given to thee for the remiſſron of 
ſins and everlaſting life : and at the de- 
livery of the Cup, ( b )) The precious 

and holy Bloud of our Lord and Saviour 

Jeſus Chriſt 3s giver to thee for the remilſi- 

on of ſins and everlaſting life. This te- 
nour of words is not always retained , 
but admits of a variation , the Prieſt 
ſaying ſometimes , 1 give unto thee the 

preciows and holy Body of our Lord, &c. 

ſometimes, Thou receiveſt the precious and 

holy Body of our Lord, &c. 

 Aﬀter they within the SanCtuary or 

Holy place have been partakers of the 

Divine and tremendous Myſteries, the 

Deacon, ſtanding at the middle door 

with the Chalice lifted up 1a his hands, 

invites the Communicants to approach; 

(c Come hither, in the fear of God, 

with Faith and Charity. He then dips a 

ſpoon , Az, into the Chalice, and 


C 4 ) MerediSomu ave 78 71wey % 00 #, d 36 44my 
np Te Kueis & Os x, Ewrigt nul Tron Xeigs rig 
agunv fs d papniy x; &s Crohy ala vicy. 

C 6 ) MemdiJormi ov mt Twey % 43100 cane 7% 
Kveis xy Ew pO@r nwj "110% Xewss vis d penn os dpage 
Tay & tis (wv diwpioy. 

( ©) Mint giCs Ot og wigtus x a3ams mepcmadile, 


taxing 


142 An Account of the Greek Church.® 


taking out abit or bits,which are uſually 
very ſmall, of the conſecrated Bread 


| (called waggaes)) or pearls) ſoaked in 


The Sacra- 
ment in both 
binds. 


and floating upon the Wine, he puts it 
to their mouths, ſaying to each, (4) The 
precions and holy Body and Blond of our 
Lord and Saviour Jeſus Chriſt are given 
to thee for the remiſſwon of thy ſins andeter- 
zal life; or, with a little alteration , 
Thou receiveſt the precions and holy Body 
and Blond of, &c. 

Thus the people communicate in both 
kinds; which is the expreſs dofrine and 
conſtant praftice of the Greek Church ; 
which they ground on the words of our 
B. Saviour, S. John chap. 6. v. 53. Ve- 
rily, verily 1 ſay unto you, Except you 
(that is, all of you, for no particular 
order of men being mentioned, they 
underſtand this declaration univerſally) 
eat the fleſh of the Son of man, and drink 
his bloud , you have no life in you, and 
on the example of the Apoſtles ; and on 
the hiſtory of the Inſtitution, explained 
by S. Pal in his firſt Epiſtle to the Co- 
rinthians, 11, Chapter. 


(C4) NemAauCare mf riwmoy x; d3c0v one Pe. 
Ts Ku-'s 1 EwneO- nu) Ines News vis dgenv 
&10pmicy 0% x, tis Coty chdyicn, 


It 


An Account of the Greek Church. 143 


It is an uſual cuſtom with them, and 0f their mu- 
certainly in it ſelf highly commendable, _ rn. 
and which argues a great ſenſe of the before they 
dignity of theſe Holy Myſteries, that mmncate, 


. * > I FF ww ana 


- 


_- 


t— 


before they receive the Sacrament, they 
ask Forgiveneſs one of another. The 
Deacon begs it of the conſecrating 
Prieſt, who always takes care to be re- 
conciled to any one who has a matter 
againſt him , before he approaches the 
Altar. The Prieſts, who affliſt, turn 
their heads to the right hand and to the 
left, ſignifying by this geſture their de- 


5s ww wif Wi AY HE Y FI ww a EST m3 us 


fireof Forgiveneſs, if they have oftended 
any there preſent. And the people , 
who communicate, every one for him- 
ſelf, fays aloud, in the hearing of all, 
before the aQ of receiving, Zuyywetorle, 
Xewiav, Forgive, O Chriſtians : which 
the reſt with one voice anſwer, 'O Ot; 
ouyyweloy os, God forgive you. 

When the Communion is over, the 7he os 
Frieſt diſtributes promiſcuouſly to ſuch "47 yr 
as are preſent the blefied Bread uncon- ward among 
ſecrated, (For onely the upper part of '** 17% 
the Loaf, circumſcribed within the Seal, 
hence called 5 opezy4, is uſed for the 
Sacrament.) This 1s called by ſeveral 
names 3 as Id, 2p, or divine bread ; 
2yzomua and wayz, from its being 

ſanctt- 


144 An Account of the Greek Church. | 


ſanQified and bleſſed; and moſt com- | 

monly 2n9ve:y, being given in ſtead 

of the conſecrated holy Gifts or Ele- 
ments to thoſe who do not communj- 
cate : to which the people aſcribe great | 
cfhicacy and virtue ; and which they of- 
tentimes carry home, and beſtow upon | 
their fick Friends, thinking it as effec- | 
tual, if not more effeCtual then any 
Phyſick. The facred Solemnity is ſvon 
after concluded , the Prieſt diſmiſſing 
the people with a Bleſling, | 
Thus much in the general. I ſhall 
now proceed to mention ſeveral things 
relating to this Argument, which if I 
had inſerted in the precedent Para- | 
graphs, mighthave interrupted the ſeries 
and order of this moſt ſolemn Admini- 
ſtration, which now lies cloſe, as to all 
the material parts of it , and falls under 

one eaſy view. 

In what m- As to the moment of Conſecration, 
the Cofecra. 3 which the Symbols become and are 
ton is made, Made the Body and Bloud of Chriſt, 
'tis certain that the Greeks, herein tol- 
lowing the authority of ſeveral ancient 
Writers of their Church, do not hold 
this Divine Myſtery to be perfected and 
conſummated by or after the pronunci- 
ation of thoſe words, Take, eat, this is 
my 


W—__ Oo XX FYy > T* RP v9 Ha $ 


"> aw 5 3 yy my U3 phws 


ww 


—_ ;*F wm js FT $* w v- 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


my Body ; the Change, what-ever it be, 
not being made , according to S. Johr: 
Damaſcen , but by the deſcent and 11- 
lapſe of the Holy Spirit upon the Gifts 
or Elements placed upon the Altar, 
Therefore in order to the completion 
of this Sacrament, they adde BenediQion 
and Prayers, in which they do expli- 
citely implore the Divine grace of the 
Holy Spirit of God : the Prieſt , after 
he has recited the words of our B. $4- 
viour 1n the Inſtitution, invoking God 
in theſe words, Send thy Holy Spirit 
upon #8 , and upon theſe holy Gifts lying 
before #4; and after a little pauſe , ha- 
ving three times made the ſign of the 
Crofs, adding, (which I purpoſely re- 
peat) Make this Bread the precious Body 
of thy Chriſt, and that which is in this 
Cup the precious Bloud of thy Chriſt ; 
then with his hand lift up , and held 
over them, changing them by thy Holy 
Spirit. Theſe are the formall words of 
the Liturgies of S. Chryſoſtome and 
S. Baſil now in uſe. It is of no great 
moment what ſome obje&, that the laſt 
words of all, changing them by thy Holy 
Jpirit , are omitted 1n ſeveral ancient 
Manuſcript Exemplars 3 for the fame 
thing, that is, that the Elements be- 

come 


145 


146 


Of the change 
made after 
Conſecration, 
which they 
call MgTeaia- 
GIS» 


But this doc- 
rtrine altoge- 
ther new ; 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


come facramental by the intervention 
and deſcent of the Holy Spirit, 1s faid 
expreſ]y in the ſhort prayers which pre. 
cede, which are confelledly ancient, 
and free from any interpolation. Thus 
in their ( 4 )) Confeſſion of Faith, 'tis 
poſitively aflerted, that the Change is 
made by the operation of the Holy Spirit 
of God, whom the Prieſt invokes at that 
time, conſummating this Myſtery , and 
praying , Send thy Holy Spirit upon us 
and, &c. For after theſe words there pre- 
ſently follows a wrrenuns. Of this change 
I am next ro ſpeak. 

'Tis moſt certain, that the dodrine of 
Tranſubſtantiation, by virtue of which, 
according to the fancies of the Roma- 
2iſts, the natural ſubſtance of the Ele- 
ments 1s ſuppoſed to be annihilated and 
wholly deſtroyed, the Species or Acci- 
dents onely remaining, was not admit- 
ted inthe Greek Church till of late years: 
there being nothing in their Liturgies 
tending that way; onely that a Change 
is made, and that the Elements after 


Ca_ id + weyea 78 Ayis Tirttual®, «mw 
emrunnny yaun mw wet cyeivny, ayamMgs T9 pon 
evoy Tin, ene iuly ©  Miguy , Kanimisor, Os 
Mer 33 mm pram Tame 1 WiTWIONs TApeuavs 
HVETW 


conſe- 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


conſecration become the Body and 
Bloud of Chriſt : (which no Chriſtian of 
what Communion ſoever does doubt of 
in the leaſt.) And this they thought fit 
to expreſs by the names of werzb2A) , 
METRTONNG, PATEGUY 12G, without de- 
termining the manner of the Preſence 
of Chriſt in the Sacrament, For that 
theſe words do not infer ſuch a ſubſtan- 
tial Change, that 1s, that the Elements 
notwithltanding their Conſecration re- 
tain their eſſence and nature, though 
they are , as they are juſtly ſaid to be, 
the Body and Bloud of Chriſt, is clear, 
not onely becauſe atthe ſame time they 
are acknowledged , in the Liturgy of 
S. Baſil, tobe avrmvme Ts ay mwucl. 
xz1 a; ual, antitypes and repreſentati- 
ons of his holy Body and Bloud ; but be- 
cauſe the perſon baptized is faid uerr- 
Tin, Fjv24, Or to be changed; and fo of 
( 4 )) the Water : which cannot be un- 
derſtood of a natural change: and in 
the Office of Baptiſm, they pray, that 


C 4 ) Merimiyny, Y ubramiany,y epwamp m uydup 
Timmy —\#9 74 ayagnyeu 7 ydvp 7877 Th Swneye x, 
Ugyts x empuniow Ti Agis TrLudl@ , Eucholog, 
pag. 350. And fo 1n the Office 74 ws dyiacous they 
tepeat the ſame words, pag. 449+ Is wim mindivas # 
&@ aud Canmiloulvorg—page 353+ 


L 2 the 


147 


148 


and the word 
whollynew t99. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


the water may be ſandtified 75 Srzuc 
xz}! eee xz} banpurion TE Ayis 
Th4ualG.,, by the power and operation 
and acceſs of the Holy Spirit. ( And fo 
the like they fay of the ( 4) Oyl uſed 
atthat time.) Which very manner and 
form of words being uſed of the Ele- 
ments of Bread and Wine, that they are 
ſantified and conſecrated, and become 
the Body and Bloud of our Saviour by 
the power and operation and deſcent of 
the Holy Spirit upon them , can no 
more infer a ſubſtantial change in the 
one then in the other. 

There 1s no mention made of a wers- 
nw; inany Liturgy, Creed, or Prayer, 
the word being wholly new, and alto- 
gether unknown till the latter end of 
the laſt Century, when it was firſt uſed 
(as I hope I may pardonably conjec- 
rure)) by Gabriel Archbiſhop of Phila- 
delphia , in his Treatiſe of the Seven 
myſteries; who, though otherwiſe a 
zealous defender of the Rites of the 
Greek Church, yet living at Verice , 
and not unacquainted with the niceties 
and ſubrilties of the Latize School-men, 
might eaſily be wrought upon to bring 


C 6 ) Vid. Euchol, p. 354- 
in 


= "NOT" 


_ ID) 3 5 _Mha< os ff > OO _+»% 


vw ww ry 


An Account of the Greek Church, 


in this new word, ina way of compli- 
ance with the Dodqrine of Rome; of 
which Jeremias Patriarch of Conſtanting- 
ple, who made him Archbiſhop, ſeems 
to- be utterly ignorant, For he, far 
more agreeably to the rules of modeſty 
and truth , in his Declaration of the 
Faith of the Greek Church in the matter 

of the Sacrament, in his Anſwer to the 

German Divines, ſays onely thus much, 

that ( a )) the Catholick Church believes, 

that after the Conſecration the Bread is 

changed into the very Body of Chriſt, ad 

the Wine into his very Bloud, by the Holy 

Spirit, without defining more particu- 

larly the nature and manner of the 

Change. Nor dol find that this word 

began to be of common uſe, at leaſt in 

the publick and authentick Writings of 

the Church, for ſeveral years after. For 

the two Synods that were held at Cor- 
ſtantinople, on purpoſe to condemn and 

anathematize the Confeſſion of Faith 


(4) ArZdle hn wr Girandia, 3m 7 7 aia- 
Cudy © wh ap] Or warnCarne®) vis aun m0 anud Ts Xeift, 
$5 or® cis 37) 73 cue, did Trivual@ Az, Re- 
ſponſ. 1. ad Theologos Wittenberg. p. 85. *O 4p'G&+ 3ive) 
awe Xeiss, u; 6 dv@ x; 7 Udwp a; (ia Xe1ST, emput- 
Tioes Ty Agis Trevud) CO, weramigy Of 27d antp nov 
x Eyveras , Reſponſ. 2. pag. 240, —— 4 7, a 
47% 78 7444 Ty Kuels Tv 3rwidy or, thid. 


L 3 publiſhed 


t5o 4n Account of the Greek Church, 


publiſhed by that great man Cyril/us Lu- 
caris, Patriarch of that See, the one un- 
der his immediate Succeſlour Cyril/xs of 
Berrhea , in the year 1638. the other 
under Parthenizs, in the year 1642, 
ſeemed to abſtain religiouſly from the 
uſe of it, each of them onely declaring, 
( 4) that the Elements by the bleſſing of 
the Prieſt, and the deſcent of the Holy 
Spirit upon them, became the true Body 
and Bloud of Chriſt. Afterward indeed, 
in the year 1643. there was a Confeſſion 
of Faith made in the name of the Eaſtern 
Church, in the way of Queſtion and 
Anſwer, inthe kſſer Ryſſza, approved of 
by Parthenizs and the three other Patri- 
archs and ſeveral Metropolitans, though 
not publiſhed till the year 1662. where» 
in, together with this new word , they 
eſtabliſht the dodrine of Tranſubſtantia- 
tion.” ( b ) After theſe words, ( the 
Prayers above mentioned, ) there pre- 
ſently follows a prrsomwor; or Tranſub- 
ſtantiation , and the Bread is changed 
into the true Body of Chriſt, and theWine 


C a _) Vid. Synod. primam pag. 76. 80. (&f Synod. 2. 
Pag. 129. edit, una cum Confeſſione Cyrilli, pag. 145+ 
4 F, 1 Ts mapevI4; Jive), x, dNNNOE 6 
ep]& &s 79 aAuy owpet Ts Xeurv, x0 iv wig 
eanIy cpa Sanulorm wy m' & dy, os paler muy 
X Tere x7! Ti Irray 0ikovouiar, Þ. 124+ 


znto 


An Account of the Greek Church. 151 


into his true Bloud : the Species, which 
appear, onely remain, and this according 
to the Divine diſpenſation. But if we 
refle& upon the ſtate and condition of 
the Greek Church at that time, andcon- 
ſider by what arts and by whoſe afſi- 
ſtence Cyril/zs Lucaris was firſt depoſed 
by the Turks, and afterwards ſtrangled, 
and his ingratefull Succeſſour advanced 
into his throne, it will ceaſe to be a 
matter of wonder tous, that this man 
(who had ſtudied Philoſophy in his 
younger days under the Jeſuits at Ga- 
lata", and was wholly governed by 
them 3 whoſe end too was as diſmall as 
his Predeceſlour's, he being baniſht to 
Tunis, and there by order of the Port 
ſtrangled) and the reſt of the AzTvipeo- 
vs or Latinizing Biſhops ſhould re- 
nounce the Faith of their Anceſtours , 
and determine thus boldly. And how 
they have been wrought upon ſince, in 
the Synodus Bethleemitica, to come up 
more fully to this and ſeveral other Te- 
nents of the Roar Church , ſhall ap- 
pear hereafter. The Romaniſts are now 
aware, that there is no hope and like- 
lihood of reconciling Greece by bluſtring 
and force 3 and therefore they betake 
themſelves to cloſer arts and methods of 

L 4 ſubtlety: 


152 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


ſubtlety : the Greeks bred up in the Col- 
lege of that Nation at Roe, eſpecially 
they have finiſhed a courſe of ſtu- 
dy, being ſent into Tirkze, upon a de- 
fgn of working an Union, and of redu- 
cing their Countrymen from the ſcandal 
and guilt of Schiſm and Hereſy 3 who 
are permitted to diſſemble their Com- 
munion, and oftentimes are advanced 
to great Dignities in the Church ; to 
whom, being men of great eloquence, 
and wit, and learning, and policy, I 
believe theſe Alterations are chiefly tobe 
aſcribed. In the mean time, Jet the 
Zelots of the Roman Church triumph, 
that the preſent Greeks declare abſo- 
lutely for them : we need not envy 
them a victory, which they have gained 
by ſuch baſe and treacherous Arts, not 
to ſay Bribery. But however, this is 
one great argument, that the opinion of 
Tranſubſtantiation is wholly new among 
them, that they have not much ſtudied 
the point , but heedlefly take it upon 
truſt with an implicite faith. For when 
their Biſhops and Prieſts are urged with 
the horrid and monſtrous conſequences 
of it, fully made out from Scripture and 
Philoſophy , they ſtand amazed, and 
return no other anſwer but this, that it 

is 


wet. hi wa Mod 


ww Tr wyearu MTV WW [-b7# Www Www ew 7 my, Ww3 FF _ os mw% _ 0 


SW TT FAY Ww = Www FT VWww: as  V V»r WW N32x5 


An Account of the Greek Church. 153 


is agreat Myſtery, and not to be diſpu- 
ted. Tis certainly a great, an holy, a 
venerable Myſtery, this we moſt readily 
and heartily acknowledge 3 but how 
much better had they conſulted the ho- 
nour of the Chriſtian Religion, and the 
peace of the Church, had they not pro- 
ceeded fo boldly and blindly to ſuch a 
peremptory definition? 

The Greeks uſe Leavened bread in 7, ,; 24. 
the Sacrament : which praftice of their wened bread 
Church they defend with great fierceneſs, '/** 57 
as if our B. Saviour had clearly and in 
expreſs terms forbad the uſe- of Azymes. 
For fo they interpret the words of the 
Inſtitution, that Chriſt ſaid of Bread, not 
of Azyme, that it was his Body : as if 
there could be no Bread truly and pro- 
perly ſo called without a mixture of 

eaven in it, But that which they moſt 
rely upon is, an imagination, that our 
S$awonr, in the celebration ofthe Paſſeo- 
ver, anticipated the uſual time of the 
Feſtival , and kept it a day before, 
(which they think may be proved from 
S. John 18, chap. v.28. and chap. 19: 14.) 
that is, Lani decimi terti4, or the 
thirteenth day of Nz/ar at the eve- 
ning, and conſequently , that he u- 
ſed leavened bread, And ſome - 

| the 


Ly 


154 An Account of the Greek Church. 


the (a) Greek, Writers, who managed 
this controverſy formerly,were fo ridicu- 
louſly impudent, as to aſlert, that there 
' was a piece of thatvery leavened bread, 
which our$Sav4onr at his laſt Supper con- 
ſecrated, reſerved , among other Re- 
liques, in the Chappell belonging to 
the Emperour's palace in Conſtantinople, 
at what time that City was taken by the 
Latines. 

While they urge the neceſitty of 
uſing Leavened bread in the Sacrament 
with an intemperate ( not to fay, an 
unreaſonable) zeal againſt the Latines, 
(whom they therefore reproach with 
the name of "ACouinre z, Or Azymites , 
and appravate, as a horrid and grievous 
defet and fault, the quality of the 
Bread, whether leavened or unleavened, 
being in it ſelf a matterof ſmall moment, 
and meer indifference , and no way ef- 
fential to the Sacrament, ) the Schiſm, 
upon the heat and conteſt ariſing hence 
ſeveral Centuries of years before the 
overthrow of the Greek Empire, grew 
wider and wider, and at laſt became ir- 
reconcilable , being fomented in the 


C a _) Vid. Allat. de Libris Eccleſiaſticis Grecor. 
Þ4g&+ 220» 


following 


7. 0 WW WW” OR” 


» 
® 


An Account of the Greek Church. 155 


following Ages by the ambition of the 
great Eccleſraſticks of both parties, who 
upbraidedeach other with prevaricating, 
and departing from the mind and will of 
Chriſt herein. 

The Sacramental Bread is to be x2» The Sacra- 
Saeg;, clean or pure; which purity — 
does not ſo much refer to the fineneſsof whm made. 
the corn, as to the manner of its being 
kneaded and baked, either by Men le- 
gally pure, or elſe by the zz2:y2/z or 
Old women profeſled, or the Wives of 
married Prieſts, not otherwiſe unquali- 
fied : the former being ſuppoſed upon 
the account of their Vow, the other of 
their relation, to be of more then qrdi- 
nary SanCtity. 

They celebrate the Holy Sacrament rhe $.a- 
on the ſame day but once upon the ſame ment celebra 
Altar, which is always the middlemoſt '* _ 
of the three ; or where there are onely upon the ſame 
two, on that which is oppoſite to the —_— 
middle Door z and never upon the Pro- ne Altar in « 
theſis. Anciently there was (a) onely ©. 

a {ingle Altar in each Church : (as one 
High Prieſt and Mediatour, the Lord 


C a _) Sce S. Ignart. epift. ad Philadelph. pag. 40. edit. 
Voſſ. *» Sunagietr, ws ws H17%0n&, (oc. Et in epiſt, 
aa Magneſianos, pag. 34+ wivris by ws ms Unyaty oun- 
T*;x.47+ Ot?, ws om by Ivnariey. 


Teſia 


1186 An Account of the Greek Church. 


Jeſus Chriſt, who by his own bloud ente- 
red in once into the Holy place: ) as ap- 
pears, not onely from the order and 
diſpoſition of their Fabrick ; Antiquity 
being wholly unacquainted with Side- 
Altars, (wherewith the Churches under 
the Papacy are crowded, forthe ſake of 
that great number of Maſles, daily 
ſung, as they pretend, for the relief of 
poor Souls in Pxrgatory ; ) butfrom the 
facred uſe to which it wasappropriated, 
(for, for ſome hundreds of years, the $a- 
crament was not celebrated twice the 
ſame day, ) as is evident from the elo- 
quent Panegyrick of Parlinws Biſhop of 
Tyre, concerning the ſtructure of Chur- 
ches, preſerved by Erſebizs, in the tenth 
book and fourth chapter of his Eccleſca- 
ſiicall Hiſtory. 

The Sacra- In the great Churches the Prieſt ce- 

—_— lebrates the Sacrament upon the ſolemn 

whe: nd Feſtivals and upon Sundays, and at o- 
ther times upon occaſion , when he is 
hired either to pray for the Soul of any 
dead perſon, or for ſucceſs in a journey, 
or the like. 

inruined pla- Sometimes they go to ruined places 

ces, where without their Towns or in the Fields, 

formerlyChur- = 

hes were ſea- Where :Ormerly were Churches, or near 

red, a holy Fountain. A Table there placed 

in 


An Account of the Greek Church. 157 


in ſtead of an Altar is covered with 
(4 )) *Arnwivo12 or conſecrated cloaths, 
without which they cannot conſecrate 
in unhallowed places. At theſe times 
[ have obſerved perſons troubled with 
Agues, and other feveriſh diſtempers, 
laid at ſome diſtance from the Altar with 
their faces toward it, hoping, by the 
merit of the Blefled Sacrament, and the 
prayers of the Prieſt officiating, to be 
reſtored to their health. 

The Laicks are obliged to receive People obliged 
the Bleſſed Sacrament four times a year. - nag 
With which law of their Church they four times « 
moſt readily comply, none omitting it, /**" . 
eſpecially at Chriſtmas or Eaſter, unleſs 
hindred by a real and urgent neceſlity. 

In order to Pheir better Preparation, the 
preceding Faſts are appointed and ob- 
{crved. 

It is not allowed, that the Prieſt be- 73. prief 
g1n the ſervice of Conſecration till after doe5mr conſe- 
morning: the uſual] time being about pr ga 
the third hour of the day ; which is 
not without a delign : the Prieſt uſing 
this ſhort form of Prayer, O Lord, who 
ſenteſt thy moſs Holy Spirit upon the Apo- 


t a ) ſrve ' Arnujyna. De horum conſecratione vide 
Ta=iy in Euchologio, 


files 


iss An Account of the Greek Church, 


files at the third hour, O mercifull God, 
tahe not thy Holy Spirit from #9. But at 
the Feſtival of Eaſter their piety is early; 
this Service being uſually performed be- 
fore the Sun-riſe, after the example of 
. $. Mary Magdalen and the other devout 
women, who came with their ointment 
to the Sepulchre, where Chriſt had 
been entombed, (4) as it began to 
dawn toward the firſt day of the week , 
S. Matth. chap. 28. v.1. or, as S. Luke ex- 
preſles it, chap. 24. v. I. ( b )) on the firſt 
day of the week, very early in the mor- 
ning, 
tn Lent rhe In the time of the Great Lex, except 
Sacrament # on Saturdays, Sundays, and the Feaſt of 


nt celebrated ro, , 
zilt the afrer- the Annunciation, the Sacrament 1s not 


RIM. celebrated till in the middle'df the after- 
noon. But of this more at large here- 
after. 


The Greeks The Greeks communicate faſting, loo- 

emmunicate . . . 

jaſting. King upon it as a thing very unlawfull 
and ſcandalous to raſt a drop of wine, 
or eat the leaſt bit of bread, for ſeveral 
hours before they receive 3 ſo that 'tis 
oftentimes to be admired , with what 
great courage and obſtinacy they doe 


( 4 ) Th emgomtuay tis pieu Ealla ny, 
C 5) ©p3ps Caius 


23 


”—— ah 


;*$ WW FF ww _ TR EW om WP 


23 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


as it were violence to themſelves, and, 


get the maſtery over their natural pafh- 
ons and inclinations. 

When they receive the Sacrament , 
they do not knee], but onely incline 
their body ; at which moment they are 
taught to exerciſe an aCt of Faith after 
this manner: ( 4) {confeſs and acknow« 
ledge, that thou art Jeſus Chriſt, the Sor 
of the living God , who cameſt into the 
world to ſave ſinners, of whom 1 am chief. 
Which form, were it as ancient as the 
times of S. Chryſoſtome, which will never 
be proved, cannot juſtly be urged by 
the Patrons and Aflerters of Tranſub- 
ſtantiation, in favour of their opinion 
becauſe the words are, moſt probably, 
referred, not to the Elements , which 
they are juſt about to receive, but to 
our B. Saviour, God and Man, in Hea- 
ven, whom the ſacred Elements not 


onely truly and really repreſent, but 
alſo exhibit. 


The People are obliged by the law of 


the Church to confeſs to a Prieſt right- 
fully and lawfully conſtituted, before 


_ (4) Nino t owns, in od & © Inovs Xergdr, & 

us 7% Ots Ty Larl®, 0 trJwy tis + Kg por apapTue 
\ o ad ” # ” $A 

Avg want, wp EXT Is Hp fas 


they 


I59 


Their Poſture 


at receruinge 


The People 0b- 
liged to Con- 


feſſion, before 


they commu- 
nicate. 


160 


The Prreſt 
bimſelf oblt- 
ged alſn. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


they communicate : But the Confelſlours 
(whom they call Trw wer or ſpiritual 
men do not require and exact of their 
Penitents a rigid, anxious, or particular 
confection of their Sins, but have regard 
to modeſty, and an ill memory, that *' 
may not retain every circumſtance of | 
fact; and are not over-difficult in gran- 
ting their Abſolutions. What remains 
to be farther ſaid about Conteſtion, may 
be ſeen 1n its proper place. 

The Prieſt too 1s obliged, by the 
9:272:1; or Order pretixed to the Litur- 
gy which bears the name of S. Chryſo- 
ſtome, to confeſs, betore he goes tocon- 
ſecrate. But I am apt to fear, that this 
piece of Church-diſcipline 1s not kept 
up among them, and that Prieſts and 
people, notwithſtanding the obligation, 
are not very ſtrict and zealous 1n the 
practice of it , unleſs in the caſe of hai- 
nous Crimes which walt the Conſcience, 
it being oftentimes intermitted. This 
is the fault of the Perſons: and as tothe 
practice it ſelf, the Church of Ezgland 
does no way diſallow it , but rather re- 
commend it to thoſe of her Communi- 
ON, in the Office of the Holy Sacra- 
ment; provided it be done after a due 


manner, and that the Conſciences of 
the 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


the people be not burthened with un- 
juſt ſcruples, as if the whole benefit of 
the Sacrament would be loſt , and the 
Confeſhonit ſelf rendred ineffectual, ex- 
cept they disburthen and lay open the 
ſecreteſt thoughts of their heart, and 
reveal the minuteſt punAilio and cir- 
cumſtance of their guilt. 


They give the Euchariſt in both kinds 


161 


They commu- 


to little Children of one or two years nicare Chil- 
of age, ſometimes to new-born Infants, nin 6 


that 1s, after they have been Chriſtened, 
in caſe of imminent danger of death 
grounding their belief of an abſolute 
neceſlity of this Sacrament alſo uponthe 
words of our B. Savionr , S. John ch. 6. 
v. 53. Verily, verily I ſay unto you, Ex- 
cept you eat the fleſh of the Son of man, 
and drink his bloud, you have no life in 
you. If it be objefted againſt them , 
that theſe words are not to be under- 
ſtood of a Sacramental manducation , 
and that the cuſtom which they retain 
ſe-ms to be ſo far from being neceſlary, 
that it is ſcarce proper and juſtiftable , 
Children not poſhbly having any actual 
Faithorunder(tanding of theſeMyſteries; 
they will appeal, for their juſtification, 
to the univerſal pratice of the Church 
n the Primitive times for ſeveral Ages, 

M wherem 


162 


They reſerve 
the Sacra- 
ment for the 
uſe of ſick, 


perſons. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


wherein the communicating of Infants 
was lookt upon as a neceſlary and eflen- 
tial point of the Chriſtian Religion. 
That there may be a provition made 
at all times for the neccffities of Sick 
and Dying perſons, that they may not 
depart out of this world without the 
comfort and ſupport of this heavenly 
Viaticum, they take care that a ſufficient 
quantity of Bread be conſecrated for this 
purpoſe on the Thurſday of the Holy 
week ; which being broken into little 
Particles, and ſufficiently tinged and 
moiſtned in the conſecrated Wine, they 
take out of the Chalice, and dry them 
in a ſmall diſh, put under a pan ofcoals, 
and then put theminto a Pix or Box to 
be reſerved. This (4) Box, whether 
of (ilver or wood, 1s put up intoa filken 
caſe, the better to defend what is in- 
cloſed from cobwebs or any thing that 
may defile it, and is hung up uſually 
bchind the Altar againſt the wall, with 
a Lamp or two for the moſt part bur- 
ning before it. Upon occaſion the 
Prieſt, taking out one or more of the 
Margarite , carries them to the houſes 
of ſuch as are ſick, who deſire to com- 


C 4 _) nagnge:iy, 


municate 5 


An Account of the Greck Church. 163 


municate 3 but they are firſt dipt and 
moiſtned in common Wine : which is 
done upon a double account ; either, 
that by this vehicle the little Particles 
may the better paſs into the ſtomach; or 
elſe,that the Particles of the conſecrated 
Wine, which were dried up and con- 
denſed by the heat of the fire, may this 
way be excited. 
| hope it will not be unacceptable to 4 digreſſom 


the pious Reader, if I make a little Di- =_ of thi 


—_ Bb St oe . SR. 26 A, A 5 = @3_ 7 


greſfion , and ſhew the antiquity and ct», 


original of this practice. 

So great was the Faith and Zeal and 
Piety of the firſt Chriſtzars, that they, 
in all probability , every day received 
the Blefled Sacrament, which evidently 
ſet forth before their eyes Chriſt cruci- 
fied in the chiefeſt and moſt remarkable 
paſſages and circumſtances of his Death, 
( 4) They continued ſtedfaſtly, v2 goxae- 
Te23vre, (diligent and afliduous) 2» ; 
Apoſtles doFrine, and in communication, 
perchance of the ſeveral gifts of Bread 


C a ) Aﬀ#s 2.0.42, 46. koiwvovie a3iuv , In the A- 
ew Creed, perchance ought thus to be underſtood, 
or the participation of rhe Sacraments, and other holy 
things of God, as they lie in common to all Saints, un 
the language of the New Teſtament, that 1s, Chriſtians ; 
who have herein a Communion one with another, 


M 2 and 


164 An Account of the Greek Church. 


and Wine, among other things, eſpect- 
ally for the uſes of the Sacrament, and 
the Agape or Love-feaſts, which follow- 
ed, and in breaking of bread, and prayer, 
that is, 1n receiving the Sacrament, and 
in joint and publick devotion. This 
was done partly out of the great Jove 
and affeion which they bare to our 
B. Lord and Saviour, who ſhed hisdea- 
reſt Heart-bloud for us; and partly out 
of obedience to his bleſſed will , who 
therefore was pleaſed to inſtitute and 
command it, that it might be a perpetu- 
al Memorial of his precious Death, un- 
till his coming again ; (for they did 
not think it a meer matter of indiffe- 
rency, whether they received the Sa- 
crament or no, as many 1n this degene- 
rous Age are apt to deceive and flatter 
themſelves; ) and partly out of a deep 
ſenſe they had of the many Benefits 
flowing from a worthy Participation of 
it. For being convinced by the moſt 
ſatisfactory way of proof, experience , 
that the Sacrament was a moſt effeCtual 
inſtrument of conveying Grace into 
their Souls, that hereby they were 
ſtrengthened in Grace and Vertue, that 
hereby they held a cloſe Communion 
with Chriſt, and became one with = 
an 


_— Oo WW” NR MM TT V<F 0 SD 5 MS ar 


. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


and were fulfilled with the Divine Grace 
and heavenly BenediCtion, and, laſtly , 
were more and more confirmed and en- 
couraged to undergo all the troubles 
and torments either of life or death for 
his Name ; they were frequent and affi- 
duous in their approaches to the Altar. 
At that time it was made death by the 
law for the Chriſtians to have their Re- 
ligious meetings 3 an horrible Perſecu- 
tion raged every-where throughout the 
Empire; they were dragged before Tri- 
bunals, and ſentenced to be burned, or 
crucified , or tormented worſe. All 
this they beheld withtheireyes, without 
ſhedding a tear, without a ſigh, with- 
out regret and trouble of mind ; re- 
joycing greatly, that they were counted 
worthy to ſuffer reproach and death it 
ſelf for the Name of Chriſt, and that 
they were thus made conformable tothe 
image of their Saviour, and partakersof 
his Sufferings. It was altogether uncer- 
tain whether their lives were not toend 
before the day : they therefore daily 
contemplated Chriſt in the holy Ele- 
ments: this inſpired them with new 
courage, and their zeal became more 
ardent and vigourous then the flames 
that conſumed them. They were 1n» 
7 M3 deed 


x 


165 


-” 


166 An Account of the Greek Church. 


deed oftentimes prevented by the mali- 
cious induſtry of their Idolatrous ehe- 
mies, and purſued to the very Grotta's 
and Caves, and continually hunted out 
by the Heathen Officers, from whoſe 
violence nothing could be ſafe , and 
thus deprived of theſe happy opportu- 
nities. In ſuch perplexity of affairs 
what was to be done? They would 
joyfully lay down their lives for Chriſt, 
ſo that they might but firſt receive Chriſt 
in the Sacrament. Hereupon it was 
permitted them to carry away with 
them ſome part of the conſecrated 
Bread, and reſerve it either about them 
or in their houſes, that 1f they were 
diſcovered , and ſeized upon, . and hur- 
ried before a Judge , and immediately 
ſentenced , and dragg'd to execution, 
they might have wherewithall to com- 
fort and ſtrengthen them in their Jaſt 
Agonies. This was afterwardinduiged 
to Hermites, who had retired to the 
Woods or Mountains, and other ſolita- 
ry places ſcarce acceſhible, to enjoy 
themſelves and their Devotion with- 
out the leaſt moleſtation from company. 
With which kind of life frequent jour- 
neyings to Cities and placesof reſort did 
no way ſuit and comport, Very or 
) 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


of them being dignified with the Prieſt- 
hood, it ſeemed very hard and ſevere, 
that they ſhould be deprived of ſo com- 
tortable a repaſt as the Body of Chriſt 
is, in their receſles and folitudes. A 
maſs of conſecrated Bread was either 
ſent to them accordingly ; or elſe, whea 
they thought fit to come and converſe 
with the World tor a few hours, they 
carried it away with them upon their 
quick and ſpeedy return. When this 
cuſtom of reſerving the Sacramentall 
Bread in private hands began, it cannor, 
I ſuppoſe, be exactly ſtated : it is moſt 
probable, that it might be about the 
beginning of the Third Century. But 
however this is certain ; that there be- 
ing not onely juſt ſuſpicion, but juſt 
and full proof, that the Holy Bread 
which was reſerved was abuſed to very 
evil purpoſes, it wasforbid by the Coun- 
cil held at Saragoſa, the chiet City of the 
Province of Tarragona in Spain, in the 
year of our Lord 381, Canon the third, 
that any ſhould preſume to carry any of 
the Holy Bread away with him. Upon 
the ſame reaſon , ſeveral pieces of the 
conſecrated Bread were reſerved and 
kept by the Prieſts, to diſtribute a- 
mong Sick people, and eſpecially to 

'M4 Laps'd 


A» "RR " 


167 


168 An Account of the Greek Church. 


Lapsd perſons, (who, through humane 
frailty , had been guilty of ſome finfull 
compliance in the times of Perſecution, 
and ipſo faJo were deprived , in the 
way of penance and humiliation, of the 
Sacrament, till the hour of death,) who 
poſhibly otherwiſe could not have gone 


out of the world with peace and com- 


fort. A famousinſtance of this we have 
in (4) a Letter of Dionyſis Bilhop 
of Alexandria to Fabius Bithop of Ar- 
tioch concerning Serapion , who had 
miſcarried under Decizs. He, being in 
theſe circumſtances, and at the point of 
death, in the night-time was in great 
diſorder and trouble of mind for want 
of a Prieſt to ablolve him , and give 
him the Communion : whereupon: a 
Meſſenger was ſent immediately to fetch 
the - Prieſt to adminiſter comfort to the 
dying Penitent. But the Prieſt hap- 
pened to be fick himſelf. He, fol- 
lowing the orders and direCtion of his 
Biſhop,i the Relater of this ſtory, in 
ſuch like - caſes, ( b ) that the dying 
perſons might not deſpair, but depart 
with good hope of their Salvation, 


C 4 ) Vid. Euſebii Hiſtor. Eccleſ. lib, 6. cap. 44+ 
c b ) iy evinmides &nadniuy), 


gave 


= an —_ *” ” & _  £ 4 


An Account of the Greek Church. 169 


gave ( 4 )) Bexyv Tis wyagilzs, Ora 
little piece of the Sacramentall bread, to 
the youth , commanding him to dip it 
in water, and convey it into the mouth 
of the poor old man, who was juſt 
upon the point of yielding up his Soul 
intothe hands of God. This ſhews us, 
that they had ſuch an high eſteem and 
reverence of the Sacrament in ancient 
times, as to judge it almoſt abſolutely 
neceſlary in articulo mortis : which was 
the effect of their great Piety , which 
deſerves the higheſt commendation and 
encouragement. 

I cannot here forbear my wonder at , ;,gcenſure 
the odde fancies of a late learned Wri- on a little 
ter concerning the Blefled Sacrament, \nopra 
in which , as in many other arguments |. H. 
of Religion, he choſe to! be fingular , 
preſuming too much upon the ſtrength 
and nimbleneſs of his wit, to make out 
plauſibly any Paradox, he, torun caun- 
terto the Times, unluckily pitchtupon. 

And I think the Publiſher of theſe 
Poſthumous Remains was not aware of 
the ill effeRs that ſuch Notions, whereby 


C4) S. Baſil, in his Liturgy, calls the Sacramentall 
bread diſtributed to the Communicants, Ti wueids 
& 120K TOY - 


the 


I 70 An Account of the Greek Church, 


the Bleſſed Sacrament is fo horribly 
flighted, may produce, to the cooling 
thoſe ardours of Devotion and zeal, 
which all truly devout perſons have to 
this Holy Inſtitution of our Saviour, 
No perſon certainly whatever can re- 
ceive the Symbols of our Blefled Sav;- 
our's Paſſion and Death too often , fo 
he come with that due preparation of 
mind which theſe pure and tremendous 
Myſteries require : and the time of 
one's laſt Sickneſs eſpecially 1s very 
proper. Our Church, indeed, has de- 
clared , that a frequent and conſcienci- 
ous uſe of the Sacrament in the time of 
Health is ſufficient 3 and that ſuch devout 
and religious perſons, in caſe of ſudden 
Sickneſs, have leſs cauſe to bediſquieted 
for the lack of the ſame. Our Salvati- 
on does not neceſſarily depend upon, 
nor is reſtrained to an externall and oral 
Communion 3 whether there be or 
be not an opportunity , God accepts 
the will and defire of a contrite and de- 
vout heart, in ſtead of this commemo- 
rative Sacrifice. Nor do we attribute 
ſo much efficacy to the Sacramentall 
Sign, as to the internal Grace, for fear 
we ſhoeuld detrat from the perfection 
of the Sacrifice of the real and natural 

Body 


—— MG _ md A, f* Raj 7 my aw £A ws 1 os ws 


Bd © &. a nt mw &23A ©. =, 


m—_— 


—L 
ce 


An Account of the Greek Church. 171 


Body of our Saviour, once offered upon 


the Croſs, of which this isa Type and 


a Repreſentation, though not onely ſo. 
[ urge it no farther, but that it is very 
convenient for ſick perſons, when they 
foreſee that their Sickneſs may prove 
mortal , to receive 3 and undoubtedly 
they would find the great benefit of it. 
T put an end to this Digreſſion , with 
reference to the preſent practice of the 
Greek and Roman Churches, as to the 
Reſervation of the Blefled Sacrament z 
that the reaſon which held formerly, 
has ceasd long ſince. For there are 
Prieſts enough at hand, even in Greece 
it ſelf, to conſecrate the Sacrament in 
the preſence of the fick man, if he de- 
ſires to communicate ; and this may be 
done (I mean, as to what 1s onely ne- 
ceſlary and eflential, the Ceremonies 
being omitted , which are uſed at the 
publick Communion in- the Church, 
where a greater regard 1s had to ſplen- 
dour and decorum ) with lefs trouble, 
and ſooner, thentaking the Sacramental 
Bread out of the Czboriur, and carrying 
it in Proceſſion to the houſes of dying 
perſons. 
The ten Particles, which are placed Ab the ten 
in the Patin with the Holy Bread, be- #9: 
come 


172 


About the Co- 
Iyba or boiled 
Wheat. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


come ſanQified relatively and in a way 
of participation, as ( 4 )) Gabriel Phi. 
ladelphienſis ſpeaks , becauſe they are 
bleſſed at the ſame time with the Holy 
Bread that is to be conſecrated juſt after 
the great Offertory. The Prieſt is to 
take care, (* b ) that he does not give 
one of theſe Particles, through a miſtake, 
toany of the Communicants in ſtead of 
a conſecrated one ; as the ſame Authour 
does adviſe. Whence it follows, (c) that 
thoſe who aſlert ſo many Hoſts to be 
offered up as there are Particles, are 
miſtaken; for ( d ) they are onely 
cloſe joyned to the Body and Bloud of 
our Lord, and are not conſecrated, but 
are reckoned to be of the ſame nature 
with the unconſecrated bleſſed Bread. 
After the celebration of the Sacra- 
ment, upon great Feſtivals , there is 
uſually an entertainment for the people 
then preſent in the Church , which is 
called by them Ko2u&uv mp29poee , or 


C a _) in traftlatulo wp) preidur, pea tias Th ay 
a0u% usToAduCayn. 

(C b ) bra ph amn miouuald: ie Kveis wi wieids, 
KOIVwyNngouTs 

> _— theſe Arcudius lib. 3. cap. to. (Fc 
and Cryd. Bona de rebus Liturg. b. 1. C. 1. Þ. 31» 


(Cd ) ielpm Ted 0wpunm Th Kueis x, aiuan 


the 


"ER SD A. <SS ans K@oo©oÞds cocs wm 


WW Q _ e =, wes 4H A” as = -= 


"— 


SW WW aa a vT v Www FI 


Lens had 


mw wy wa WY Vw YP Y 


Wl we * we 


. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


the oblation of the Colzba , that is, a 
heap of boiled Wheat and Pulſe, Rai- 
fins, Nuts, Almonds, and the like. For 
the Prieſt, having a Charger full of this 
confuſed maſs, goes about the Church, 
and diſtributes more or leſs of it to the 
men, women, and children, that are 
in his wayz which they receive very 
readily and gratefully , kiſſing either 
his hand or veſt. (4) - 

By this Ceremony they pretend to 


173 


The _ 


( b ) make out their belicf of the ge- 7e4/mofir. 


neral Reſurrefion of the dead at the 
laſt day, of which they ſuppoſe this to 
be a ſymbol; deriving the occaſion of 
it from the words of our B. Savory, 
S. John 12.24. Verily, verily I ſay unto 
yon, Except a corn of wheat fall into the 
ground, and die, it abideth alone 5 but 


( 4 ) The original of boiled Wheat they derive from 
the times of the Apoſtare Emperour Fulian, who had 
cauſed the bread, fleſh, and fruit expoſed to fale in the 
marker, to be polluted with the bloud and ſteams of the 
Idoll-facrifices. The Biſhop being warned of this from 
God » Of the appearing of S. Theodore, who had been 
marty under Maximine, commanded the people, 
leſt they ſhould be polluted by this unlawfull food, to 
fatisfy their hunger this way. Thus the ſtory is related 
by Nicephorus Calliftizs 1n his Church-hiſtory, L. 10.c. 12. 
fy 5 AiGnov $0745, & &y Euyaimus tiauCa eidgnm 
AV fv. 

C b_) Vid. peculiare opuſculum Gabrielis Archiepiſcopt 
Philadelphienfts a3 / Koaufore 

if 


1974 An Account of the Greek Church. 


if it dies, it bringeth forth mmch fruit ; 
and of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 36, 37,38. 
Thou fool , that which thou ſoweſt is not 
quickned, except it die : and that which 
thou ſoweſt , thou ſoweſt not that body 
which ſhall be , but bare grain, it may 
chance of wheat , or of ſome other grain, 
But God giveth it a body, as it hath plea- 
ſed bim, and to every ſeed his own body, 
Nothing indeed does repreſent more 
clearly to the eye, or render more pro- 
bable to our belief, the great myſtery 
of the Reſurretion of the body, then 
the ſtupendous raiſing and growth of 
feeds of Corn, hid and buried in the 
furrows, into full ears. Gabriel! Phi- 
ladelphienſis finds a Myſtery in the addi- 
tion and mixture of the other things, 
without any other ground then that of 
his own trifling fancy : for they are 
onely added as ſauces, x22vx4 marr, 
to the Wheat, to make it more gratefull 
to the palate, and more eaſily digeſtible 
in the ſtomach, But 'tis certain that theſe 
things are offered in honour of particular 
Saints upontheir Feſtival-days,and (2 )in 
remembrance and behalt of the dead : 

a ) In the yy 7 nohuCaye—t } Ty e244 Ty- 
"Ag Lu % 6 onda CD 
in Euchdl, p. 658. 


and 


— 2 a £A cc oo a as oAM a as Aa. 2m. ac a. 


t £&, ma, ws 


| 


_—_— _—_— '—— _ Ts 


An Account of the Greek Church. 175 


and accordingly they carry them to the 
graves of their deceaſed Friends. 

During the ſolemn time of Lent, ſct No cmſecrart 
apart for the ſevere exerciſes of Penance, ;, p nas 
there is no conſecration of the Sacra- oy - 
ment , except on Saturdays , Sundays, '* ,-: 
and the F eaſtof the yarns, Fn For = 
which cauſe the other days are called 
"Adailseoyre. But leſt by this inter- 
miſſion there ſhould ſeem to be a neg- 
let of our B. Sav7owr's Inſtitution, which 
it concerns the Chriſtian Church to ob- 
ſerve every day, to implore God's mer- 
cy by the oblation and merit of this un- 
bloudy Sacrifice; there is this proviſion 
made for it, yet ſo as that the ſeverities 
of the Lenten Faſt ſhall be preſerved 3 
that there ſhall be onely celebrated in 
the intermediate ſpace 27 aompyzs ures 
aalezya , or Miſſa Preſandificatorum. 
Thus at this day, according to the an- 
cient cuſtom, about three a clock in the 
afternoon, when the Faſt is ended, a- 
bout the time of Veſpers, ( though 
ſometime, the old'fevere diſcipline be- 
ing ſomewhat relaxed as to this circum- 
ſtance, they doe it ſooner,) the Prieſt 
does receive and exhibit the Elements, 
which were before conſecrated : fo 
that this Solemnity is :9thing but an 

1mage 


176 An Account of the Greek Church, 


Hel Order. 


Sexton . 


Reader. 


Qutre-man. 


image and repeated celebration of the 
former Conſecration, except that there 
ate peculiar Prayers allotted for this 
ſervice, which are to be found in the 
Office, Of the Sacrament of the Eu- 
chariſt hitherto. 

Under the title of {z200:w9,or Eccleſi- 
aſtick or ſacred Order, the Greeks com- 
prehend the inferiour as well as ſuperi- 
our Miniſters, which any way ſoever 
may belong to the Church. In the whole 
they reckon up ſeven, which are, 

( 4) The Sexton, whoſe office is to 
light the Lamps, keep the Church clean, 
and doe any ſuch like mean work. 

( b ) The Reader , who reads the 
Leſlons out of the Goſpels or Epiſtles to 
the people ; though ſometimes this 1s 
performed by a Deacon art the Desk. 

Cc ) The @nire-man , whole office 
is to ſing the Prayers and Hymns, Te: 
7212 #21 x2vivz;, whence they are cal- 
led Kzyxe: , and the Pracentor Kay 
#2 yn; Or Canonarcha. TI have obſerved 
a Iittle Boy ſometimes paſting from one 
ſide of the Quire to the other, and re- 

( 4 )) Ouywegs, Mauntdin@. 
( b ) 'Avraryvoacns. Vid. Ballamonem in quartum ca- 


nonem Synod: Trullanz. . 
C c ) Yeans, vwpls, vides. 


peating 


—_ 


| 


An Account of the Greek Church. 177 


peating ſeveral verſicles , which they 
chant after their poor way. For their 
vocal Mufick is very rude and harſh, 
without any art or gracefulneſs. 

( 4 )) TheSnb-deacon, who takes care Sub-deacm, 

of the Utenſils of the Altar,and of the ſe- 
veral Veſtments uſed by the Prieſt and 
Deacon in the time of their officiating, 
He remains in the Sacrarium during the 
Service, which is cumbered and per- 
plexed with ſo many Ceremonies, that 
his being there to afliſt is almoſt ne- 
cellary. 

Of the three ſuperiour Orders, Dea- Deacm, Prieſt 
cons, Prieſts, and Biſhops, I have dif- ©* Bip. 
courſed already. I will onely obſerve, offce of 
that the office of a Prieſt, according to * W_s in 
the ( b )) Greeks, conliſts of theſe three ſits Ws 
parts 3 that is, inthe power of abfolving 
or remitting the fins of Penitents, of 
teaching and inſtructing the people , 
and of conſecrating the Blefled Sacra- 
ment. 

In conferring any of thcſe three Or- A f 
ders they take a (ſtrict care, ( c ) that wy —_ 
the perſon ordained have no lameneſs -»ferrins 

theſe three 
laſt Ora*re, 

C 4 ) Tmiaror&. 

C b ) See the Owohngin, þ. 129. 

( © )  Owchey. page 130, 


N or 


178 An Account of the Greek Church. 


Penance. 


Confeſſion. 


or other defe@ in his body, whereby he 
may be made leſs fit and capable to doe 
the duty belonging to his Order and 
Office. And this is always done by Im- 
poſition of the hand of the Biſhop, 
according to the Canonical] practice, 
and as the particular condition and 
order of the perſons ordained ſhall 
require. This 1s ſo eflential a part of 
the Rite, that with them iz2@791 and 
y=gowiz are promiſcuoutly uſed, and 
{crve to expreſsthe ſamething, 

The dodrine of Confteflion and Pe- 
nance conduces very much to preſerve 
the eſteem and dignity of the Pricſt- 
hood, notwithſtanding the great want 
of ſecular advantages among the Greeks, 
who are very ſenhlible of the great quiet 
and ſatisfaction they find within them 
from their Ghoſtly Fathers Counlſcls and 
Abſolutions. 

In order to which ( a )) they make 
oral Confeſſion neceſlary : not a nice 
and ſcrupulous Confefhion of every fin, 
with every particularity and circum- 
ſtance of itz but a general and free diſ- 
burthening of the Conſcience, as the 


( a) ned gudl& ifopoatryuos mirmoy iS d page 
THKGATWY NgI & 1350 *OUAIY + [Age 132» 


Pent- 


—_ a © my =* 


_ 
@— 


a A <4 Ss ns OY wh ..Y =, > =2y 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


Penitent, who knows his own caſe beſt, 
ſhall think fit in prudence to make, in 
order to his recovery and confirmation, 
They ( 4 ) oblige all in general to go 
to Confeſhon four times a year : but 
they think fit to diſpenſe with the «© 
2725423 or {impler ſort of people, if 
they onely confeſs in Lert. But for 
ſuch as have advanced in Piety , they 
expect from them a monthly Confettion. 
Every Prieſt is not a Confeſſour, nor 
indeed can be without the licence of the 
Biſhop, who uſually chuſes out grave 
and elderly and prudent perſons, to 
exerciſe this ſolemn part of the Prieſtly 
Function. Men of this faculty and of 
theſe qualifications being for the moſt 
part made Pariſh-Prieſts, for the greater 
eaſe and comfort of fick and dying per- 
ſons, of whoſe Souls they have the care, 
They are called Traum, or Spiri- 
tual men or Fathers, and are readily 
obeyed and complied with in the Pe- 
nances, which they infli& according to 
the praCtice and Canon of the Church 3 
which is therefore called in the vulgar 
Greek u2viva;* as alſo 7 bam, be» 
cauſe it is exacted in the way of puniſh- 


C 4 ) Vid.*Oucary. page 109, 
N 2 ment 


172 


180 


Abſoluton. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


ment and ſatisfaction. But here I could 
wiſh I had not reaſon to complain of 
the avarice and jugglings of the Prieſts, 
who commute theſe Penances with Pe- 
cuniary mul&sz which yet perchance 
are as grievous to the poor people, as 
the ſevereſt auſterities of Faſting. 

After the Penance inflicted is perfor- 
med, or ſome way or other ſatisfied, the 
Prieſt abſolves the Penitent after this 
manner; (a) The Grace of the All-holy 
Spirit by my Meanneſ5, that is, by the 
mediation of my Miniſtery , pardons 
and abſolves you. This form of Abſolu- 
tion is not conſtantly obſerved, but is 
varied oftentimes, it being left in a 
manner wholly to the diſcretion of the 
Penitentiary. Chriſtophorus Angels, a 
Greek of the Morea , in the ac- 
count he publiſhed of the State of this 
Church in the year 16 — mentions this 
form. (b) According to the power which 


( 4) 'H eu 74 mais Tiywua)]G@ Ne 7 ewns me 
Acovoril Toes 0% avy Ke wemfuov ); AENULALON 

C b_) Cap. 22. Kant TW afuoiar iy Edtorev 6 Xerns 
Tis 'Amgnos awry, 6 mv, "Oon dy More em T YI 
#5 Achuulua x of Md Wearts, x; x7" Thu $5e01an WW Gdte- 
ay of 'Amozhor Tolg EmtTxomals, o x&9' nv 6Cu914y 
Zxafcy Int T4 "Emtoxeme jus , Toy ouvy x4 080% Of 
So oh Ilargds, £ ff Tis, & T4 Agis Thretyal®. 
"Aly. *. were 79) d\ngloy y wes dv 


Chriſt 


d | 


, ; 
| g 


An Account of the Greek Church. 181 


Chriſt'gave to his Apoſtles, ſaying, Whoſe 
ſins you looſe upon earth, they ſhall be loo- 
ſed in heaven, and according to the power 
which the Apoſtles gave to the Biſhops, and 
according to the power which I have re- 
ceived from my Biſhop, thou ſhalt be par- 
doned by the Father , Son, and Holy 
_ Amen. and thy portion ſhall be 
with. the juſs. But in the Prayers of 
Pardon , which the Prieſt recites over 
Penitents, and ſuch as have conteſt, it 
runs thusz ( 4) Thou, O Lord, remit, 
pardon and forgive the Sins committed by 
thy Servants: (b)) againz Be pleaſed 
to abſolve thy Servants according to.thy 
word : (c ) again; Do thou pardon , as 
being our good and graciows God: (4d )a- 
gainz Our Lord and Saviour Jeſus Chriſt 
pardon all theſe Sins which thou haſt con- 
feſt before him to my Meanneſs, and thoſe 
which thou haſt forgotten : (e) again; 

( a ) Aurts, Aimmt, dvts, apts, cry d;nmy 
Tas april 

C b ) Tis S2aut os Abryr Audhyeu cudiuyny. 

C c ) 'Ns 43a & pd Ipo nt Otts, ovyX&+ 

LATO 
; (d ) Aung 65 Swnp nw x; Kver© "T1955 X2458s 
0X pions ov mdyTe, 3m yur, EvuTioy WuTs Ky Gal 
tag gbmum 0uAoyiiou, of ws dmAd3 5 

Aumvs, Siam, guy ywpney x, 7 d'ixbv 0s 5 
em Tis idiow ons Tmeats mnuuthiuan, d) tus Ty 
avatis x; currhrs, 1» Nandyunln, Y wary Wny TH 


(4 HAANTIE. 
N 3 Thou, 


182 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


Thon, O Lord, pardon this thy Servant 
all thoſe Sins which be hath committed, 
by me thy poor unworthy Servant, 'and- be 
reconciled to him, and unite him to t 

Holy Church : (a )) again; God pardon 
thee by me, who am a Sinner, that is, by 
my Miniſtery : and ſometimes very 
briefly in thevulgar language, «5 con; 
oVyyncum., Be thou pardoned, or ab- 
ſolved. Our of this great variety, it is 
moſt clear and evident, that the ſentence 
of Abſolution is not pronounced by the 
Prieſt, who is the onely Miniſter of this 
ſacred Rite, in his own proper perſon, 
much lets judicially 3 but onely in the 
way of ſupplication or deprecation. $0 
that we may here juſtly conclude this 
form, ( b ) My Meanneſs abſolves thee, 
or the other, which 1s more plain and 
expreſs, (c_) I abſolve thee from all the 
Sins which thou haſt confeſt before God 
and before my Unworthineſs, or (d) the 
third, I pardon all thy Sins, to be up- 
ſtart and novell, and borrowed from 


(4) Avns 6 Ocig ovy youpiicy ov Si £15 58 dpuay- 
TWAYs 

C 5) "H manevorns jv Togr 0% ov y ut wpnutvore 

Cc ) 'Amitio os Sr) aaony dugnay Oy 5H (5 gs 
(40) 0 ow aT109 Th O88 X; THs 4a evat im. 

(4) "Exdavy yopw ov maozs Tas dpedp71%; ON» 


the 


Fo ge ra mY” * »« Þ@ MH 2 


| 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


the Latines, whom they love to imitate 
in moſt things. - | 


133 


This authority of the Church in in- 7c end efe8 


flicting and rcJaxing Cenſures is gene- 
rally eſteemed ſacred, venerable and di- 
vine, and conſequently of great efficacy, 
and does very much conduce, as I have 
intimated before, to the preſervation of 
the Chriſtian Religion among them. For 
fear of theſe Cenſures, they are not 
onely affrighted from the commiſſion of 
thoſe Sins which would bring a ſcandal 
upon their holy Profethion, (this argu- 
ment prevailing more with {laviſh and 
degenerous minds, then conſiderations 
of modeſty, or the lovelineſs and agree- 
ableneſs of Vertue to humane nature,) 
but from running to the Turkiſh Judges 
for juſtice. For they look upon the 
perſon to be in a moſt deſperate condi- 
tion , and as undone for ever in the 
other world, who dies unabſolved from 
the ſentence of Excommunication, that 
was canonically paſt upon him. Such 
great power has the dreadand reverence 
of Eccleſiaſticall Authority over this 
querulous and contentious people. 

It any perſon happen to die before 
the Excommunication be taken off, the 
general belief is, that his body fcels the 

N 4 ſad 


of Church» 
cenſures a= 
mong them. 


194, An Account of the Greek Church. 


ſad effes of it in the grave, and quick- 
ly becomes black, the bloud no way 
clotted or dried up notwithſtanding its 
ſtagnation, and all the parts remaining 
entire in their natural poſture without 
the lealt alteration 3 and this for ten or 
twelve months after, or longer; except 
that the skin hardens, and ſwells like a 
drum; ( whence the perſon 1s called 
Tyurmwzi,) and that this is cauſed 
by the Devil's entring into it. Stories 
paſs current among them of the walking 
of their ( 4) Ghoſts, eſpecially in the 
night-time , not onely 1n the Church- 
yards, but in the Streets, and knocking 
at the doors of the houſes, and calling 
them by their names. The Greeks are 
ſo timorous and ſuperſtitious herein , 
that they will not anſwer any one 1n 
the dark at the firſt call, though they 
know his voice never ſo well, for fear it 
ſhould be this Spirit ; for then they 
look upon themſelves as dead men, and 
fall into an irrecoverable melancholy. 
This opinion is ſorooted in their minds, 
that there is no perſwading them to the 
contrary : They will tell you of matter 

C a ) which they call Cupz2zua;, or Crntonatum » 


a fetore, qualis & lim) putreſcente in foſſa oriri ſolet, ſic 
dittas. 


of 


OR a Re Rr + * Y = FT © 


ef»... A. 


vi'l 


An Account of the Greek Church. 185 


of fat , how ſeveral graves have been 
opened, and the bodies found undiſlol- 
ved : though I could not hear of the 
ſucceſs of the experiment, notwithſtan- 
ding my diligent enquiry. But found 
the Prieſts equally credulous, not fo 
much out of defign to keep the poor 
people in awe of the Church-cenſures, 
as out of weakneſs, being led away with 
the ſame popular errour. The Biſhops 
(4) accordingly in their Briefs, when 
they forbid any thing to be done, 
threaten the tranſgreſſours , that they 
ſhall be ſeparated from God and curſed, 
and deprived of the ufe and benefit of 
the Sacrament, and after death their bo- 
dies ſhall ſwell and be undifſolved. 
And this latter is inſerted in the ſentence 
of Excommunication , to adde to the 
horrour and terrour of it. At (6) the 


C 4 ) Thus Metrophanes, Patriarch of Conſtantinople, 
menaces the Chriſtians of Candia, unleſs they ceafed 
from moleſting the Jews of that Iſland, that they ſhould 
de 42we:0uW0 S&n3 O88 TanKenp@, v namenuls ol 
*; &0vy Ny purely wird Sdlyeriy EAvTot. In Turco- 
Grecta pag. 281. : | 

C b ) See an inſtance of this at large in the Hiſtory 
of the Patriarchs of Conſtantinople, fince the taking of thar 
City by III in vulgar Gree by Manuel Ma- 
laxus, in the Life of Maximus, im Turco-Grac. p. 135,07. 
alſo the Hiſtoria Politica of Conſ/tantimple, 1n the ſame 
Volume, p. 27, 28. Vide etiam Chriſtophor. Angelum 
in Enchiridio, 

ſame 


186 An Account of the Greek Church. 


ſame time they will tell you, that as ſoon 
as the Dead perſon has been abſolved, 
at Conſtantinople by the Patriarch, or 
by the Biſhopof the Province, the bo- 
dy, though buried in ſome of the Iflands 
in the Arches, or at what great diſtance 
ſoever , immediately corrupts and dif- 
ſolves, and crumbles into aſhes. (4) This 
( b ) indulgence 1s procured and granted 
to the Dead, and read over his grave, 
with ſeveral Prayers to the fame pur- 
pole. 

They have the ſame fearfull appre- 
henfions of an evil Spirit , called 
( ©) KzWuxgrrCac., Which they pre- 
tend to be let looſe the twelve days of 
the Chriſtmas-Solemnity , and poſſeſs 
Children born within that ſpace: du- 
ring which time alſo the little Boys and 
Girls dare not go abroad in the night- 
time, for fear of meeting this Hobgoblin, 
but haſten home before Sun-ſet. The 
Turks ſeem to be infected with the like 


C a ) Vid. was ouvyyupunrss z in Euchilogio , 
pag. 684, 75c. 

C b ) T3 dau. 

C c |) Our Interpreters at Conſtantinople fanſied this 
woru to be corrupted from the Turkiſh Kara Congra , 
which fignifie a black old man, in which ſhape they 
pretend this Demon often to appear, 


Super- 


2 ow @£@ 8 FA 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


Superſtition 3 for they will ſcare ven- 
ture to Sea till after the waters are bleſt 
by the Chriſtians, that 1s, till after the 
Tweltth day, the Feſtival of the Bap- 
tiſm of our Savior, when that Cere- 
mony is performed ; grofly imagining, 
that in their voyage they ſhall be met 
and ſunk by a brazen Ship. They uſu- 
ally alſo fright their Children with ſto- 
ries of Apparitions and Spectres, which 
they call wawen , which word 
properly - denotes any thing dreſt up 
+ an odd ridiculous ſhape and ha- 
It. 

All (a) clandeſtine Eſpouſals are ſe- 
verely torbidden, and therefore they are 
never lawfully done but before wit- 
neſlesz and ſometime, to ratify and 
confirm them the more, before a Prieſt. 
At ſuch time they go to Church , and 
ſtanding before the middle door of the 
Chancell, the Prieſt, having made the 
ſign of the Croſs upon their heads, de- 
livers lighted Tapers into their hands , 
and deſcends with them into the body 
of the Church : where, after ſome 
Collects , he produces two Rings, the 
one of gold, the other of filver, which 


( 4 ) i xpugia Mpyoeia, 
before 


1397 


Eſpouſals. 


188 An Account of the Greek Church. 


Marriage. 


before had as it were been conſecrated, 
by being put upon the Altar, and gives 
the former to the Man, and the latter 
to the Woman , repeating theſe words 
thrice, ( 4 )) The Servant of God , ſuch 
a one, eſpouſes the Servant of God , ſuch 
4 one, in the name of the Father, and of 
the Son, and of the Holy Ghoſt , now 
and for ever. Amen. Which form, mu- 
tatis mutandis , he, turning toward the 
Woman, uſes as often. Immediately 
after the Paranymph or Bride-man takes 
the Rings from off their fingers, and 
makes an exchange 3 the Prieſt then 
joyning their hands. And this is done, 
as well that the Woman might not too 
much reſent the inferiority of her condi- 
tion, repreſented by the Ring of the 
leſs noble metall; as to ſignify, thatſhe 
1s to be admitted into an equal right 
and ſhare of her Husband's goods and 
poſſeſſions, which , upon a conſum- 
mation of this Matrimonial contract, are 
to become common to both. 


Their Marriagesare always performed 


C a ) 'Aifeboviteru © S5AQr vs O87 6 diive Thy 
$6.yv T4 ©8s Tiwd\ » #45 Th Your Ts Ilaress þ 
X;z OCs 


publickly z 


OOF aww  _ 


Wh. aA 2, MW: 2 SS SDÞG. 72 Q nw 


UMI 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


publicklyz ( 4) this being an expreſs 
Law of their Church, Let none preſume 
to marry but before Witneſſes, If the 
Prieſt ſhould tranſgreſs herein, he is lia- 
ble to Eccleſiaſticall Cenſures provided 
in ſuch like caſes. Be the perſons of what 
quality or condition ſoever, Crowns 
or Garlands made for the moſt part of 
Olive-branches, ſtitcht over with white 
filk, and interwoven with purple, are 
a neceſſary and eſſential part of the 
Nuptial Solemnity , ( hence 5:p2r2wwe 
is oftentimes uſed for Marriage , and 
ceparida and 1a uid lignity the fame 
thing,) they feng the Symbols, not 
to ſay the complement, of this myſticall 
Rite. The Prieſt, covering the head 
of the Bridegroom with* one of theſe 
Garlands, fays, (b ) The Servant of 
God, ſuch a one, is crowned for, that is, 
marries, the Servant of God, ſuch a one, 
in the name of the Father, and of the 


C a) Vid. Harmenopulum , apud Gabriclem Phila- 
delph. pag. 55.4 Mndtis puurnas rigari ow, 4nd Tap - 
orruy TAnhvay. 6 38 Tar: Kamambuius Ep jaAfti ws 
eeerideodw mwril Of. Ivrovim X, Th iephas. ws mis 
« TpETEMY £OuTEY hal dN).00 GY hs aZi ah our ata TERT* 
Tus, xÞ TU T9) EXMAnnasnK a0 vayeruy Sid mis. 

# b ) STi) J#a& ms ©:s 6 Jdrivs mh Saab mh 
Os 19ſt, 6s 76 Gycpue 74 TItTHSS, x 74 Tit, 75 Agile 
IlywualG+, 


Sor , 


199 


190 


Second and 
third Marrt- 
azes how e- 
ﬀ cemed. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


Son , and of the Holy Ghoſt. Then he 
crowns the head of the Bride with the 
other Garland, repeating the ſame words 
with their due alterations; and then 
putting their hands acroſs, - he bleſles 
them in this form thrice, (4) O Lord 
God, crown them with glory and honour. 
After the Epiſtle and Goſpell and ſeveral 
Prayers are read, the new-married cou- 
ple drink out of the fame Cup which 
the Prieſt had bleſt, in fign and token 
of Love, Agreement, and Joy, and as 
a pledge of their mutual Converſation, 
and of their right to one another's 
eſtates and fortunes, After two or three 
ſhort Hymns, the Prieſt takes the Gar- 
lands from off their heads, and they, 
ſaluting each other, are diſmiſt with his 
Blefling. | 
They are not over-favourable to ſe- 
cond Marriages, following the rigour of 
the ancient times. But as for Teyawiz, 
or third Marriages, they look upon 
them as torbidden by the Canons of the 
Church , and arraign ſuch perſons as 
onilty of Incontinence 3 and ſeverely 
condemn the fourth as altogether un- 


(C4) kei 5 Oth5 nwfs , dign 1 mul repay? 
abTs;. 


lawfull 


| An Account of the Greek Church. 191 


lawfull and finfull : making no allow- 
| ancesfor temper, or accidental deaths. 
This variety or change of Wives they 
moſt invidiouſly call by the name of 
TArajuiz, or Polygamy, contrary to 
the primary fignification of the word : 
againſt which they ſo fiercely declaim, 
as a thing hatefull to God, ( to whoſe 
providence in taking away their firſt or 
ſecond Wife by death, they ſay, every 
one ſhould ſubmit, and curb his natural 
defires and inclinations,) and as unwor- 
thy of men governed by reaſon. In 
this ſenſe I find the word uſed by Pho- 
tizs, (4) who oppoles it to puma, 
as that to 23x /juiz, and paſles this ſevere 
Cenſure upon the thing, that it is very 
baſe and deteſtable , and onely proper 
to impure and luſtfull irrational crea- 
Inres. 

To make the Marriage-vow the more ,,,;,,,cp.. 
binding and ſolemn, the Bridegroom vents and 
and Bride receive the Holy Sacrament, * mg of 
He muſt be always above fourteen years ©” 
of age , and ſhe above thirteen : and 
the conſent of their Parents, Guar- 


C 4 )) Fpiſt. 1. ad Michaclem Principem Bulgar. p. 39. 
Tloavyauia 5 Vaigaugoy of watzy » 7 IH dniyur 
&KoAgITG XN, EkAY? dp7ig. 


dians 


va 


192 


Spiritual Af- 


finity an hin- 
drance of 
Marriages 


Druorces fre- 


quent among 
them. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


dians or Tutors, is eſteemed ſo neceſſary, 
that withour it it is accounted unlaw- 
full , and no other then Fornication. 
Among other impediments of Marriage 
they reckon ( 4 )) ſpiritual Affinity , 
that 1s, ſuch as ariſes at the Font: as for 
inſtance, he whois a Godfather to any 
one, and his Son, cannot lawfully mar- 
ry either the Mother or the Daughter, 
Such two as have had the ſame Godfa- 
ther, areincapable of marrying each the 
other 3 andif they do, they are accoun- 
ted inceſtuous. 

The praGtice of the Greeks does hor- 
ribly contradi& their eſtabliſht doGrine 
of the Indiſfolubility of the bond of 
Matrimony; for Divorces are ealily and 
frequently obtained and granted upon 
ſeveral light and frivolous accounts, be- 
ſides that of Adultery ; as it it were left 
wholly to the idle and extravagant fan- 
cy of every luſtfull and diſcontented 
perſon, who is weary of his Wife , to 
retain her, or divorce himſclt from her, 
as he pleaſes. This evil ſeems paſt all 
remedy 3 there being no other way left 


( d ) Ilvemuentt ovyWireet. Vid. Bemninoy L. 28. 
tit. 5. cap. 17. Oy Determinationem Joaſaph1 Metropolite 
Corinthii apud Cru. in Turco-Grac. lth. 4. page 324+ Vide 
etiam þ. 330» (7 339 


at 


mn £9, a Az 


nn © 


Pm, Sram” rae oe” Wi IF wy VT 


LInMI 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


at preſent to ſatisfy a people , who are 
ſo prone to revenge where they have 
conceived a grudge, or to make new 
love after a diſlike of 'the former match, 
then by this moſt unjuſt and horribly- 
abuſed indulgence. 

It is the proper work of the Prieſt 
who has a power to make and conſecrate 
the Holy Oyl, to anoint dying perſons 
withitz ( 4 )) all other perſons what- 
ſoever being excluded. Which prac- 
tice they found upon the example of the 
Apoſtles , who were ſent out by Chriſf, 
and ('b ) anointed with ogl many that were 
ſick, and healed them; and upon the 
Advice or Order of S. James, chap. 5. 
V. 14. 1s any ſick among you £ let hint cal 
for the Elders ( or Presbyters ) of the 
Church , and let them pray over him , 
anointing him with ol in the name of the 
Lord. And from this Text they pre- 
tend toconclude moſt ſtrongly, that ſe- 
veral are neceſlary in order to the right 
performing of this laſt office. The Of- 
fice requires , that they be no lets then 
ſeven, and affigns to every one of them 


(4) Tiveru T9 MUSWCL:Y Tyr Ne? aps us me x5 
Md te uvonels, t 34 Sm ny2 4&ny. Oren Þ. 137 
C 6 ) S. Mark 6; 13, 


Oo their 


? Prayer 


194 An Account of the Greek Church. 


their particular employment at that 
time. But this number is not rigidly 
exated, and three oftentimes ſerve, 
They onely anoint the forehead, ears, 
and hands of fick- perſons. Severall 
Prayers are uſcd at the time of UnCtion, 
and this particularly among the reſt, 
(4_ O Holy Father, Phyſician of Soul 
and body, who haſt ſent thy onely-begotten 
Sor, our Lord Jeſus Chriſt, zo cure af 
diſeaſes, and to redeem from death, heal 
thy Servant of his infirmity both of body 
and Soul, and quicken him by thegraceof 
tby Chriſt, for the interceſſzon of our La- 
dy the Mother of God , the ever-Virgin 
Mary, &c. and here they recite the 
names of ſeveral Saints— for Thou, O 
Chriſt, our God, art the Fountain of all 
healing; and we give the glory of it to 
Thee, and tothe Father, and to the Holy 
Spirit, now and for ever. After (b)) this 


C 4 )) Tidmp ax, jane Juyor x ovndray, © 
meas 7 woroy tn oy + Kveror Inosy Xetgoy, mony vo- 
»* 4 \ » #, , o \ " iT | 
oy Luoy 2) H Favans Avrpruor, iam, 7 indy 0s 
Tod 0, © men y £0ws aurey awputrmting ty UN uns od St 

7 \ Ul 2 % , - ” 
pic, X, Coominoy awry Sid 7 Xael@ Oy Xe5v ou, 
Tg: Bricus 7 \efialicy amivns 1s OwaTiNE ty dt17 0p 
Sir: Mar 'a;, 0c. mn 004% y myn _— Xeu5t, 0 

< \ \ jg - » - 
Os-s nw), x) ovi TW fav dvemiumuls, a [larel, 4 
TW ©) 19 3%, Te Ai TIviCpanny VEV X, an x, tis 7605 0id- 
ya; Ty aidywvs 

C © ) Vid. "Opchoys page 110» 


they 


Ily | 
ve, | 


UMI 


An Account of the Greek Church. 198 


they give the fick perſon the Holy Sa- 
crament , as the laſt Viaticum. The 
Houſes of the ſick perſons are alſoanoin- 
ted with the ſame Oy], the figure of a 
Croſs being made with it upon the walls 
and poſts : at which Ceremony the 
Prieſt ſings the 91. Pſalm, He that dwel- 
leth in the ſecret place of the Moſt high , 
ſhall abide under the ſhadow of the Al- 
mighty, &c. 

This Oyl is not onely uſed upon per- 7hic 0! fome- 
ſons lying i» extremis: tor the people, wm ” 
believing that there is great virtue 1n It perfect health, 
to heal the Diſtempers of the Body, in 7 5 Heb 
caſe of any Sicknels or Indiſpoition, ****" " 
that does not bring in danger of Death, 
uſe it almoſt in the nature of a remedy 
or medicine; and think themſelves alſo 
by it better enabled torefiſt the Atlaults 
and Temptations of the great Enemy of 
their Souls, the Devil. Burt of the Se- 
ven Myſterics of the Greek Church hi- 
therto. 

In the midſtofthe ſad Preſſures which 77 Greeks 
daily afflict the poor Greeks, and the GO 
continual Scoffs and Blaſphemies of the r:!-s of 
Tarks, ( who, being ſtupid and dull, Fane. 
are guided wholly in their judgments of 
things by a groſs tancy, and reject with 
a brutiſh kind of pride and ſcorn what- 

O 2 ever 


196 


Conſtantino- 
policanCreed, 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


ever is raiſed, though never ſo little, a- 
bove the reach of Senſe,) it is no {light 
argument of the truth of the great Ar- 
ticles of the Chriſtian Religion, againſt 
the ſubtle contrivances of aparty ofmen 
in Chriſtendome , ( who , under a pre- 
tence of ſober reaſon, undermine the 
foundations of it, ) that the Chriſt;ans 
of the Eaſt do ſtill retain, with all ima- 
ginable conſtancy, and firmneſs ofaſlent, 
the entire profeſiion of the Myſteries of 
Faith, as they were believed and ac- 
knowledged in the firſt Ages. 

They retain exatly the Catholick 
Do&rine concerning the moſt Holy and 
undivided Trinity, and the Incarnation 
of the eternal Son of God, according to 
the Conſtantinopolitan Creed , which 
they onely retain in their Liturgies and 
Catechiſms, this being but an Expoſiti- 
on of the Apoſtles Creed more at large; 
which is the true reaſon, why the Apo- 
ſtolicall form came anciently to be omit- 
ted among them, As to that of S. Atha- 
aſs , they are wholly ſtrangers to it. 
They are content with the profeſſion of 
Faith as it is laid down there, without 
troubling themſelves with curious and 
nice diſtintions, which oftentimes, 1n 
ſtead of explaining , confound = ob- 
cure 


SE) aa - i a— — <A i => = 


An Account of the Greek Church. 197 


ſcure the Myſtery. Yet with a beco- 
ming zeal they condemnthe madnels and 
impiety of Arizs, Neſtorizs, Paulus Sa- 
moſatenws , and the other Hzrefiarchs : 
whoſe Opinions it any one be knownto 
favour in the leaſt, they preſently ex- 
communicate him; and do not reſtore 
him to the Communion of the Church, 
till he has renounced his Hereſy with 
tears, and given other ample fatisfac- 
tion. 

Indeed, as to the manner of the ſub- 7hey believe 
fiſtence of the Holy Spirit, the Greeks '%* _ 
vary from the Latines , and from the hn _ 
Churches of the Reformation 3 and by onely from the 
what we may;judge, from thereluQtan- *©*"* 
ey and unwillingneſs of the Biſhops , 
after all attempts of Reconciliation, the 
difference herein is like to be perpetual, 

They obje&, with a great deal of bit- 
ter paſtion, that the Biſhops of the R9y- 
man Church have not dealt honeſtly in 
this matter ; for that, without conſul- 
ting them , and without regard to the 
Canon of the Council of Bokeſaw, which 
forbad ſuch Additionsunder the penalty 
of an Aratherza, they have inſerted the 
words F:lioque into the Conſtantinopoli- 
tar Creed. For the juſtification and 
proof of this Charge , they appeal to 

O 3 the 


UMI 


198 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


the Writings of the ancient Fathers, to 
Ads of Councils, to Ecclefiaſticall Hi- 
ſtory, to the faith of the beſt and moſt 
authentick Manuſcript Copies, nay to 
Rome it ſelf, ( a) where that Creed 
was engraven ontwo filver Tables hun 

up in S. Peter's Church by the commas 
of Pope Leo the Third, where this Ad- 
dition is wanting. This was hotly dif- 
puted by the Greeks in the Council held 


at Florence ; and no one argument or 


. point of controverſy have they main- 


tained, or do (tl maintain, with grea- 
ter variety of learning or ſubtilty.” At 
preſefit I ſhall content my ſelf with one 
or two irrefragable teſtimonies. Cyril 
lis Lucaris, who afterwards fell a facri- 
fice to the malice and revenge of the 
Jeſuits, in the Epiſtle he wrote to Ly- 
tenbogaert, out of Walachia,when he was 
Patriarch of Alexandria, ſaith, [pſa (1c. 
Eccleſia Greca) Spiritum San@Fum 4 Fi- 
lio efſentialiter & interne & quoad eſſe 
procedere negat 5 The Greek Church de- 
mies that the Holy Spirit proceeds from 
the Son eſſentially and internally and as 


( 4 |) Vide Epiſtolam Phatii ad Archiepiſcopum Aqui» 
leie. Refpinſ. 2. Patriarche Jeremiz, p. 222. Et 'Oe- 
Aoian 7 'Avamiris Exrang ian 


to 


FH 


" "3 wg: 4 wewijy ke © > 7 © 


An Account of the Greek Church. 199 


to his ſubſiſtence. And ſo afterward , 
when he was advanced to the Patriar- 
chall throne of Conſtantinople ,- in his 
Confeſſion of Faith , which brought 
upon him all that envy and miſchief 
which afterwards befell him, chap. r. 

4 ) The Holy Spirit proceedeth from the 

ather by the Son. Which form of 
words he very wiſely and warily thought 
fit to uſe, in compliance with the anci- 
ent Writers of his Church ; as it was 
proved ih the Council of Florence by 
[#dorws Biſhop of Ruſſza, and Beſſarion 
of Nice, and Marcus Eugenicus of Ephe- 
4s, from the authoritiesof S. Maximas, 
and S. John Damaſcen, and ſeveral 0- 
thers. This being ſo expreſly aflerted 
by Cyrif/zs, T cannot ſufficiently wonder 
at the raſhneſs and difingenuity of the 
Aſſeſſors of the ſecond Synod held againſt 
this good man at Conſtantinople under 
Parthenius, who moſt unjuſtly cenſure 
and condemn him for maintaining , 
againſt the Sentiments of the Catholick 
Church, the eternal and ſubſtantial pro- 
ceſſion of the Holy Spirit, as well from 
the Son as the Father. Laſtly, they de- 


C 4 )) NVtue "Ax % 74 Taless ds Tis mertp- 
Yputy ors 


O 4 clare 


200 An Account of the Greek Church. 


clare in their Confeſſion, ( 2 ). that the 
Holy Spirit proceedeth eternally from the 
Father, as the fountain and principle of 
the Deity 3, according to what our Sa- 
viour teaches #8, ſaying, When the Come 
forter is come, whom 1 will ſend unto you 
from the. Father, even the Spirit of truth, 
which proceedeth from the Father , He 
ſhall teſtify of me, $. John 15. 26. 

The chief Ar- The great argument made uſe of by 

Lge rhgrog Photizs and other Writers, both ancient 

Greeks, and modern, is briefly ſumm'd, up by 
Cyrillzs , The Greek Church does there- 
fore deny the proceſſion of the Spirit from 
the Son , quod veretur , ne dicendo 2 
Filio ut a Patre, duo aflerat in Divinis 
principia exiſtentizSpiritis Sani, quod 
eſlet impiiſſimum, fearing leſt they ſhould 
aſſert and introduce two diſtin@ Princi- 
ples of the exiſtence of the Spirit of God in 
the Deity, which they look upon as an 
borrid impiety, 

They believe But to prevent all unjuſt ſuſpicions, 

the 1 914: as if they entertain'd any evil or hete- 

= x rey rodox Opinions about the Third Perſon 


»'//; the Fa- of the glorious Trinity , they declare 
th- and the 5 J » y 
<5 : 
, C a ) Te True mn" Ayer campiviulley ts ways Th 
Iz7ess, ws mwyns 2 agus 7 ©4457) &, Jia wn bnelev 
Zwnp ug diddoxe aiyur, Oar, (Fc. pag 90» 


fully 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


fully againſt the Hereſy of Macedoniue 
and the reſt of the Ibwauamuay, and 
molt readily acknowledge the Holy 
$pirit-to be of the ſame ſubſtance with 
the Father and the Son, to be God from 
eternity proceeding from the eflence 
and nature of the Father, without be- 
ginning , and to be equally adored. 
Likewiſe they acknowledge, that He is 
the Spirit of the Son, and ( 4) that 
He is ſent, poured out, and given by 
the Soh. But this they refer to the 
temporary miſſion of the Holy Ghoſt 
upon the Apoſtles and upon all the 
Faithfull, So that they neither con- 
found the Perſons of the Holy Trinity, 
nor take away the Perſonal Relations 
and Proprieties of the Son and Spi- 
rit 3 foraſmuch as the manner of Gene- 
ration, whereby the Son ſubliſts, is di- 
ſtin& from the manner of the Proceſſion 
of the Holy Spirit. 

From theſe premiſles it will fully ap- 
pear, that the Greeks are moſt unjuſtly 
accuſed by ſome of the Roman Church 
in the height of their intemperate zeal, 
as deſcrters of the Catholick Faith, and 


C 4 ) rium ifoX, ag xi% uxir% ins 


$uH Teh au 


201T 


and to be the 
Spirit of the 


Son. 


Apology for 
the Greeks. 


202 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


as guilty of Hereſy in a neceſlary Arti- 
cle of Faith; for that the difference 


herein is rather verbal then real, and 


Thety opinion 
about the ſtate 
of the Dead. 


lies not ſo much in the ſubſtance of the 
Article, as in the way and manner of 
expreſling themſelves. To juſtify this 
their imputation , they with an equal 
raſhneſs are not afraid to aſlert, and that 
2s boldly as if they had been admitted 
into the Secrets of God, that the Holy 
Spirit has ſufficiently ſhewed his -anger 
from Heaven againſt this ſuppoſed grie- 
vous and fundamentall Errour, becauſe 
Conſtantinople , the chief Seat of the 
Grecian Empire and Religion, was ta- 
kenby the Trrks on a Whit ſun-Tueſday, 
in the year 1453. But tis 11] arguing 
from ſuch an accidental circumſtance ; 
and they may- as juſtly conclude, that 
the people of Rhodes, and particularly 
the K nights of Feruſalem, were guilty 
of ſome grievous Errour concerning 
our Bleſſed Saviour , becauſe the chief 
City of that If{land, which they had fo 
bravely defended, was at laſt loſt upon 
a Chriſtmas-day. 

As to the ſtate of the vit2 fundi, they 
know not well what to determine : 
for teking for granted, that the Souls 
of the Righteous are not in Heaven , 

' where 


LIMI 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


where they ſhall be after the Reſurrec- 
tion of the body, they know not where 
to fix them. But whereever that placeis, 
which ſometimes they call Paradiſe , 
from the words of our Saviour to the 
Thief upon the Croſs, S. Luke 23. 43. 
ſometimes Abraham's boſome , from 
S. Luke 16. 22, ſometimes the hand 
of God , from that of Eccleſtaſticus , 
The Souls of the Juſt are in the hand of 
God ; it is certainly diſtin, accordin 
to them, from the preſence of God. 
For thus they pray 1n their Liturgy 3 
( 4 ) Remember, O Lord, all that ſleep 
in hope of the ReſurreFion and everlaſting 
Life, and grant that they may reſt, where 
the light of thy Countenance ſhines forth : 
and ſo ( b ) in the Office of Burial ; 
0 God of Spirits and of all fleſh, who, 
baving trampled upon Death , and van 
quiſht the Devil, haſt given fe to the 
world ; Thou, O Lord, make the Soul of 
thy deceaſed Servant to reſt in the glorious, 
in the pleaſant place, in the place of re- 


C 4) Mien, Koen , miyTwy oY xeolunuluov int 
$aTid: avactorus x; Cong alovis, f dys ravemy aw7's, 
&we 6m10%on8 T8 go; Ty 7e00w TW The 

( b ) *O Outs i mud x; mays 224, 6 & Inte 
vero xdmtranons, + 5 SidCohoy xemapyner, Y (wls 

ubguo os Sopnon du, as ris, Kew, ayiT2vory mw 
Jvxlub T8 xetonunuln Suns, Wc. 


freſb« 


203 


204 An Account of the Greek Church. 


freſhment , whence grief , trouble and 
fighing are baniſht. And yet at other 
times , as it were compelled by the 
force and evidence of truth , they re- 
trat, at leaſt colour over, this Opinion 
with this acknowledgment, (4) in 
their late Confeſſion : By which of theſe 
three names above mentioned any hall call 
the Receptacle of righteous Souls, he will 
20t erre ;, provided that he believes and 
underſtands thus much, that they enjoy 
the favour of God, and are in bis heavenly 
Kingdom , and , as the Church-Hymns 
mention, in Heaven. But as for the 
Souls of the Wicked and Unrighteous, 
they hold , that they deſcend immedi- 
ately into Hades or Hell, the place of 
Condemnation, and of God's Wrath. 
They do not They reje&,. in words at leaſt , the 
believe a Pur- Romiſh Dorine of Purgatory by fire, as 
£a07. 9.1% having no foundation in Scripture, and 
otherwiſe he- teach their people accordingly in their 
terodhx 3 as Catecheticall Confeſlion, and thus ar- 
pears from ue ab abſurdo againſt it 3 ( b ) If the 
andSuffrages, 
and from 


C 4 ) *OmiG broudrn + Troy Tema Lye ooun Sno 
Gon inal, Sov apdrc wivev va tyeud mas 1) ai 
"Luyat tis TWw Lux Ts Os, x} 6s TW vogron Cam- 
Avar, x, xa Ws of TKKANTIESIROA y uact \lvemy y tis F 
veevd:., "On. pag. 8. | pf 

( b ) "Own. p. 86, — 121Aatv duo ve Nx99 
14; © Sno 76 pavo ers F aerayolay— 


Soul 


FRE Fu A R LL wr ww —= "FE >"  # TFT *© 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


Soul ſatisfies for Sins committed in this 
life in ſuch a place , then, by parity of 
reaſon, part of the Myſtery or Sacrament 
of Penance might be performed there , 
which is , ſay they , *Z» 277 5e%90%o 
WtroxzAlzy , contrary to orthodox doc- 
trine. But notwithſtanding thisdeclarati- 
on, they fanſy the Souls of the departed 
detained and ſhut up in moſt ſecret and 
unknown receſſes under ground, and 
there to be perplexed and to ſuffer 
anizeg or grievous things, and to find 
eaſe and refreſhment from the (2) Pray- 
ers and Suffrages and Oblations and 
Sacrifices of the living. Upon this ac- 
count it is, that in the celebration of 
the Sacrament the Prieſt, ſtanding at 
the Protheſes, offers ſeveral Particles of 
Bread 3 ( b) onein honour of the Vir- 
gn Mary, which they placeon the right 
ide of the Bread that is to be conſecra- 
ted ; the reſt in honour of $S. Joh» the 
Baptiſt, the Holy and glorious Apoſtles, 
S. Baſil, S. Gregory the Divine, S. Joh 
Chryſoſtome , Athanaſiia , Cyrillus , Ni- 
colas of Mjra , and all holy Biſhops, 
S. Stephen the firſt Martyr , S. George , 


C 4 ) V. Gabridem Philadelph. pag. 20, 21. 
( 6 _) pag. 19. 


LIAAIL 


) Deme- 


205 


the offering up 
of ſeveral 
Particles a 
Bread at t 

IS. 


206 


perverſe imi- 
tation of the 
Ancients. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


Demetrius, Theodorns, and all other holy 
Martyrs , S. Antony, Euthymins, Saba, 
Ornuphrins , Arſenius , Athanaſins of 
Mount Athos and all holy Monks, 
the holy Phyſicians Coſmmns and Da- 
mianus, Cyrus and John , Pantaleon 
and Hermolans, Sampſon and Diomedes, 
Thallalens and Trypho', and the reſt, 
S. Joachim and Anna, the Saint of the 
day, and all Saints; and for his parti- 
cular Archbiſhop and all the Clergy, 
and for the Founders of the Church or 
Monaſtery , for the living and dead , 
where he mentions their names, and 
for all who ſleep in hope of the Reſur- 
rection to everlaſting life, to whom, O 
mercifull God, give pardon. *' 


The cuſtom of Theſe are placed in the Patin, and 
the Greeks 4 


are carried to the Altar of Confecration, 
and by reaſon of their vicinity to the 


Bread that is to be conſecrated, and is 


afterward aQually conſecrated, partake 
of that bleſſing and ſandification. Tis 


manifeſt that this practice of the Greeks 


differs vaſtly from the ancient Rite of 
the Chriſtians of the Second and Third 
Centuries , which they would ſeem to 
imitate. For they imagining that the 
Souls of deceaſed perſons were not ad- 


mitted into the Divine Preſence, = 
I 


—_—_ _—_— — a Aller cs 2% I. 


LIMI 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


did exſpeFare in candida diem Fudicit, 
as Tertullian ſpeaks , their ſurviving 
friends and relations, fearing leſt their 
preſent condition might require it, at 
leaſt to ſhew their love and care of 
them, brought their Oblations : but 
this was done onely once a year, /abo- 
rantibus animabus refrigerinm quoddant 
adpoſiulantes ; but they were not parti- 
cular and diſtinct, but for all together 3 
nor were they eſteemed by them in 
the nature of ſatisfactory or expiatory 
Oblations, but onely to ſhew the ho- 
nour they bare to the memory of the 
holy Apoſtles and Martyrs in this ſolemn 
kind of pomp, and at the celebration 
of the Holy Sacrament , at which time 
they onely prayed to God , that He 
would be pleaſed to remember them. 
And certainly no more can well be un- 
derſtood by the Commemoration, which 
follows juſt after the Conſecration of 
the Elements in their preſent Litur- 
Pics. 

The preſent Greeks too account it a 
great piece of Piety and Religion, to 
viſit the Graves of their dead Fricnds 
upon a ſet day every year, and there 
perform ſeveral Funeral rites, and pray 
for their Souls: and after that the Pricit 

has 


207 


They viſit the 
Graves of 
their deceaſed 
Friends. 


208 An Account of the Greek Church. 


has performed his Office, and the reli. 
gious part of the Ceremony is over, 
they cover the Grave with their Nap- 
kins and Handkerchiefs, and make a 
feſtival entertainment, made up with 
part of the Colyba or boiled Wheat with 
( 4 )) mixt Fruits before mentioned , 
with a great deal of mirth and jollity , 
very unbecoming the Solemnity. But 
to return to the modern Greeks. 

The reaſon of this their pradtice is 
thus aftign'd by (b_) Gabriel Philadel- 


their offering phienſis ; We offer theſe Particles for our 
*p Parncts. Fathers , Brothers, Friends and Kins- 


folks who ſleep in Chriſt. The end and 
deſign is, that God would place their Souls 
in a bright and pleaſant place, in a place 
of reſt, whence grief and lamentation are 
baniſht, and ſend them a relaxation and 
deliverance from thoſe grievous things 
that at preſent ſeize upon them, and give 
them freedom and redemption from the 
lamentation of Hades and from tears. 
Cc ) Cyrillus Lucaris was aſhamed of 


C 4 ) Theſe Fruits were anciently called xayioiue, 
a5 Balſamon explains the word, 7? 63 mug purigeans 
dior 5 xamiyuloy megopreauioa, x) xavioud 
ab ulun,d id muvcidiy omrugoy —— —_ Wunarneig 
me;otigr), in 4. Canonem Apoſtolorum. 

C b ) in trattatulo $17 puteidor. 

C © ) in Epiſt, ad Joannem Vytenbogaert, 


this 


An Account of the Greek Church. 209 


this ſuperſtitious praftice, and the idle 
pretenſion commonly uſed for the de- 
fence of it ; and therefore adds another: 
Effet hic referendum T2) we luv TY 
eye que wield novem minime parti- 
cule ſunt panis, & decima B. Mariz Ma- 
tris Domini ; quas, poſt aque & vini in 
calice infultonem , ab ano Pane oblato 
ſumptas , penes Enchariſtie Panem poni- 
mus, ad (jenificandum jam beatam eſſe 
fortem San&orum, qui, ut Membra E apitz 
Chriſto conjun@a, una in celeſti gloria 
triumphant, By which he ſuppoſes 
onely the Blefledneſs of the Saints to be 
deſigned , that as the Particles are pla- 
ced near the Bread that 1s conſecrated, 
ſo they , as the Members of the Body 
Myſticall joyned to Chriſt as to the 
Head, triumph together with Him in 
the Heavenly glory. 


But beſides this, they ſay a particu- Offerings for 
lar Maſs for the Dead : which does not * 2-4: 


differ from the formuſed at other times, 
but that there is a peculiar Epiſtle and 
Goſpell, and the dead perſons, for 
whoſe benefit it is intended, are particu- 


' larly mentioned, each having a ſingle 


Particle offered up in his beha}f Burt a 
general Maſs for the Dead is folemnized 


on the Saturday before Pentecoſt, which 
P day 


210 An Account of the Greek Church, 


day is ſacred to the Memory of AZ | 
Souls, While they ſeem to reject with | 
ſo much caution a Purgatory, they are 
faln into the Errour of Orzzer about the 
Redemption of the Souls of the wicked 
from Hell. For they thus boldly de- 
termine : Certainly many Sinners. are 
freed from the Chains of Hades, ot upon 
the account of any Repentance or Confeſſe- 
on mage in thoſe infernal regions, but for 
the g#99 Works and Alms of the living , 
for the Prayers of the Church made in 
their behalf, and chiefly for the ſake of the 
aunbloudy Sacrifice, which the Church daily 
offers up for the living and the dead, 
Again, The Sacrifices, the Prayers and 
Alms which are performd by the living , 
greatly comfort and benefit the Soul, and 
free it at laſt from the bonds of Hades, 
Though to ſalve this, they ſay, ſuch 
perſons as are freed went out of the 
world with gooddiſpoſitions, and were 
prevented by death from completing 
their Repentance , and procuring the 
Favour of God. So ( «4 ) Patriarch 
Feremias explains himſelf. Three times 
that year their Friends die they celebrate 
their Excquies , the third , the ninth, 


( 4 ) Page 247 
and 


*s# 3 WW HH IF 00 s 5 gu 


* their Souls, 


the Pictures , 


and venerable. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


and the fortieth day, and repeat the 
ſame Prayers for the peace and quiet of 
[ omit the Howlings of 
{ the Women really concerned at the 
Funerals of their Husbands, or of their 
Slaves, and of perſons hired to act their 
parts in this moſt extravagant ſcene of 
Grief. This being a relique of an old 
Cuſtom uſed in the days of their Hea- 
theniſh Anceſtours, and not falling pro- 
perly within the comprehenſion and 
compaſs of my deftgn. 

The Greeks have ſogreat prejudice to Tie hare 
all engraven Images , 
they are embolsd and prominent, that je; in rheir 
they inveigh ſeverely a 
gainſt the Latizes, as little or lefs then 
Idolaters, and ſy ,mbolizing with the ve- 
ry Heathen ; applying that of the Plal- 
miſt, Pal. 125. v. 16, 17, 18. They have 
mouths , but they ſpeak, not 5 ejes n_ 
they, but they ſee not , &:c. But as for , 


Thele t 


P 2 


and eſpecially 1 


ad fiercely a- Churches 


they rTeVerence 


and honour by bowing and kiſlng 
| them, and (4) ſaying their prayers 


Poly See the Rubrick of the *Au2 Si, 78 op3ps 5 
n the Hrobg/on printed at Venice 15.45, in 12, 


before 


2IL 


In; 
whether in colours or Pit; 
printed, of our Savior , and cf the 
Saints , they account them facred 


enzraven and 
emboſs *d Ima*« 


* but 


212 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


before them. With theſe the Partition 
that ſeparates the Bexza or Chancell 
from the Body of the Church is adorned. 
At ſet times the Prieſt , before he en- 
ters into it, makes three low Reveren- 
CES (@22owrfous, perevoins) before the 
Image of Chriſt, and as many before 
that of the Virgin Mary : and he does 
the like in the time of Celebration, 
and oftentimes perfumes them with his 
Incenſe-pot. Upon ſome of the great 
Feſtivals they expoſeto the view of the 
people, upon a Desk in the middle of 
the Quire, a printed Picture of that 
day's Saint done in Chriſtendom, whi- 
ther upon their approach they' bow 
their body, and kiſs it with great devo- 
tion. ( 4 ) This practice they defend 
from the Authority of the Seventh ge- 
neral Synod, which is the Second held 
at Nice : and from this vain and idle 
pretence, that they worſhip the Saint 
in the Image which repreſents him, by 
the help of which they preſently have 
an ſdea of him in their mind ; and that 
they worſhip the ( b )) figure and re- 
a ) "Ouohey. pag. . . 
C b , AnAov SET] a TW eicov10 ud rev mul 


over ef eroriouleor. So Photius in his Epiſtle to 
Michael Prince of Bulgaria, pag. 15. 


preſen- 


An Account of the Greek Church. 213 


preſentation not with the worſhip of 
Azreciz, but of 3&2, and that onely 
era; relatively : which is all they 
Rive to ſay for their groſs and ſcanda- 
lous behaviour herein ; to the great 
prejudice of the Chriſtian Religion a- 
mong the Tzrks, who are too groſs and 
dull to underſtand theſe ſubtil and nice 
diſtintions, which they alledge in de- 
fence of this Worſhip. But I intend 
onely a Narrative, and not a Contuta- 
tion. | 
A great part of their Worſhip confiſts 7hcir Adora- 
in external Adoration, which they call 
werzvuzs of whichthey make two forts: 
( 4) the greater, which they call 5274 
or #2i2iz , bowing the body very 
low, almoſt to the ground 3 and the 
les, with alittle inclination of the head 
and knee. This they doe when they 
come into the Church, or when they 
are in ſight of a Church or Chappell , 
either upon land or fea, repeating theſe 
words, *EA{norv ps , Kizie, 7 4 uoromw= 
A&v, Or, 'O Od, inz-2m pwr Tf o wage 
TAS, Lord, or God, be merciful to me 
a Sinner ;, or elſe onely theſe , Kyzi , 


C4 ) utmvoa pizza x, wnpes. Vid. Qzgrogy, 
Þ4g+ 36s 


FI £XunTev, 


214 An Account of the Greck Church. 


*A:nrwv , ſometimes (4) forty times, | 
ſometimes a hundred times together, | Þ 
out cf an exceſs of Devotion, croſhing t 
themſclves all the while. t 
Praying t5- The cuſtom of praying toward the || " 
wt? Eft is ( b ) ſtill prattifed, and held | 6 
ſacrcd and inviolable among them : and 
of the two, they had rather turn their | © 
backs upon the Church, then upon C 
that point of the Heavens when they 
are at their Devotions: and becauſe the 
Altar is in the Eaſtern-moſt part of the | 
Church, ( c )) they worſhip toward 
that. | 
75:y fs They ſcldome fit in the Church, ex- 
fi of an * cept when quite tired by their long 
hs, ſtanding: there being no accommoda- 
tion of Pews or Benches there, except 
a few Stalls in their greater Churches. 
And they do as ſeldom kneel, except 
( 4 ) perchance on the day of Perte- 
C a ) V. iem#Zry Philothet , of Officium diffum 
Av 118 frue Lucernarium, 0 *O 2c) acov, P» 34+ 
C 6 _) Thus 1n the above-cited Drataxis of Philthens, 
the Deacon hows toward the Eaſt thrice, p. 2. 4. And 
10 in S., Chryſtome's Liturgy, at their nrſt entrance 1nto 
the Church, the Prieſt and Deacon mevo9 515 woee 
dvamMet mer wpinueart TEN, and fo often : the Prieſt 
allo croſles and prays toward the Eaſt, p. 67. T6 
C c ) S. Baſilit Liturg. p. 159. S, Chryſoſtom1 L1- 
0227's Þe 67. 6G. 73+ 77» 
C 4 ) V. Gabr, Philadelph. p. 20, 


coſt, 


vi'l 


An Account of the Greck Church. 215 


coſt, or ſome ſuch folemn time 3 herein 
being wholly ſwayed and governed by 
the cuſtom and practice of the Coun- 
try 3 the frequent reverences and incli- 
nations they make with their body 
ſerving in ſtead of Genuflexion. 

They have a peculiar manner of Manner of 

croſſing themſelves, which is, with the 77nsrvem- 
two Fingers of their right hand and © 
Thumb cloſed ; to denote, as they tell 
you, the myſtery of the Three Perſons 
in the Holy Trinity in one Ellence. They 
firſt ſign their forchead, then the lower 
part of their breaſt, then their right 
ſhoulder, and then their left, ſaying , 
"AUD 6 Ott, au izv2g;, 21. abe- 
rel, , fAtnrev hugs, Holy God, holy 
and powerfull, holy and immortal, have 
mercy upon #53 Or ſome ſuch ejaculation, 
as, Kuzic In75 Xews, ve x21 MY Ts Ots, 
tiny we T euaTWy , O Lord Jeſu 
Chriſt, thou Son and Word of God, 
have mercy upon me + but more eſpe- 
cially the ſhort forms above mentio- 
ned, 

They keep their Culpacs or Caps on 774jr thavi- 
their heads in the Church , except at aw and ge- 
the Proceſſion , and at the time when £051" 
the Goſpell is read, and at the celebra- 


tion of the Sacrament : then they all 
P 4 ſtand 


216 


Singing maan 
and inartifi- 
cial ;, no mu- 
fical Inſtru- 
ments. 


No Holy wa- | 


ter at their 
Church-doors, 


Offerings upon 
recovery from 
dangerous 


ſichneſs. 


Their accounts 
of time. 


An Account of the Greek Church, 


ſtand upuncovered, and ſhew a particu- 
lar Reverence. 

Their Singing, as I faid before, is 
very mean and pitifull , without figure 
and the reliſhes of art, and is at beſt 
but a kind of harſh Plain-ſong. T hey 
have no Organ or any kind of muficall 
Inſtrument 1n their Churches, that they 
may not give any offence to their cruel 
Maſters, the Tizrks : which is the rea- 
ſon alſo why they have no Bells. 
They have no Holy water at their 
Church-doors, nor do they uſe to 
ſprinkle themſelves 3 though oftentimes 
they drink very greedily of it, after the 
ceremony of its benediCtion 1s over, and 
rub their eyes with it. 

Upon their recovery from any grie- 
vousdiſtemper and ſickneſs,they offer up 
thin broad Plates of filver,whichare hung 
up in their Churches. Oftentimes they 
repreſent the figure of the Part affected, 
in imitation of the Romaniſts ; from 
whom the modern Greeks have derived 
many of their religious Cuſtoms and 
Ceremonies. 

They number their years not onely 
from the Birth of our B. Saviovr, but 
alſo from the Creation. They reckon 
from the Creation to our ar” 
: | rt 


_ ww A 


UMI 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


Birth 5508 years, following the ac- 
count of the Septuagint intheir Chrono- 
logy. Thus they write, that Conſtar- 
tizople was taken in the year 6961, that 
is, of our Lord 1453. 

They acknowledge but ( 4 ) ſeven 


217 


General Councils, which I ſhall here /-dze an" 


briefly reckon up. 

The firſt held at Nice in Bithynia, 
under Conſtantine the Great, in the year 
of our Lord 325. againſt Arizs and his 
Followers, who denied the Divinity 
of our B. Saviowr. 

The ſecond held at Conſtantinople , 
under the elder Theodoſyus, 1n the year 
321. againſt Macedonius, who denied 
the Divinity of the Holy Ghoſt. 

The third at Epheſus, under Theodo- 


ſens Junior and Valentinian, in the year 


431. againſt Neſtorins , who aſlerted 
Chriſt, born of the Virgin Mary, to be 
\iX; eryewntG., or meer Man 3 and fo 
made the Son of God diſtin&t from the 
Son -of the B. Virgin, and refuſed to 


C 4 )) V. Epiſtolam Photii ad Michaclem Principem 
Bulgariz , pag. 3, (5c. Epiſtolam Jeremiz Patriarche 
Conſtantinopolitani ad Theologos Wirtenbergenſes , 
Epiſtolam Meletii Patriarche Alexandrim ad V. Ct. 

anum Douzam , que exſtat in Ttinerario Georgut 
, CID. 13+ IC. 


give 


ven gener 
Councils. 


2138 An Account of the Greek Church. 


oive her the title of ©:57:z.,, or the 
Mother of God. 

The fourth at Chalcedon, (a City fi- 
tuate over againſt Conſtantinople , on 
the other fide of the Proportzs,) under 
Marcianns , in the year 451. againſt 
Eutyches and Dioſcorns, who maintained 
onely one Nature in Chriſt, 

The fifth at Conſtantinople, under Ju- 
ſtinian , in the year 553. againſt the 
Diſciples of Origen; whole corrupt and 
heretical DoGrine about the Pra-exi- 
{tence and Tranſmigration of Souls, the 
Temporarine of Hell-torments, and 
the Salvation of Devils, and the like, 
was here condemned and anathema- 
tized, 

The fixth at Conſtantivople , under 
Conſtantine Pogonatus, in the year 680, 
againſt Sergins, Pope Honorins, Maca- 
ri1s Biſhop of Antioch , and their Fol- 
lowers, who aflerted but one Will in 
Chriſt, hence called Monothelites. 

The ſeventh at Nice, under Conſtar- 
tine then a minor , and his Mother the 
Empreſs Ireze, in the year 787. a- 
gainſt ſuch as would notallow the Wor- 
{hip of Images, whom they hence nick- 
named Etwouzyc: Or ElwrtAZ5al 
But the Decrees of this Council , not 

| founded 


An Account of the Greek Church. 219 


founded upon Scripture , but upon 
weak and uncertain Tradition , and 
without any ground of ſound or judi- 
cious reaſoning , were confuted ſoon 
after by a Council of Biſhops of the 
Weſt, held by the Authority of Charle- 
maine at Francford in Germany. 

There was a Council heldat Corflan- , 7; , 
tinople under Baſilizs in the year 869. Conſtantino- 
wherein Photius the Patriarch of Cor- = = IG 

X 10r]us was 
ſftantinople (who had appeared very ac- condemned ; 
tive againſt the See of Rozee, and had 41d anther, 

: . in the ſame 

provoked the Latines efpecially, among 1. / in 
other things, by 1mputing to them the which he was 
ouilt of Hereſy, for adding Filidque to *1t% Ea 
the Conſtantinopolitan Creed) was dc- eighth general 
throned and anathematized. This the © , B 

R . h tfterent Wri- 
Romaniſts honour with the title of the 72:5, 
Eighth Oecumenical Council. But that 
which the (4) Greeks call fo was 
neld ten years after, that is, in the year 
879. in which all the Ads againſt Pho- 
tizs, who was reſtorcd to the Patriar- 
chal dignity not long before, were re- 
ſcinded and abrogatcd , and the Creed 
recited and fixt without that addition. 
But becauſe nothing relating to matter 


of Docqrine was eſtabliſhed anew 1n this 
C 4.) See the Anrals of Zonaras and Gheas, 


Council, 


220 An Account of the Greek Church. 


Council, which was held chiefly in favour 
of Photius, the Greeks content themſelves 
with the acknowledgment of ſevenonly, 

Some of the Latinizing Greeks call 
the Council held at Florence in the 
year 1439. under Pope Engenins the 
Fourth, in which were preſent the Em- 
perour Ffoarnes Paleologus, Foſeph Patri- 
arch of Conſtantinople, and ſeveral Me- 
tropolitans and Biſhops of the Greek 
Church , the Eighth general Council, 
Here the Greeks, out of politick ends, 
that is, to pleaſe the Emperour , who 
urged them to a Subſcription, to gain 
the affiſtence of the Latines , which 
onely was to be had upon theſe hard 
conditions, againſt the Tyrks, then 
ready to take an entire poſlefſion of the 
Empire, were forced to comply. But 
upon their return home , there were 
great ſtirs and tumults in Conſtantinople, 
and all over the Empire , about this 
Agreement , and the Subſcribers were 
look'd upon as Betrayers of the eſta- 
bliſhe Do@rine of the Eaſter» Church, 
In a Letter publiſhed by Chytrexs, ſent 
from Conſtantinople to the Bohemians , 
about two years before the taking of 
thac City by the Emperour Mahomet , 


they very zealouſly renounce the _— 
O 


. * a Min ao 3. == 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


of Florence, calling it 71 Nz{peav 7d > 
dA19%a;, Or a Diſunion from the Truth. 
This was ſubſcribed, among others, by 
Silveſter Syropnlus, who had been preſent 
at that Aſſembly, and wrote the Hiſtory 
of it, publiſh'd in the year 1660. 


221 


In their Monaſteries they keep up 73 mamer of 


- the piety and rigour of the ancient their reciting 
Diſcipline , being very punctual in the 7 


ms 
Iptu- 


performance of their daily Offices. They ral Hyms in 


are frequent 'in the reciting of the 
Plalms, and Hymns of the Old and 
New Teſtament , as conſiſting chiefly 
of Praiſes and Thankſgivings : which 
they divide into twenty Sections or 
x23 uaTz * each Seftion into three 
parts, which they call 5295 at the end 
of which they repeat the Gloria Patri, 
ſtanding all the while. This Plalmody 
is one of the principal parts of the Mo- 
naſtick life and inſtitution , and they 
are ſo continually uſed to it, that there 
is ſcarce a Kaloir but has the whole 
Pſalter exaftly by heart. They obſerve 
this order : They reade the Pſalter 
twice in each of the firſt ſix weeks in 
Lent, and but once in the Holy week , 
ending it on Wedneſday 3 from which 
time to the Saturday in Eaſter-week , 
according to ancient cuſtome , it is 

wholly 


their Religt- 


ous houſes. 


222 An Account of the Greek Church, 


wholly intermitted, Afterward to the 
20. day of September, ewo Sections are 
read in the morning , and one in the 
evening: but from the 20. of Septerzher 
they reade three Sections 1n the mor- 
ning, and in the evening the Palms 
called zw 793; Kypizy, and ſometimes 77 
TT-o7x4z:2, (which are the Pſalms of 
Degrees, fo called from ( 4) the 119, 
the firſt of them, which begins, TI-;; 
Kyz1y &r Ti) SAiSiSai mes Catronta, ) 
This method they continue to the Sa- 
turday before Sexageſima , in which 
week and the week following it is but 
once repeated alſo ; except that from 
Chriſtmas to the 1 Js of Janmary they TI'C- 
cite in the evening the 135. Plalm, 
which is called by them TT224Az&., from 
the frequent repetition of the Hemiſti- 
ehinm, (b ) for his mercy endureth far 
ever, $0 that the whole is finiſht in 
the ſpace of ſeven days z except inſtri& 
and high Lezt , when it 1s repeated 
every week twice, as 1s above declared, 
The (Cc )) 118, Pſalm, which makes 
up the ſcventeenth Section, 1s called 

Ca) That is, according to the Greek account ; for 
according to the Hebrew it 1s the 120. Which account 1s 
allo to be underſtood of the reſt which follow. 

(b) int % wane 11> Wree 

C c _) that is, according to the Hebrew, the 119. 

"Aw 


gt mes ,q4_ A AS 


a am. a. ad adit oc oc © 289 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


AuwuG., from the firſt verſe, Mayor 
www, The (4) 103. Pſalm is cal- 
led 6 TI25muzrc; , fo called becauſe 
with it they begin their evening ſervice, 
and their prayers at other ſolemn times. 
There are fix Pſalms (the whole there- 
fore called *EZ2\J2AuG. 1 EZz\l2Aw) 
(6 ) which they uſually recite betimes 
in the morning, and eſpecially if it be 
preceded by a Vigil : theſe are the(c)3. 
37. 62, 87. 102. and 142. Otherwiſe, 
it there be no Vigil, and it happen to 
be Sunday, they ſing the z2v:ov Teiz3ros, 
or Hymn in praiſe of the molt B. Trinity. 

That excellent Hymn , which our 
Church retains in her Communion-Ser- 
vice, which is ſaid or ſung after we 
have been made partakers of the holy 


Myſteries of Chriſt's bleſſed Body and 


( 4 ) 104+ 

C 6 )) V. Philothet Diataxin, pag. 7. 

Cc that 1s, 3. 38. 63. 88. 103. 143. according 
to the Hebrew. The reaſon of which difference 1s this : 
The 9. Pſalm according to the Greek contains the 9. ard 
Io, according to the Hebrew : and the 145. and 147. 
Palms according to the Greeb make up but one Plalm, 
that is, 147. Pſalm, according to the Hebrew. Anct- 
ently the 62, Pſalm according to the Gree was called 
6 o8-Jendg J2Aws. S, Athanaſius epiſtoli ad Marcelti- 
WIN — 063017 av Ads + 6=14250y Surrey. Et al 
Tapduvia;, — ae3s ophegr 5 7 2h udy Try 1427s 
'O ©4285, O8hs ws, aess 08 3pYellw Et Conſtit. Apa- 
flal, l. 8. c. 37. 7 mn fnvivaa + opheryiy, (Oc 


Bloud, 


223 


The great 
Doxolog ye 


224 An Account of the Greek Church. 
Bloud, Glory be to God on high, and in 


earth peace, good will towards men ; We 
praiſe thee, we, &c. makes up a neceſſa- 
ry part of their morning-devotion, up- 
on Sundays and the other more ſolemn 
Feſtivals : and indeed, as it appears by 
their azoAs%2 032%, or Office uſed eve- 
ry morning, on all other days, onely 
with this difference; that it is then bare- 
ly read, and not ſung; which is their 
preſent practice, as I found particularly 
upon enquiry: as alſoes i; WF ATV, 
or 1n their ſolemn Prayers after ſupper, 
before they go to their reſt. This is 
called by them 5 wyxAn Soformin, Or 
the great Doxology, to diſtinguiſh it 
from the other, which they call 5 S2Zc- 
Xoya mien, Or the leſler, that is, the 
Gloria Patri 5 which they repeat at the 
end of every Station of the Pſalms, and 
at other times preſcribed in the Litur- 
gick and other Offices : this latter being 
a more contrafted glorification of- the 
Holy Trinity, which they thus expreſs, 
ſomewhat different from the Latine 
form; (4) Glory be to the Father, 


C 4 )) &iZaTlalet, £, Vis, x; Ag Trituen, x rus 
Xj a8 x, #5 763 alay%; mh ajwyor Ajulw, Tt4 quoque apud 
S. Athanaſ. avi rapdrviay, (3c. niſt quod of aiwnwn illic 


deſit. Quandoque x, ante vu; omittitur. 
and 


my —2z 


> 4c ces &.. on fans G50 an Ya. on, yr, W*® 


An Account of the Greek Chwrch. 
and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghoſt, 


both now and always and for ever, orto 
eternal ages. Amen, This greater Doxo- 
logy, (from the conſtant uſage of it cal- 
Jed. ('a_) mewyn or (b) vue. tw 
39%, the morning Prayer or Hymn, (it 
being made up both of Supplications 
and Lands, though the latter be the 
more common appellation , ) and by 
ſome, the Argelical Hymn , from the 
Preface to it, ſung by the Azgels at the 
Birth of our B. Savioxr, S. Lake ch. 2.) 
is of great antiquity, being mentioned 
(c ) by S. Athanaſius , as univerſally 
known and uſed by the generality of 
Chriſtians of both ſexes , in thoſe E4- 
ſtern and Souther» Countries of the 
world, in their private Devotions; and 
is to be found after the Pſalms and 
Hymns, in the third Volume of that 
moſt venerable monument of Piety and 
Antiquity, the Greek tranſlation of the 
Bible in His Majeſtie's Library ar Saint 
James's ſent to King Charles the Firſt, 


C 4) It has the title of 720m $211) in the Apo» 
ſtolicall Conſtitutions, 1th. 7. cap. 47- 

C b_) And (© particularly in the Alexandrine Manu- 
ſcript of the Septuagint;z and in feyeral other Greek, 
Manuſcripts. 

C £ ) deVirgin. werſug finem. 


Q Martyr, 


225 


\ 226 An Account of the Greek Church. 


Martyr, of bleſſed and glorious memo- 
ry, by that great man Cyrillass Lucaris, 
Patriarch of Conſtantinople, who was 
alſo murthered, which he brought with 
him out of Egypt, upon his leaving 
the Patriarchate of Alexandria, written 
in capital letters, and, as he gueſles , 
in a paper placed by him in the begin- 
ning of the firſt Volume, giving an ac- 
count of it, above thirteen hundred 
years fince. This I conjetture to be 
the @) mavewu@ mentioned b 
Lacian in his Philopatris, in theſe wind 
of Triephon to Critias , ws famy Ter; , 
Tlu) el Boro Tizless Zetzuar©. , xa) 
Woeru ww is TN Emre 
which I underſtand thus, that the Chri- 
ſtiars of that time, whom the wicked 
Infidel ports with and abuſes in that 
Dialogue, uſed to begin their Devotion 
with the Lord's Prayer, 5 «7 277 Tla- 
Te, and conclude it with this divine 
Hymn, or ToAvwwuG. oy, or Ode full 
of the appellations of God the Father 
and Chriſt, This I think to be no way 
unlikely , as judging the Wy1 and 49) 
to be diſtin& and different forms. But 
becauſe it is poflible, that it might be 
but one compoſition or Prayer , con- 
cluding with an Hymn, I am more in- 
clined 


wut we at wu a,s coca a oo © a Io = a - © - 3 «» 


_— 
ed 


————— 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


clined to believe, notwithſtanding , 
that it ought to be meant of this, rather 
then of the Lord's Prayer ; and how- 
ever, that it more then ſeems ( though 
the moſt learned Archbiſhop ( 4 ) Uſer 
will have it onely to ſeem ſo) tobe one 
of thoſe Palms and Hymns mentioned 
by an (6) ancient Authour , who 
confuted the Hereſy of Artemor , to 
have been compoſed and ſung by the 
d3>get and m50!, or Chriſtians, in ho- 
nour of our Bleſſed Saviour's Divinity 5 
7 Afyi Ts Os 7 Kew Uuvin Fro9Ag- 
years ( what ( c ) Pliny teſtifies of 
them alſo in a Letter to Trajan; ) to 
which that part of this divine Hymn , 
Kyere 6 ©O:%55— - does very fitly and pro- 


227 


ca_ 
Lan 


ele. Re. ECO 


perly anſwer. 
Thereimmediately follows intheſame —— 


Manuſcript this Hymn , colletted for the prece- 
the moſt part out of the P/a/ms, which 4'ng Hymn 
> a . . - wath the fol- 
is till retained by the Greeks in ther jing, fe 

C4)V. _—_— ejuſdem Reverendiſſimi Anti- _ _— 
Riitis de Symbol » Page 34. ; 

C 6) Apud Enfebrum in Hiſtor. Eccleſ. lib, 5. cap. 28. 
deAuct 5 bx1 y BI od Spar dn apyys Va? Tay 
Yeatriou , + Nogey os Ot + Xerhy Uurie Stohge 


YuvTes. 

C ec iſt. 99. jb, 10, Affirmabant hanc fuiſſe ſum- 
ary £ La xy ſus vel erroris, quid efſent ſpliti ftato die 
ante lucem convenire, carmeinque Chriſto quaſs Deo djtere 
ſecum invicem—— 


Q 2 Morning 


LIRMIL 


228 An Account of the Greek Church. 


The Evening 
Hymn. 


Morning-ſervice, and repeated after it, 
as a part of it. 

Every day will I bleſs Thee, and praiſe 
thy Name for ever. 

Vouchſafe, O Lord, to keep #4 this day 
without (in. 

Bleſſed art Theu, O Lord God of ow 
Fathers , and bleſſed and praiſed be thy 
Name for ever. Amen. 

(4) Bleſſed art Thou, O Lord, 0 
teach me thy Statutes. This Verlicle is 
repeated thrice. 

O Lord, Thou haſt beer our refuge 
from one generation to another. _ 

1 ſaid, O Lord, be: mercifull to me; 
—_ my ſoul, for 1 have ſinned againſt 
Thee. 

Lord, I fly unto Thee ; teach me to 
doe thy will : for Thou art my God. 

For with Thee is the fountain of life , 
in thy light we ſhall ſee tight. 

Extend thy mercy to ſuch as know 
Thee, 

The following Hymn is always rect- 
ted 1n that part of the Evening-ſervice , 
juſt upon Sun-ſet, which they - call 


C a _) The preſent Greeks here inſert this Verſicle , 
Tet thy mercy, O Lord, be upon ws, as our truſt is in 
Thee, - : 


W y## 


Ins a —_ ——c ll 1B Bil. aw, 


An Account of the Greek Church. 229 


&y21 Ts Aung , and the Latines Li- 
cernarium 5 Which I onely here put 
down for the antiquity of it: it not be- 
ing my buſineſs to tranſcribe their Offi- 
ces, Which the learned and pious Rea- 
der may conſult at large, to his great 
latisfaion and advantage. 

Pleaſant brightneſs of the holy glory of 
the immortal, heavenly, holy, bleſſed Fa- 
ther, Jeſu Chriſt, we having arrived to 
Sunſet , and ſeeing the evening light. 
praiſe the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit 
of God. Thou, O Son of God, giver of 
life, art worthy to be praiſed always with 
= voices. Wherefore the world glorifies 

ee. 

This ſeems to be the very form of the 
emu Wy2piciz, Which S. Baſtl re- 
fers to in his Book de Spiritu Sando ad 
Amphilochium , cap. 29. as having. been 
eſtabliſhed by the Fathers long before 
his time : "ES>Ze Tois 7ulegov nas, wm 
nwnh TYW yew TE £9 TEE $0706 Jx e992, 
NN wW3wvws pavivl OL ey 2215tfiv. xl 0515 EY 
6 Tame 7 (nut TW Cachvev Þ EIT yvis 
W Y2215126, cinciv &x 2y0,ue)* 5 jury 701 Az3; 
C2 212v epinn TYw gave), #21 8 Tw- 
Tole arid erinoy d Mywles, Afr 
13uev TIzTiez, was Viv, x21 Ayiov 
TIve5 «a4 ©:3, This form being accoun- 


Q 3 ted 


IL JAAL 


230 


Superſtition 
of the Greeks, 
and chiefly in 
their prayers 
to Saints. 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


ted ancient by S. Baſi/, who lived in 
the fourth Century, it may not unfitly 
be referred to the firſt and early times 
of Chriſtianity. In compliance with 
this ſuppoſition, the Authours of the 
Conſtitutions commonly called Apoſtoli- 
cal, lib. 2. cap. $9. and ib. 8, cap. 35. or- 
der this to be done: where the Z:- 
Ayn zu; is not to be underſtood 
of this Hymn , as Archbiſhop Uſeer is 
willing to grant 3 but of the (a) 140. 
Palm ,* whereof the ſecond verſe runs 
thus , KeſwSIuw mw } ar2owyh pw ws 
juice ue cramby os frragn; m7 yea wa 
Dune tavewh Let my prayer be ſet forth 
in thy fight as incenſe, and let the lifting 
up of my hands be an evening-ſacrifice : 
this being called JaAue; kr wynG, 
and is always repeated after the T&ou- 
42; Or 103. Plalm above mentioned. 
By this it appears that the Greeks doe ill, 
in their as, printed at Venice 
1646, to aſcribe the compoſition of 
this Hymn to Sophronizs Patriarch of 
Jeruſalem. | 4 

- It muſt be ſadly acknowledged, that 
there isa great deal of Superſtition mixt 


C a _) according to the Greek: the 141. according 
tothe Hebrew. 


ER OE NES SRC ND ono tp 


=_ DE. 4 2 2a as T7 =} 5 ,” #* CD mo wt Z 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


in their publick Service and Offices : 
ſuch is their perfuming the Church, the 
painted Figures, the holy Table, the 


Deacons and others with their Incenſe- 


pots 3 their frequent Croſſing them- 
ſelves 3 the extravagant reſpe& they 
pay to the unconſecrated Elements in 
the great Proceſſion 3 their clofing ſeve- 
ral of their Prayers with theſe words, 
( 4 )) for the interceſſion of our Lady, the 
ſpotleſs Virgin- Mother of God ; and 
ſometimes they adde, and of all Saints ; 
the oblation of Particles, and their 
Prayers to Saints, and eſpecially to the 
B. Virgin, and the like. After the offe- 
ring up of the Particle, ( 6b) the Quire 
lings , It is meet indeed to praiſe Thee, 
the Mother of God, who art always to be 
bleſſed, free from all blemiſh, the Mother 
of our God, more to be honoured then the 

berubims , and beyond all compariſon 
more glorious then the Seraphims , who 


C 4) mTpeofelars $ mwvetyegyle Srrions 1p Ot0- 

ks % d6i maps Maciay. 

C5 ) "Atty iy as anntns para (Ce ov wu Oto- 
TK TU dep r erty X; TAapuwunloy, Y 1NTHC# TY 
O47 14h), The mwoTiegs I XepiBiuy th and oCoricar 
ov YnelTws AW Eveqapiv, mw dIagHpos Orly Abgoy 
TyYKs own * Thu) ove Ot07% 0v Va ON LO 00708 Liturg. 
S. Chryſoſt. Which Hymn is alſo thruſt into the L1- 
turgy of S. James. 


Q 4 brouzhteſt 


231 


232 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


broughteſt forth God the Word, without 
any diminution of thy Virginity : we 
magnifie Thee, who art truly the Mother 
of God. They oftentimes make dire& 
Prayers to her; as, (4) O Mother of 
God, holy above all, ſave 4s. When 
they are riſing out of their beds in the 
morning , they are taught to fay, 
C b-) Thou, O God, art holy, holy, holy : 
for the ſake of the Mother of God have 
mercy upon #5. Belides, there are pecu- 
liar Prayers and Hymns directed to her 
in their Offices, hence called O:570z42, 
full of extravagant expreſſions, and 
which argue a great declenſion from 
the purity and ſimplicity of the Chriſt- 
an Worſhip, too fulſome to þe here re- 
cited at large 3 onely for a taſt I ſhall 
adde one or two. (c_ 1» Thee, 0 
Mother of God, have I put all my 
truſt ſave me by thy interceſſon , 
and grant me pardon of my ſins, And, 


( 4 ) Vie Otomur, owmy uz, This occurts 
frequently in ſeveral of their Offices, 

C b) *Az©, exi&, az:@ & 0 Ot%, Nd © 
Otoniay Aims unwuas. Vide Horologtum page. 3- Occurrit 
ſepe in Tropariis, 

Cc ) "En 04 ws mis eaniday areviulu, Otorone* 
away Tis MpiHdCHias Os, X. huignont wot 17 UT put TwV TW 
&g:mv. In officio aque benedifte minoris, inter alta Teg* 
cue, cjuſdem mpnos nounal Gt, in Exchol. p. 442» 


(a) 0 


An Account of the Greek Church. 


(4) O bleſſed Mother of God, open to 
44 the gate of thy mercy: let not ws who 
hope in Thee, erres but let us be delive- 
red from dangers by Thee : for Thou art 
the ſafety of al{ Chriſtians. And the 
like horrible Superſtition they are guilty 
of in their Addretles to Angels and 
Saints. 


This ſuperſtitious cuſtom 1softentimes 46 


233 


ut the trt« 
ular prece 


«- " elaine « ang 
practiſed among the Kaloirs : One of Wy 


them after dinner takes a triangular 
piece of bread, which they call 7zv2y4z, 
(for by this Ceremony they pretend to 
ſhew their great devotion to the B.V;zy- 
gin, who is moſt commonly among the 
Greeks expreſled by that name.) which 
they had laid before her Picture du- 
ringthe whole time of dinner, in away 
of oblation 3 and lifting it up between 
his fingers, ſays firſt, (b ) Great is the 
name ; they anſwering, of the 1oly Tri- 
nity. Afterwards he lays, ( c ) O wmoſe 
holy Mother of God, help ws ; they an- 


C 4 ) Tis evonney yHia mw mil grofor navy 
Og979ts evnorynulun EATIGorTEs ig 07 wil ecrMiowuw, 
puSeml Ne os 5 eferct Tiwv* oy 3 & i mnenreln Th 
yives  Xerrravay, V. varias lefiones in S. Chrytoltonu 
Liturg. pag 87. 

C 6b ) Mia 3 area —7 ejiz TewS Of, v 

(C £ ) Tlayazia Ozone, Conte 1/417. 


{wering, 


led Taxaics 


234 An Account of the Greek Church. 


Abſtinence 
from bloud 
and things 
ſtrangled. 


PS oh. 


ſwering, ( a ) By her interceſſion, 0 
God, have mercy upon #4 , and ſave m4. 
Then they all, having been cenſed by 
the keeper of the RefeQory, and ing- 
ing Hymns in her praiſe , and particu- 
larly that above mentioned, It is eet,&c, 
break and eat it, and ſoon after drink 
as it were a grace-cup , that has been 
bleſſed in her name. This ceremony is 
alſo performed at the requeſt and in the 
behalf of ſuch as are taking a journey , 
whether by land or ſea, for their good 
ſucceſs z who are thus ſuperſtitiouſly 
carefull to commend. themſelves to the 
proteQion of the B. Virgin, who is ad- 
dreſſed to under the title *O3)9y/2/z 
hence beſtowed upon her. 

They moſt rigourouſly abſtain from 
Bloud and things Strangled 3 and in 
their greateſt hunger and extremity 
have an utter loathing and abhorrence 
of all fort of Fleſh, whoſe bloud, when 
it was killed, was not poured out upon 
the ground, after what manner ſoever 
dreſſed and prepared : relying herein 
upon the Canon made by S. James and 
the other Apoſtles aſſembled in the 


_ Ca) The ris mgioCnas, © Oadr, tninmy x4 onory 
ETA 


Council 


An Account of the Greek Church. 2 35 


Council at Jernſalem , As 15. 20. 29. 
for the direction of the Gentile Con- 
yerts 3 (which they hold to be of per- 
petual uſe and obligation ;) and upon 
the practice and example of the Primi- 
tive Chriſtians , who were wont to be 
tempted and tried by this kind of diet, 
whether wr were Chriſtians or no, as 
( 4 )) Tertallian tells the Heathen. in his 
Apology 3 Inter tentamenta quoque Chri- 
ianorum botulos etiam cruore diſtentos 
admovetis. And Oftavizs, in Minucins 
Felix, in his anſwer to the ObjeRions 
and Cavills of his Heathen friend Ceci- 
lis, replied, Tantnm ab bumano ſan- 
gine caverns, ut nec edulinm pecorum in 
cibis ſanguinem noverinuss, The Greeks, 
not content with this cuſtom ſtill retai- 
ned in the E2f#, fiercely reproach the 
Weſtern Church with the violation of 
this Apoſtolical Conſtitution 3 this lit- 
tle controverſie contributing ſomething 
to the heightning of the Schiſm: for- 


C 4 ) Cap. 8. Erubeſcat error weſter, qui ne animali- 
um quidem ſanguinem in pabulis habemus, qui propterea 
quoque ſufſicatis {5 ſangnine abſtinemus , n2 quo ſanguine 
maculemur vel intra viſcera ſepulto. Denique, mter ten- 
tamenta quoque Chriſtianorum botulos etiam cruore giſtentos 
admovetis , certiſſimi ſcilicet illicitum eſſe pents Us, per 
gud exorbitare cos waltis. 


getting, 


236 An Account of the Greek Church, 


Their ſwea- 
ring upon 4 
Croſs. 


getting, that the reaſon of the Decree 
ceaſing, (which was the great tenderneſs 
and reſpe& ſhewed to the Jewiſh Con- 
verts, that they might not be ſcandali- 
zed, if ſuch a liberty had beenallowed,) 
the obligation ceaſesalſo 3 and that the 
matter of it being altogether indifferent, 
and without the leaſt moral evil in it, 
it plainly appears to be onely proviſio- 
nal and temporary. Collateral here- 
untois their abſtinence from fleſh of any 
creature that dieth of it ſelf, becauſe, 
though it be not properly ſtrangled, the 
bloud remaineth in it. Theſe meats 
they account pwuzes defiling 3 and if at 
any time through ignorance and inad- 
vertence they eat of them, or of things 
ſtrangled , and ſuch kind of unlawfull 
tood, which they equally abominate , 
theſe pzexpzyivrz; think themſclvesob- 
Iiged to confels and doe penance for the 
involuntary tranſgreſſion. 

When they {wear , they lay their 
hand upon the Croſs, and kifs it after- 
ward, and put it to their forehead : 
hence the word 52vzo7zln; or avzomn- 
Tov, a term of horrible diſgrace among 
them , is uſed for a perjured perſon , 
who treads as it were upon the Croſs, 


and ſtamps it under his feet, Such an 
| one 


An Account of the Greek Church. 237 


one the [talians call Sputa in croce, from 
another uſual ſign of contempt and de- 
hance. 

No Service is performed either by N» Church- 
Biſhop, Prieſt or Deacon , without hen] ut 
their cixcizi 50Azs , or proper Veſt- out peculiar 
ments 3 in which they are as fancifull as /m* 
the Romaniſts : and particularly the 
Prieſt when he conſecrates always wears 
7 67rlezyiAo or a Stole, To give a 
particular account of their Habits when 
they officiate, would be too nice and 
perplext, and of little uſe. 

To advance the dignity of the Pa- _ pſ 
triarchal Throne, ſeveral both Churches onge femme 
and Monaſteries were anciently exempt 7uriſdi#im 
from the Juriſdition of the Biſhop of = _— 
the Dioceſe, in the nature of Pecultars, 
and immediately ſubjected to the Patri- 
arch of Conſtantinople. This amy 
tive was taken away from Joarnes Vec- 
cs Patriarch for his ſiding too much 
with the Biſhop and Church of Rome, 
by a Decree of Michael! Palzologus , 
about the year 1279, recorded by 
(a) Pachymeres , who obſerves, that 
it did intrench upon the 72 Ot MEVIIEOY 5 
or power belonging to him as Oecume- 


( a ) Hiſtor, lib, 6, cap. LI. 
nicall 


238 An Account of the Greek Church, 


nicall Biſhop. But this held onely for 
a time, and was nlade uſe of to ſerve a 
preſent turn , the Privilege being af- 
terward reſtored , and ſtill remaining, 
The Moraſteries which enjoy theſe Im- 
-munities are called Zavgornya, fromthe 
fixing of a Croſs behind the Altar there 
by the Patriarch in perſon, or by his 
Deputy , at the requeſt of the ſeveral 
Founders, who by this Ceremony ap- 
propriated the whole power of it to 
himſelf. 


An 


(239) 


_ 


EL_—_— 


_—— 


Cr ——— 


An Account of the ſtate of the Greek 
Church under the Government of 
Cyrillus Lucaris, Patriarch of 
Conſtantinople , with a rela- 
tion of his Sufferings and Death. 


Trillaus Lucaris was born in Car 

( dia, the chief City of the Iſland 
to which it has given its name : 

which , when the neighbouring places 
became a Prey to the Ottomar arms, for 
ſeveral years before and fince, kept up 
and maintained a well-eſtabliſht peace 
and quiet under the mild Government 
of the Venetians, The Greeks there 
ſenſible of the great bleſling and benefit 
of Liberty, and of the full exerciſe of 
their Religion, according to the Rites 
of their Church, without the leaſt dif- 
turbance or controll, endeavoured to 
render themſelves worthy of it. They 
were ſtout and couragious , and very 
faithfull to the State whoſe SubjeQsthey 
were, Which gave them proteGion. 
They cheriſhed all inclinations to inge- 
nuity 


240 The Stateof the Greek Church 


nuity in their Youth, and ſent them 
(as their Nation did formerty'to Athens ) 
to Venice and Padua , to be educated 
and trained up in the exerciſes of Wit 
and Philofophy, and in the Studies of 
all polite and ſolid Learning. This 
happineſs befell Cyri/z5s, who at Venice 
was committed to the Care of Maximus 
Mareunixs, afterwards Biſhop of Cerigo, 
(an Iſlandin the entranceintothe Archi- 
pelago, (till in the poſlefſionof the Vere- 
tians, ) who, among other, wrote a 
learned Diſcourſe about the Proceſſion 
of the Holy Spirit, in the old Greek, 
After he had finiſhed his Studies here, 
and had acquired a perfect knowledge 
of the Latine and Italian Tongues, he 
travelled out of [taly into other parts of 
Chriſtendome , the better to. fit himſelf 
for the ſervice of his Country ; where 
he learned enough , by diſcourſe and 
converſation, added to his own inquiſt- 
tive genius and wife Obſervations of 
things, to make him more and more dit- 
reliſh the Tenents of the Roar Church, 
and the Fopperies and Superſtitions of 
their Worſhip, 'and to pity the defects 
and miſcarriages which his. diſtreſſed 
Countrymen lay under by' reaſon of 


their Ignorance and Oppreſſion, and " 
C 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 


be more and more in love with the Re- 
formation, 

Thefe Accompliſhments and Qualifi- 
cations gained him the favour of 1eleti- 
# Pegws , Patriarch of Alexandria, a 
Candiot too by birth, who had alſo ſtu- 
died in [taly, whence he carried away 
withhim a fettleddiſhike of Rome, which 
be afterwards in the whole courſe of his 
life declared with great zeal and fierce- 
nels. By himhe was made a Prieſt, and 
afterwards Architnandrite or Prior of a 
Convent. That (4) this Meletiz 
was a man of excellent Learning and 
Judgment, thoſe Books, which he 
publiſhed , ſufhciently ſhew. Such as 
his Book againſt the Jews, written both 
in Greek and Latine, and afterwards 
publiſhed in the year 1593. at Leopolis, 
In the Greek and Ruthenick or Slavonian 
languages : his Dialogue called *O29%- 
WA Yer iavc; ,' or Orthodox Chriſtian, 
printed atV;/na 1596 : and ſeveral Let- 
ters written in Greek , printed at Lon- 
don about the year 1624, and others in 
Latine 3 as that, for inſtance, which he 


Ca ) Of this Meletius ſee more at large in the Itine- 
of Georgius Douza pag. 42, U5c. where 1s the Letter 
which this Patriarch wrote to his Father, p. 112+ 


R wrote 


24.1 


242 


The State of the Greck Church 


wrote from Conſtantinople to Janus Don- 
z4in the year 15973 and that (a) which 
he dire&ted out of /Egypt, 1n the year 


1600, to Sigiſmmnd the third, King of - 


Poland and Sweden, wherein he diſputes 
very ſolidly and judiciouſly againſt the 
Supremacy and univerſal Headſhip of 
the Popes. The occaſion of this Let- 
ter, which our Cyril carried, and where- 
in he is ſo highly commended, was this. 
( b ) Several Biſhops of Lithuania and 
Ruſſuez nigra , who had hitherto conti- 
nued in the Communion of the Greek 
Church, wrought upon by ſeveral tem- 
poral advantages and honours, which 
they propoſed to gain in the Diet and 
Government of Poland , ſent two of 
their number to Rome in the year 1595, 
in order to their being reconciled to 
that Church, and to offer their Submiſli- 
on and Obedience to Clement theeighth 
the Pope then reigning. But their go- 
ing thither, and doing this in the name 
of all the Ruthenick Churches, ( c ) was 
prptelted againſt , and a publick Act 


Ca) apud Regenvolſcium in fſtemate Hiſtorico- 
Chronologico Eccleſiarum Slavonicarum. Traje#i ad Rhe« 
hum 1652. 4% page 467. 

(C5 p4ge 463- 

Cc ) pag. 465, 


made 


Ss 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 


made of it by Conſtantine Duke of Ofto- 
rovia, and Palatine of Koviz, (at whoſe 
expenſe the Scriptures of the Old and 
New Teſtament were tranſlated into the 
language of thoſe Countreys, and pu- 
bliſhed 1531.) and ſeveral others, who 
utterly diſliked this intended Union. 
Upon the return of the two Meſlengers 
from Rowe, where they had been en- 
tertained with all ſorts of careſles, (a) a 
Synod of the Biſhops was ſummoned to 
meet at Breſta, in OZober new ſtyle 
1596. by the authority of King S7gi/ 
mind, who conſtituted. three perſons 
of the higheſt quality for title and office 
in Lithuania, as Duke Radzivil, the 
Chancellor , and the Treaſurer of that 
Dutchy, his Ambaſladours, to fix and 
eſtabliſh this affair , which he deſired 
with great earneſtneſs to effect. 

At this Synod the Duke of Oftoroviz 
with the reſt of his Party, who were 
reſolved to continue in the fame Obedi- 
ence whichtheir Anceſtours had profeſt 
and ſhewn to the Patriarchal Throne of 
Conſtantinople, were commanded to ap- 
pear : which they did accordingly, but 
thought fit to hold their meeting apart, 


( 4 ) page 470, | 
R 2 and 


243 


244 TheState of the Greek Church 


and after ſeveral conteſts and ſtrugglings 
refuſed to ſubmit to the Union propo- 
ſed, which ſeveral, who had before re- 
tained the Rites and DoCtrin of the 
Greek Church, now ſo greedily embra- 
ced. Our Cyril was of the number of 
the Non-4niti or Diſlenters , being ſent 
thither by Meletins Ez 7 taxwAdon v2} 
ouwTECRKEa TH Paowy TW vow) An 
Aov tmravoFev we 55 mw pnliex TH xn 
o19v , = amr xalis egy , as 
( 4 )) Caryophilus ſpeaks, to break off and 
diſturb the Onion = the hr 
the Church of Rome: whence ( b ) he 
hardly eſcaped with his life ; whereas 
Nicephorus, ſent thither by the Patri- 
arch of Conſtantinople for the ſame pur- 
pole, was taken and ſtrangled. 
Afterwards thoſe of the Greek Com- 
munion, in order to their ſecuring their 
civil intereſts and privileges the better, 
againſt any attaque which might be 
made upon them, had a meeting with 
ſeveral Proteſtant Nobles and Divines, 


C 4 ) & YmIrriuacig, page 155, Of which Authour 
and Book more below. 

C b V. Hottingeri Analefa in append. pag. $53 
where the number of the year 15 amiſs : though Regenuol- 
ſcius fays, that at that time he kept a School and taught 
Greek in that Country : which 1s not fo likely, 


who 


LE DO LF On oo Fe  w = JW w aRaqn xt FF YT _ 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 


who had embraced the Aygnſtan Con- 
feſſion , at Vi/lma, in the year 1599. 
Here ſeveral Propoſals were made about 
their uniting in Spirituals, which met at 
firſt with oppoſition from the ignorance 
and obſtinacy of the Lithuanian Biſhops 
and Prieſts, and became afterwards, up- 
on a ſedate reflexion on things, more 
inclinable to terms of peace and recon- 
ciliation, But they being unwilling to 
determine any thing of this nature 
without conſulting the Patriarchs of 
Conſtantinople and Alexandria, there 
was a ſtop put to the Debate for a time, 
while Letters were diſpatchd away 
from the Evangelici about this excellent 
deſign which afterward fell to the 
ground, and proved abortive. 

It was much about this time, that 
Sigi/mmnd , out of his great zeal to the 
Roman Church, had publiſhed an Edict 
for the preventing the farther ſpreading 
of the Greek Religion in his Dominions, 
and forbidding Strangers to enter there 
without leave; and ſoon after wrote a 
Letter to Patriarch Meletins , to per- 
ſwade and adviſe him to acknowledge 
and ſubmit to the Pope of Rome. This 
Letter he anſwered with all due and be- 
coming reſpe&t, deſiring the King to 

R 3 bettow 


"44 
4588 


ASS 


246 


The State of the Greek Church 


beſtow his Royal favour upon Cyril his 
Exarchus or Nuntio, a Perſon both for 
learning and integrity very worthy of 
it. * A tua verd clementia boc quidem tems 
pore petimus, ut reverendum Patren Cy- 
rillum Lucari, Exarchum hujus Apoſto- 
lice ſedis & filium noſtrum, favore Re- 
gio dignetur , hominem &» Probitate &- 
eruditione Regio favore digniſſamum. In 
this ſecond journey from his Patriarch 
meeting with great oppoſition from the 
other Party, who were favoured by the 
Government, and finding, that the an- 
{wer of Meletins to the Proteſtant Di- 
vines would diſguſt the King and all of 
the Roman Communion , he forbore 
Either to deliver or make it publick. 
And here it was, 1n all probability, 
that, reflecting upon the great hazards 
which 'he ran during his ſtay in thoſe 
parts, his heart failed him, it it be true 
what ( a) Petrus Scarga a Jeſuite,who 
had been Chaplain to the three Ambal- 
{adours at Breſta, ſaith, that in a Letter 
written at Leopolis 1n January 1601, and 
left with the Archbiſhop of that City, 
he publiſhed a Confeſſion of Faith agree- 
able to the Roman. Howeverit it were 


( 4 ) apud Regenyolic. pag, 471. 479» 
ſo, 


cs a4 £4 oo. Rea 


Mi. p—=—y — | EC Y 


= . 


— WO * » WW 0 7 20 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 


ſo, he redeemed this flip of humane in- 
firmity with undaunted reſolution and 
courage in the future courſe of his life, 
which he afterwards ſacrificed as it were 
in a way of expiation. 

His active way of life, and know- 
ledge of the world, gained by his tra- 
vels and employments in ſeveral matters 
of concern relating to Religion and the 
State of the Greek Church, render'd him 
every-where conſpicuous, and worthy, 
in the judgment of thoſe who knew him, 
of the higheſt dignity of that Church; 
for which heſeemed every way fit and 
proper. The Patriarchal See of Alex- 
andria becoming vacant, he was choſen 
to ſucceed Meletins; as being a perſon 
of a publick ſpirit, and of <qual zeal 
and learning and prudence. Here he 
continued above nineteen years. The 
great deference whichthe other Oriental 
Patriarchs of the Greek Communion pay 
to the chief See , that of Conſtantinople, 
puts them upon frequent voiages thi- 
ther , as the affairs of their reipeCtive 
Churches require. Here hecame about 
the beginning of the year 1612. (4) In 


C a ) This I find in a Letter written by Sir Paul 
Pindar from Conſtantinople i April that year, 


R 4 the 


247 


246 


The State of the Greek Church 


the Lent following a certain Kaloir, a 
Neapolitan born, in a Lent-Sermon, ha- 
ving received his inſtructions from the 
Jeſuits , with whom he had daily con- 
verſation, ſaid many things in favour of 
the Romiſh Religion, to the great di- 
{tration of the minds of the People. 
But he was oppoſed herein by Cyril/as, 
who perceiving the deſigns of the Je. 
ſuits, who began to grow confident of 
ſucceſs, was reſolved to ſet himſelf 
againſt them , and ever after deteſted 
them vehemently. 

It pleaſed God, that during his laſt 
being in that City Neophytus the Patri- 
arch died. At ſuch a time horrid quar- 
rels and diſlenſions uſally happen among 
the Metropolitans and Biſhops avout 
thechoice of anew Patriarch : of which 
the Turks, greedy of mony, know how 
to make a mighty advantage. For the 
chief Vizirand the Baſla's expect in ſuch 
caſes, that the ſeveral Pretendersſhould 
make application to them. Without 
the Grand Signor's confirmation, noone 
dares accept the title or exerciſe the 
power of a Patriarch : nor dare the 
Creeks refuſe whom they impoſe , be 
the perſon otherwiſe never ſo unfit, or 
the EleQion of another never ſo ey 

nICAL, 


6 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 
nical. Cyril had a great party among 


"the Biſhops, who wiſh'd that the Prima- 


ry conduct and management of the 
affairs of their Religion might be com- 
mitted tohim : and therefore were very 
zealous in his promotion to the Patriar- 
ehate. To prevent which, the oppoſite 
FaQtion made uſe of the accuſtomed evil 
arts of bribing the Trks, and proffer'd 
toadvance conſiderably the yearly Tri- 
bute, which they pay the Emperour for 
the Exerciſe of their Religion, fo 17mo- 
theus Biſhop of Marmara might be the 
man, Mony doing all things in Tzrkze, 
they got him eſtabliſht Patriarch, The 
new - Patriarch , which is uſual , makes 
uſe of the Intereſt, which he has lately 
gained, with his maſters the Turks, and 
proſecutes ſuch as oppoſed him, and ba- 
niſhes and diſplaces, as his paſſion ſug- 
geſts, and as he finds himſelf able. A- 
mong them the Competitor eſpecially 
could not hope to find any favour, and 
therefore retires, of rather is driven a- 
way. Timotheus not long after dies : 
though AZatius, (a moſt paſtionate and 
virulent Writer, who cares not what 
ſtories, though never fo falſe and ſcari- 
dalous, he picks up from any diſconten- 
ted Greek, fo they reflect upon the ho- 

; nour 


249 


250 The State of the Greek Church 


nour of Cyril/#s , or ſuch as favoured 
him) will have him poiſoned at an En. 
tertainment at the Dutch Ambaſladour's; 
' and further adds, as if they being afraid 
that the poiſonous wine , which he 
drank, ſhould not have the deſired 
effet, that the Phyſician, who was 
ſent for, was hired with a thouſand ze- 
chins to accelerate his death by ſtron- 
ger medicaments. Whereupon Cyril was 
choſen , unanimouſly and without any 
oppoſition, to ſucceed him, the 26. 
day of OZober in the year 1621, doubt- 
leſs to the great regret and trouble of 
the Latinizing Greeks , and eſpecially 
the Jeſuits and Friers, who, by the 
permiſſion of the Grand Signor, under 
the proteQion of ſeveral Ambaſſadours 
of the Romay Communion, kept up 
the Service of their Church in their 
reſpeqive Convents. For they were 
very ſenſible what an aQive man Cyril 
was, and with what zeal he had decla- 
red himſelf againſt their ſeveral Innova- 
tions and Encroachments 3 and thence 
they could not but conclude, that, now 
having attained to this ſupereminent 
Lignity in the Eaſter» Church , he 
would vindicate the honour of his See, 


and by degrees work off the Greeks 
from 


A. 3 


ES. JF} =. 6. = Mm. 3 Ado. 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 


from thoſe Errours and Miſperſuaſions 
into which they had inſen(ibly faln, and 

introduce a Reformation among them. 
And now began with this new Ho- 
nour the moſt laborious and trouble- 
ſome part of his whole life, from the bit- 
terneſs and fierceneſs of the Roman Zea- 
lots, who were ſo exaſperated againſt 
him, that they were reſolved by all 
imaginable artifice and policy either to 
gain him, or ruine him : and to that 
purpoſe they thought fit to infule jealou- 
fie into the Trks of his conſpiring againſt 
their Government and Religion, there- 
by to render him and his followers ob- 
noxious to their implacable rage and 
cruelty : whereby the Chriſtian name 
and Religion were in great danger of 
being extinguiſhed inthe Eaſt. A brief 
account of theſe Troubles, which befell 
the Greek, Church in the beginning of 
his Patriarchate, was written at Galata, 
in Latine, in the year 1628, by an eye- 
witneſs, and printed in 1633. at the 
end of a little Book, entitled Myſteria 
Patrum Societatis Jeſi. This Book 1n- 
deed, which, containing a declaration 
of matter of fact, ſtates the caie very 
much tothe diſadvantage of the Jeſuits, 
is rail'd at by A/atias , after his uſual 
manner, 


251 


252 


The State of the Greek Church 


manner, which is an eaſy way ofconfu- 
tation : but there is nothing 1n 1t, but 
what I can confirm by an uncontrolla- 
ble teſtimony, with the addition of ſe- 
veral circumſtances and particulars which 
eſcaped that Authour : and this out of 
a large Relation written by Sir Thomas 
Row , in Conſtantinople, July 1627. at 
that time Ambaſſadour at the Port , 
where he arrived 22. December 1621, 
Of whom I cannot forbear to ſay this 
little, (for I do not pretend to write a 
full CharaQer , ) out of gratitude to 
his memory both as a Member of the 
famous Univerſity ofOxoz, ( to which, 
upon his return into Ergland, he made 
anoble Preſent of excellent Manuſcripts 
both Greek and Arabick; ) and by whom 
Cyrillas preſented to King Charles the 
Firſt that incomparable monument of 
Piety and Antiquity, the Biblein Greek, 
ſuppoſed to be written by the hand of 
Thecla; and as having lived ſometimein 
Conſtantinople , where to this day our 
Nation enjoys the happy effe& of his 
Negotiation : that he was a Gentleman 
of excellent parts, and of great honour 
and integrity , and one who ſerved the 
intereſts of his Prince and Country in 


Turkey with great courage and _ 
an 


LE EE: ea ea at ed nod AS © >. ar ow os od ww tm YES a ov. ev» a aan FA Tc A  3©©& 


under Cynillus Lucaris. 


and with an agreeable ſucceſs; before 
whoſe times the affairs of our Merchants 
were in great diſorder, and little regard 
had to the Capitulations and Privileges 
accorded by the Grand Signor, either to 
our Nation or toany other 3 he having 
to his immortal reputation recovered 
the Reſpet due to Amballadours , 
which had been utterly loſt for ſeveral 
yu before, by a ſucceſiion of inſolent 

iZirs 3 and that hedeſerved moſt high- 
ly, not onely of the Greek Church, by 
his generous proteCtion of it againſt 
thoſe who endeavoured, as much as in 
them lay , to deſtroy .its very being; 
but of Chriſtendom 1n general, and par- 
ticularly of Poland, which King Sigi/- 
mund acknowledged with great reſpect 
and thanks in a Letter to his Excellency, 
written from Warſaw Sept. 1622. which 
I have had the good, fortune to perule. 
I ſhall here give an Extract of it out of 
Papers now in the -poſleſhon of the 
Right Honourable Wiiam Earl of Den- 
bigh whoſe Lordſhip's generousfavour 
ſhewed to me herein, I do here, as it 
becomes me, moſt . thankfully acknow- 


Rage. | 

ebruary 1622. The Jeſuits , who 

bore Cyril/as a grudge for his former 
ZCA® 


253 


254 The Stateof the Greek Church 


zealous oppoſition of their Deſigns, as 
well 'as preſent, laboured openly, by 
the help and afliſtence of the French 
Ambaſſadonr , to have him depoſed, in 
order to their preferring Gregorins Bi- 
ſhop of Amaſia, who had ſubmitted al- 
ready to the Pope, and was very willing 
totrockle under them. Cyril's intimacy 
with the Exgliſh and Dutch Ambaſſadours 
- and thoſeunder their proteCtion, height- 
ned their malice; and indeed was the 
goodly pretence they made uſe of to 
juſtifie their proceedings againſt him, as 
one tainted with Hereſy : which forced 
him in his own defence , with the afhi- 
ſtence of four Archbiſhops and the reſt 
of the Clergy aſſembled in the great 
Church, to excormunicate the ambi- 
tious - Pretender, This Eccleſtaſticall 
Cenſure madethem the more outragious; 
and to effe& their purpoſe better, they 
accuſe Cyrillus tothe Vizir, whom they 
had gained, - of adeſign of delivering up 
an Hland'in the Arches to the Duke of 
Florence, whoſe Gallies uſed to rove 1n 
thoſe Seas. Whereupon he was ſeized, 
depoſed, and bamſhed to Rhodes ; and 
the excommunicated Biſhop was advan- 
ced to the Patriarchall dignity, upon 
promiſe of paying twenty thouſand 
dollers : 


a + SS. _ t&as co oe HS GS SS ww wy os © tr DJvJvTIH 114 — [{ﬀ»l. HEE QY_,[[dx_9Þþzvzya- as A =: 7K ras Ju ma -© 


undey Cyrillus Lucaris. 


dollers: a certain ſumm, more or leſs , 
being uſually paid to the Tzrks, from 
( 4 )) the time of Symeor of Trapezond, 
preferred by Bribery, in the nature of 
an acknowledgment, upon every new 
advancement. The Greeks upon this 
grew diſcontented, and retuſed to con- 
tribute towards the levying this ſumm 3 
and no ſupplies coming from Rome, as 
were expeted, Gregorins , after ten 
weeks fitting, was willing to give way 
to Anthimus Archbiſhop of Adrianople, 
whom they knew to be rich, and had 
prevailed upon to accept of the Reſigna- 
tion. He making his Covetouſneſs veil 
to his Ambition, pays part of the pro- 
miſed ſumm down in hand, and the 
reſt, being armed with the authority of 
the Vizzr, he forces from the Chriſtians 
in what proportion he pleaſes. *,* The 
news of this victory , which they 
had gained ſo baſely, quickly flew to 
Rome, and the ſervice = the Catho- 
lick Cauſe in the Levant by the French 
Ambaſſadony , the Count de Ceſt, was 
highly magnified z and afterwards taken 
notice of and acknowledged by OUrbar 


( 4 ) Seepag 75. 


the 


255 


256 The Stateof theGreek Church 


the Eighth, in (4) a Letter ſent to 
him from Rome, dated July 1624. not 
long after his aſſumption to the Pontifi- 
cate : in which his Holineſs breaks out 
into very opprobrious language againſt 
poor Cyril/zz , whoſe name now grew 
more and more odious at Rome, calling 
him Son of darkneſs and Champion of 
Hell. 2»id autem Conſtantinopoli ege- 
ris, as he complements theEmbaſladour, 
Jampridem plaudens laudibus pietatis tug 
Romana Eccleſia audivit. Filinm illum 
tenebrarum & Inferni athletam, Pſeudo- 
patriarcham , ſcimus que calamitates per- 
culerint , quantiimgue Hereſt uulnus ins 
flidum ſit, dum venerabilem Patren An- 
eimum 7ſt; Eccleſeprefici curaſti. 

This triumphing did not long laſt: 
for Sir Thomas Row, having received 
Orders from King James in favour of 
the oppreſſed Greeks, to oppole thele 
violent courſes of the French Embaſla- 
dour and the Jeſuits, happily ſtept in 
and countermined them 3 and by his 
aſiſtence chiefly Cyril obtained his li- 
berty, and returned to Conſtantinople in 


C 4 _) This Letter is printed at the end of Codrnus 
de offictis (x officialibus Curie (5 Eccleſie Conſtantino- 
politanz, Par!ſ. 1548, 


September 


tm—my Wy Gin my Pong AS, oy a A AY mw. IA. = Tj OA _ w._4.- 


© -—x © 


a 5 FJ @ =P pe = _ a. a 


= 


under Cyrillos Lucaris. 
September following. Whereupon Ar- 


thimus, now grown conſcious of his 
Simony, and of having invaded his See, 
waited upon him privately, and ſub- 
mitted himſelf to him, acquainting him 
with his readineſs to reſign to him, as 
being the rightfull Patriarch. This fo 
alarmed the Preach Embaſladour, now 
grown warrn in the quarrel], as wcll 
out of a point of honour as of bigotry, 
that he ſends for Anthimns to his houſe 
over the water at Per, and what by 
promiſes of protetion from the Pope 
and his Maſter the French King, and to 
ſpend forty thouſand dollers in his de- 
fence, and what by threats, he prevai- 
led upon the weak man to make good 
and retain his Title and Charge. But 
notwithſtanding this ericouragement and 
aſſurance, Arthinmus being atraid of the 
evil conſequences of his obſtinacy in 
caſe Cyril ſhould be reſtored by a high 
hand; came in the night, and humbled 
himſelf, and begg'd his abſolution for 
the miſcarriage he had been guilty of , 
and abſolutely deveſted himſelt of the 
Patriarchall Dignity. Cyril/z here- 
upon, though not without a great ſum 
of mony paid to the Tirks, this Reſto- 
ration being look'd upon as a new Ad- 

S Vance- 


257 


253 The Stateof theGreek Church 


vancement, was re-eſtabliſhed in his 
former Seat. 

January 1623. A Kaloir, preferred to 
be an Archimandrite, arrived at Con- 
ſtantinople from Rowe , whence he 
brought the aſſurance of a conſiderable 
ſum of mony, in caſe they could once 
more ſecure the diſplacing of Cyril: but 
the defign taking vent, it was happily 
prevented. However the cauſe wasnot 
| wy over as deſperate, but new de- 
1gns were carried on at Rome with 
greater ſubtilty, and endeavours were 
uſed to corrupt the Patriarch, and this 
way, having blaſted his reputation a- 
mong his friends, ( who had hitherto 
afforded him their utmoſt aſliſtence, 
and who had a great opinion of his ho- 
neſty and inteprity,) the more effectu- 
ally to ruine him. Accordingly three 
wereſent from Roxze about Febr. 1624. 
Padre Berilli, a Jeſuit, a man of great 
ſubtilty and wit, who was to infinuate 
himſelf into the acquaintance of the 
Patriarch, and to perſwade him to ſtir 
up the Coſ/acks, over whom he had a 
mighty influence , they being. of the 
Greek Communion : which if it had 
been really praiſed and diſcovered, 
had been puniſht with a thouſand _— 


=» a —XAXo #*o&S = ooowoA arU Pr  u  .qQ_ (m6 (aa ant WkMLmmmcs ferro Ro #w OT Fm My qa 


mc dt... Mo A. > aa©& . oc SS... 


> aa®a7To 


ws wmDeetp DB = aa rr#T @ 7 Tv © 


znder Cyrillus Lucaris. 


if he had had ſo many lives to loſe. A 
ſecond , who was a Lay-gentleman, to 
make ſome overtures about a | 
and Peace with Spair. A third, a 
Greek of Naxplia, bred up in the Greek 
College at Rome, ed by Pope 
Gregory the Thirteenth in the year 1581, 
called Cannachio Roſſa, who had inſtruc- 
tions in [taliay, under the hand and 
ſeal of Cardinal Bandini, inorder to ad- 
juſt matters with Patriarch Cyril: Theſe 
may be ſeen at large in the Narrative 
above-mentioned : the ſum: of them in 
ſhort is this, That the Pope was willing 
toexpend conſiderable ſums of mony to 
reunite the Greek Church to the Roman; 
that they ſaw not how this Union could 
be made, if the reports which they had 
received of the preſent Patriarch were 
true, as that he denied the Invocation 
of Saints , and the worſhip of I . 
Tranſubſtantiation, (which they choſe to 
expreſs by thename of the Real Preſence 
of Chriſt in the Sacrament , for at that 
time the word wu4lunway Was ſcarce 
known among the Greeks 3 ) Liberty 
of will, Authority of the Councils and 
Fathers, the nanny Fs of auricular Cone 
fkeſtion: thus drawing up a confuſed 


charge of Articles againſt him, whereof 
S 2 ſome 


259 


:260 TheState of the Greek Church 


ſome were wholly untrue, (for no per- 
fon profeſſed a' greater reſpe& to the 
ancient'Councils and Fathers then he ;) 
that he ſent ſeveral Young men to the 
Univerſities of Erglarnd and Germany, 
in order to his propagating the fame 
Dodrin.all the Eaſt over 3 and that he 
diſtributed Catechiſms amongſt his Bj 
ſhops full ofthe ſame Errours, in compli» 
ance with the H»gonot Embaſladours, 
And if.that he would gain their eſteem 
and favour. at Rowe, he ſhould admit 
the Florentine Council , and condemn 
and anathematize the Errours and Blaf 
phemies of the Calviniſts and Lutherans. 
Upon theſe propoſals of Ryjſz, the Pa- 
triarch conſulted our Embaſladour, and 
was over-perſwaded by him, contrary 
to his own temper, to make no reply 
at the preſent. But this ſilence was 
taken for a'' contempt and a refuſa}, 
which they ' could not 'brook 3 and 
therefore in the way of revenge, they 
ſtirred up ſome of the Biſhops, whony 
they had made of their party , to de- 


throne.him, - and offered twenty thou-' 


ſand Dollers to fix one of them. in his 
place. -During this -hurly-burly , he 
thought fir:to. retire,” xill-the Jeſuiricall 
intrigue was made known tothe Govern-" 

| ment z 


a © ww 


| — 


ww © © 


«a wa 6s om egy Pn 64 ﬀ&4& a += A KA £5:  o.G2I.s SS _ - «< . x 


woerT 


"TD au Re: 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 


ment; who yet would underſtand no- 
thing of it , till their eyes were opened 
_ a Preſent of ten thouſand Dol- 
ers. ao 
. The Greeks now expeQed to enjoy 
the Peace which they had bought at fo 
dear a rate; but the event ſhewed, that 
their expefations were vain and il! 
ed : for at Rome they were re- 
olved not to give over a game as loſt , 
which they had ſome kind of hope to 
retrieve by foul play. To effect this , 
they thought fit to ſend an Arti-Patri- 
9 , though onely with the Title of 
Apoſtolicall Suffragan , and with him a 


Treaſurer, with full and abſolute Power 


and Authority to doe as they ſhould 
think fit, and agreeable to the Intereſts 
of the es Flnk And. to. pro- 
mote this defign, new Titular, Ryhops 
of Smyrna, Naxia, and the other |{Jands, 
were created, Monſignor. Suffraganeo 
arrives at Nzxia, December 162g, where 
he was complemented by the French 
Embaſſadour , who ſent thither his 
Chaplain , titular Biſhop of that place, 
and two Pefuits to receive him. They 
brought him to $cio 5 where at firſt he 
met with the ſame reſpect as the Townf- 


men of Lyſtra would have ſhewn to 
9 3 S. Paul 


261 


262 


The State of the Greek Church 


S. Paxl and Barnabas, as if the Pope had 
come amongſt them and appeared in his 
likenef. Butthe man ſelling withthe 
thoughts of the extraordinary Power 
wherewith he was intruſted, and not 
able to contain himſelf, begins to la 
about him, tothe great | of thoſe 
of his own Communion, as well Eccle- 
fiaſticks as others. The Greeks eſpeci- 
ally were alarmed at this unparalleld 
boldneſs 3 and, ſeeing that the Liberty 
of their Church was now ſtruck at and 
invaded, made friends to the Vzir , 
and repreſented their caſe ſo effeQually, 
thatthe Syuffragar was forc'd to fly, and 
the titukar Biſhops , who had the ill 
luck to be apprehended, were commit- 
tedto Prifon, notwithſtanding the me- 
diation'of their great Patron. 

The Aﬀairs of the GreekChurch were 
in a likely way of ſettlement, to the 
great Vexation of the Jeſiits, who 
were horribly perplext and confounded 
at their fate ſhamefull baffle and over- 
throw. They ſeemed to acquieſce, but 
it was onely till a fair opportunity pre- 
ſented it felf of renewing the onſet 


' with greater fury and violence. This 


they wiſht for, and knew could not be 
Jong wanting in Turkey, where i 4 
uc 


ww © 3 © = 7s 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 


fuch frequent alterationamong the chief 
Miniſters , and ſuch change of humour 
too, upon any freſh emergence: it be- 
ing a maxime of Tyrkiſ Politicks, to 
ſulpeQa Deſign in every little accident, 
and take ombrage at it 3 and accor- 
dingly fo it hapned, 

In J#ne 1627. there arrived at Cor- 
ftantinople , upon a ſhip of London, a 
certain Kaloir , called Nicodemo Ma- 
taxe, born in Cephalonia; who havin 
learned in E-gland, where he had lived 
ſeveral years , the art of printing, had 
brought with him a Prefs and Types in 
order to the publiſhing of Books for the 
uſe and information of the poor igno- 
rant Greeks, The defign was excellent 
and moſt Chriſtian: but it being wholly 
new ; the great —_ was, how to 

the lu aſhore, without givin 

bh dk 6s the Tarks. The good 
man was brought to our Embaſladour by 
the Archbiſhop of Corinth from the Pa- 
triarch, tobeg of him to own the goods, 
otherwiſe in great _— to be ſeiſed, 
Which accordingly he did, upon a far- 
ther application of the Patriarchs of 
Conſtantinople and Alexandria, this lat- 
ter, Geraſimws , t.apning then to be up- 
on the place, who with the Dutch Em- 

S 4 baila- 


264 TheState of the Greek Church 
baſladour, the Sieur Va» Haghe, came 
to his Lordſhip's Palace to conſult him. 
But to prevent all ſiniſter interpretati- 
ons of the Tyrks, he thought fit to doe 
it openly, having firſt given the Vizir 
notice of it EE 
There was a longer demurr about 
working at the Prefs, it being very ob- 


vious to foreſee how liable they were to 
be accuſed by the jealous Turkiſh Ca- 


dyes and Imams, that is, Juſtices and 


Prieſts, of printing Books againſt their 
Religion. The Embaſſadour would by 
no means be perſwaded by the Patriarch 
'to permit this to be done in his houſe, 
but adviſed them to take a houſe in the 
neighbourhood, promiſing them hisaſli- 
ſtence. It was impoſhble that this 
ſhould- eſcape the knowledge of the 
French Embaſſadour and the Jeſuits, 
who hearing that the Preſs was ſet up, 
and all things ready fortheir work, grew 
ſtrangely dillatisfied at it, as if the de- 
ſign had been chiefly to print Books 
againſt the Church of Rowe, and by 
pubiilliing Catechiſms and Rudiments 
of Learning ſpoil the trade of the Feſnits, 
W110 had fet up a School in their Con- 
vent, and taught Greek Children grate, 
and by theſe means oftentimes made 

Proſelytes 


a Ho ara a ea Aawmdty wn cos FI TT ——_— w wm —] 


i ti. a. I In——Y 


3. a. 2 XX EH 2- A 3 TE © 6 


— - _— _— = vas 


= n= 4 


under Cyrillus Lucans. 


Profelytes of their Parents. They firſt 
tried to win Mataxa by fair means ; 
but this way not ROmonny they cal- 
led him Heretick and Lytheran 5 and 
ſoon after it was told him, that they had 
deſigns upon his life: which put the 
poor man into ſuch a fright , that he 
made it his earneſt requeſt to the Em- 
baſſadour, that, he might be permitted 
to lie in his houſe, not daring to adven- 
ture to ſtay in the night in his own lod- 
gings, where he worked in the day- 
time, for fear of having his throat cut. 
The Patriarch, to vindicate himſelf from 
the aſperſions caſt upon him by the Je- 
ſuits , as if he had introduced new and 


265 


ſcandalous Dodrines' in the Greek . 


Church, ſent a little Book to the Preſs 
concerning the Faith and Dodtrine of 
that Church, which ſome years before 
Mitaxa arrived he had compoſed, and 
deſigned to have ſent into Ergland to 
be printed there, and to dedicate to 
King James : but.now he inſcribed it 
to his Son and Succeſſour, Charles the 
Firſt, of bleſſed and glorious memory. 
They look'd upon this as fuch a bold 
Defiance of Rome and France, that 
they were reſolved not onely to de'troy 
the Preſs, but to ſacrifice the au 
| an 


266 The State of the Greck Church 


and Printer to their — And ha- 
ving procured a copy of a Book written 
by Cyril , and printed in Ezglard, in 
defence of our B. Szvioxr's Divinity , 
which he chiefly intended againſt the 
Jews, and finding ſome few paſſages in 
itagainſt the Opinions of the Mabones 
tans, they gained a Buffone, who was 
a cunning Raſcal, and in eſteem with 
the Vizir , by promiſing him twenty 
yards of Sattin , to acquaint him, that 
' Mataxa was a Souldier, and ſent to 
ſtir up the Greeks to mutiny : that un- 
der a pretence of printing Books for the 
uſe of Children , hs had diſperſt others 
of a quite different argument, and ſuch 
as oppoſed the Alcorar, ( meaning this 
little Book of Cyri[s, ſeveral copies of 
which he had brought over with him: ) 
that the Eg/;ſh Embaſſadour protected 
him, that the Patriarch was the Authour: 
and that great numbers were ſent into 
Okrain, to perſwade the Coſſacks to in- 
vade the Empire upon the abſence of 
the Grand Signor, who then deſigned 
an expedition into Aſia. 

The Pizir upon the firſt notice, 
without examining whether the accuſa- 
tion were true or falſe, or ſo much as 
likely, (which I intimated before to - 

the 


YG Ge aw DM aA wehbotw a AAA. Acxiom Ac am Ak ans an a, 


4 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 


the raſh and heady practice of the Turks, ) 
ſends a Company of Jenizaries, no leſs 
then one hundred and fifty , comman- 
ded by a Captain, to feiſe upon Ma- 
taxa : and this at the inſtigation of the 
French Embaſſadour , who contrived 
that the deſigned aflault ſhould be de- 
ferred till Twelfth-day, having learned, 
that our Embaſſadour had invited the 
Venetian Bailo , ( a Roman Catholick , 
but a man of a more mild and Chriſtian 
temper then the French Connt, and with 
whom he maintained a friendly and in- 
timate correſpondence, notwichſtanding 
their different ſentiments in ſome few 
poiges of Religion, no way eſſential to 
it, ) the Patriarch, and feveral other 
perſons to an ie rye" hl _— 
tax happily abſent , at "Mp 
with the” Entaſſadour's Secretary , in 
bis return to Pere , not knowing that 
his houſe was beſet , paſſed unknown 
through the Souldiers , being in a hat; 
and though pointed at by ſome as the 
man, yet others ſaying, that he belon- 
ged to the Exgliſp Embaſladour , he 
eſcaped at laſt, and got into the Palace, 
half dead with the fright he was put in- 
to. The Captain miſſing his chief prey, 
binds his Servants, rifles his Cheſts , 

empties 


<. 


13> 


267 


268 The State of the Greek Church 


empties the Room, and carries all away 
with him, as the goods of a Traitour , 
to the value of ſeven thoufand Dollers, 
The Patriarch lying under the accufati- 
on of a-Crime ſo capital, and fearing 
the ſad effets of Twrki/b fury upon the 
firſt impreſſions, before. the fit is over , 
durſt not go home to his own houſe that 
night. The next day the Book was 
examined , and the particular place , 
in which -was the ſuppoſed Blaſphemy 
againſt Mahomet , interpreted by two 
Greek Renegado's, inthe preſence of the 
Vizir and: ſeveral Churchmen: but no 
reat matter upon their examination 
could be: made of it. Cyri/zs himfclf, 
relying upon his innocency , appearin 
the dw , againſt pom. vera 
crimes were objeted,' but without the 
leaſt proof, -The day following , the 
Embaſſadour thought fit to demand 
audience of the Vizir, to expoſtulate 
the caſe with him, and to ſatisfy him in 
ſeveral particulars relating to Mataxa, 
which he did with an admirable ſucceſs; 
the Vizir confeſling with ſhame, that 
he had been over-credulous, wondrin 
at the impudence of thoſe' , who ha 
abuſed him by falſe informations, and 


promiſing to ſee reſtored all the goods 
| which 


a a a —_ aul_qQ Cl... 


ww «un =3X' A mw Kt. nm ta ta oe 


a ene  aAmFP ID FY-= © uk 4 © 


nn” IS —_— Tr TO TE THF Rune ww ww - T7 ww a % ww Q ww ry ue 4s FF w ww 


\ oanaana heÞd If _ AMTL—_— SS Ces A * 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 
which had been taken away three days 


before in that great hurry. And to 


wipe off the prejudice out of the minds 
of the Tixrkiſþ Prieſts, he thought fit 
and condeſcerided to go ſoon after to 
the Myftz to ſatisfy him alſo. ' - 

Upon theſe heinous provocations , 
the Embaſſadour and the Patriarch were 
ſo juſtly offended , (the Embaſladour, 
for that they endeavoured to ruine his 
reputation in the T»rk;/þ Court, and 
had ſpoken not onely reproachfully of 
him, which he generouſly flighted, but 
of the King his Maſter, whom Roſ/z, in 
a diſcourſe with- the Patriarch the day 
after the Tirks had ſeiz'd upon the Preſs, 
had called the Head of the Hereticks ; 
the Patriarch}, for that they conſpired 
apainſt his life., ) that they were reſol- 
ved to ſhew their reſentments upon the 
Authours and Contrivers of - the Plot ; 
and- prevailed. ſo far , notwithſtandin 
the : reiterated inſtances of' the Frerc 
Embaſſadour, as to have Canmnathio Roſſe 
and-'the Feſuzts thrown into- priſon. 


| The Turks defigned to ſtrangle them, as 


having contravened the Laws of their 
Government ; bur at the interceſſion of 
the E-gliſþ Embaſſadour chiefly , they 
forbore to execute this bloudy ſen- 


+) £4:30} tence, 


269 


270 


The State of the Greek Church 


tence, and baniſht them and the reſt of 
their Order the dominions of the Grazd 
Sijgnor , as diſturbers of the publick 


Soon after, Sir Thomas Row leaves 
Turkey, ſucceeded by Sir Peter Wych, 
a Gentleman of great worth and rare 
accompliſhments, and every way fit 
and qualified for that weighty and diff 
cult Ewployment : who, following the 
example of his Predeceſſour , took the 
Greek Church into his ProteRion , and 
had a particular value andefteem for Cy- 
ril : But not having had the happine6 
hitherto tomeet with any account of his 
Embaſly under his own hand relating 
to the Greeks, I ſhall out of others give 
a brief Relation of the Troubles whi 
befell the good Patriarch, andthe man- 
ner of his death. | 

( 4) For ſome few years after this 
blow given bis enemies, Cyril was at 

uviet , but far from being ſecure. De- 
were then a on in the dark, 

and thediſcontented Greek Biſhops were 
made- uſe of in order to his Deprivati- 
on: and particularly Joaſaph Archbiſhop 
of Philippopoli,, who ſtruck at him, but 


C41) V. Hting-pog: $58 | 
| miſ'd 


om rm nm <*D—©Frc<r EAR == 5 © 2m cpH Ry = ww wee ky 4 we A. 


PN. =» 


G B PT FRA Ana T'S pe 6 


— 


7 5I” 


COOLED 


36” 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 271 


miſ'd his blow , the other keeping his 
ground, They grow furious and cla- 
morous hereupon , and knowing what 
were the moſt effetual arguments with 
Turks, they offer twenty thouſand Dol- 
lers, in favour _— Metropolite of 
Chalcedon, who had eſpouſed the Roware 
Intereſt , and was in great vogue and 
reputation among them. But the Em- 
ur having had one of his Pages 
illd in his preſence in his Seraglio at 
Beſhiktaſh , ( a place about four miles 
from Conſtantinople upon the Boſphor wo, ) 
being much troubled at the ſad accident, 
and looking upon it as ominous, and 
the Greeks , who were friends of Cyril- 
lw, lamenting the fad misfortunes they 
were likely to fall under by the loſs of 
him, refuſed at laſt to give his conſent 
for his Removall, In the mean while 
his Exchequer was not to ſuffer, and if 
they would continue the old Patriarch, 
the ſame ſumm was to be paid in, which 
was profered to make a new one. 

The Dutch Embaſladour  Cornelizs 
Van Hlaghe , haying obtain'd a copy of 
the Confeſſion of Faith in Latiz, which 
he had begun to print in Greek at Con- 
ſtantinople , at the time the Preſs was 
broke, ſent it into Chriſtendox: 3, and it 

Was 


272 


T he State of the Greck Church 


was firſt printed at Geneva, about the 
end of the year 1630. This alarm'd 
them at Roxze, as much as it an Army 
had been on their march towards that 
City. | At firſt it was' Took'd upon as a 
thing feign'd , becauſe onely writ in 
Latin ; and it was giver out, that the 
Patriarch's'name was onely made uſe of 
for a blind : but however an anſwer 
was publiſhed by one of his Country- 
men; a Candiot, Foannes Matthens Ca- 
ryophilzs , bred up m . the Gregorian 
College at Rome, and Titular Archbi- 
ſhop of Iconinm 5 and printed at Rome 
1631. under the Title of Cerſura Cone 


" felfronis Fidei, ſen potiis Perfidie Calvi- 


riane, que nomine Cyrilli Patriarche 
Conſtantinopolitant circumferatur : 
which was alſo put into Greek by the 
fame hand, and dedicated to Urbar the 
Eighth, 'and printed 'at Rome 1632. by 
the Printersofthe Sacred Congregation, 
as they ſpeak, de propaganda frde. 
Afterwards Cyril/zs thought fit to 


tranſlate: this Confefftion , which had | 


made fo great a noiſe in Chriftendor , 
word for word into Greek, with a con- 
ſiderable addition of four Queſtions and 
Anſwers z which was done in Jar. 1631, 
though not printed till 1633.at _— 

t 


ap = —_— a wud fi. ci ax -_— a= Daw aa ic EL 


JV xy 


4 6 }_ tus \& 


* + His 


7 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 273 


| It was now no longer a_ queſtion or 
doubt, who was the Authour. He 
himſelf own it 1n all companies, when 
he was conſulted about it : and not- 
withſtanding all the artificesand violence 
uſed upon him, he, would never be 
brought to deny or diſlemble the thing, 
or retraCt his judgment. Which will 
more fully appear from the following 
Memojre , which I have copied out 
of a Letter written by the Sieur Var 
Haghe, Embaſladour of the States of the 
Netherlands, at Conſtantinople, Jan. 17. 
1432, wherein he ſays that Cyril viſiting 
the new FrenchEmbaſladour, the Count 
de Marcheville , was received very re- 
ſpettully, the Embaſladour giving him 
the Title, which was thennewly appro- 
priated to the Cardinals, of Eminentiſſz- 
mo Signore, Aﬀer dinner, the Embaſ- 
fadour ſhew'd him his Confeſſion, which 
the French Embaſſadour at Roxze had 
| ſent him, by order of the Pope , with 
expreſs order to demand of him , it he 
| had made it, and if he would perfiſt in 
it, The Patriarch, after he had taken 
up the Book in his hand , and look'd 
carefully upon it, repli'd, That truly it 
was his Confefſion :; but before they 
demanded , whether he would perfift 

T in 


4 - 
- 2 L0 


274 The Stateof the Greek Church 


in it , they ought firſt to ſhew and 
convince him by the Scriptures, where- 
in he had erred : that it was more then 
five hundred years, fince the Greek 
Church had been entirely ſeparated 
from the Roman; and that he had no- 
thing to doe with the Pope, and was no 
way obliged to render an account of his 
Faith to him, or to any who depend 
upon him: adding further, that he had 
more then a hundred Metropolitans and 
Biſhops , beſides a great number of 
other Ecclefiaſticall perſons, under his 
Juriſdiction, to whom, if it were requi- 
lite, he would be always ready to give 
ſatisfattion in a general Synod of the 
Greek Church, + rv all tothe Word 
of God, and the ancient Fathers of the 


Primitive Church. To this juſt dif- | 


courſe the Embaſſadour made no other 
anſwer but this, That at Rome, and in 
France they held his Eminence for a Cal- 
viniſt ; which Se& was much hated by 
the King his Maſter : and I wiſh, faid 
he, that your Eminence were a Roman- 
Catholick , as the King is, whoſe favour 
and liberality might be gain'd this way. 
The Patriarch replid intheſe few words: 
In the affairs of my Belief, and eternal 
Salvation, IT ſhall neither follow the 

King 


pan Ps ny. mp 5 FY ©\ ww won, A*% a 


<q 5 8» IA,oIOqO&AD OAS 


LM IE MES. . m—_ —— = SS 


WS OI bas ** 


-* XY R8I i * ww + : 1-0) mw DD CD 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 


King of France, nor any perſon in the 
world whatſoever ; and I ſhall never 
doe any thing otherwiſe then what my 
Conſcience diretts me. Here the Con- 
verſation ended ; the Patriarch 1mme- 
diately taking his leave of the Embaſſa- 
dour, having given him thanks for his 
kind and noble entertainment : but to 
prevent all miſreports that might pals 
upon the account of this Viſit, he ac- 
quainted his friends with the particula- 
ritics of it. 

I do not doubt in the leaſt , but that 
this ſtout and honeſt Profeſſion, which 
Cyrillzs made before the French Embaſ- 
ſadour, in which he continued to the 
laſt minute of his life, will, in the cſteem 
of all indifferent perſons , whoſe judg- 
ment is not perverted either by preju- 
dice or paſſion, fully vindicate him 
from all thoſe unjuſt, and malicious Ac- 
cuſations, wherewith he is charged by 
his enemies, whom his zeal and love 
for Truth had provoked beyond all de- 
grees of reſpe&t and Chriſtian. charity, to 
an irreconcileable hatred of his perſon. 
What artifices were uſed by the Roma- 
»iſts to gain him, and make him theirs, 
cannot be denied or conteſted, and 'tis 
as certain, that if he had ſtudied any 

Sf bale 


275 


276 TheState of theGreck Church 


baſe or ſecular intereſt, or had had any 
regard toeaſe, and quiet, and a ſecure 
enjoying of his dignity, that if he had 
not been a man of great integrity above 
the temptation of mony, and of an in- 
vincible courage to ſuſtain all thofe fre- 
quent aſlaults, wherewiththey thought 
to tire and weary out his patience, and 
to expoſe himſelf without any concern 
of fear , to continual dangers, even of 
death it ſelf, wherewith he was threat- 
ned , onely that he might preſerve the 
peace of his Conſcience, he would have 
ſunk under theſe powerfull Temptati- 
ons , and might have made his peace 
upon very advantageous terms, and in 
all probability have died in his bed for 
any crime the Txrks had to lay to his 
charge but through their falſe ſuggeſtt- 
ONs. 

By this let the world judge, whether 
there be the leaſt degree of probability 
in the charge of Grotizs, (a) that he 
framed this modell of his Faith, pretio 
indudus , merely out of conſiderations 
of gain. For what Colleftions were 


C a )) In diſcaſſime Apologetici Rivetiani. Sumends 
eſt Eccleſia Greca , non qualem ex ſuo Capite Cyrillus nupe” 
indutffus pretio confinxergt—— 


Ever 


St a _Þ a a ana a_ mat oo mnt ——_ as 


PF mILA_q  __rF == wer #*= * aw_ MM a XA A Xa £4 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 


ever made in Erg/and or Holland for his 
ſupport, or to induce him to defend 
the doctrine of the Reformation 2 who 
were they that furniſhed him withmony 
to bring him to this compliance ? The 
violent perſecutions , under which he 
lay, forced him upon making applicati- 
ons'to the Engliſh and Dutch Embaſla- 
dours, for their affiſtence 5 that he 
might not be run down by the power of 
his enemies : and theſe publick perſons, 
though both juſtly zealous for the Reli- 
gion and Dodtrine of Proteſtants, ſcor- 
ned to doe any thing unworthy of Gen- 
tlemen, or inconſiſtent with the ſtricteſt 

int of honour. His oppoſition of 

»e bore a much ancienter date then 
his acquaintance with them, and with- 
out doubt was founded upon a juſt and 
clear conviction of his underſtanding. 
So that this Imputation of his being bri- 
bed to doe what he did, is wholly 
groundleſs and fictitious , and procee- 
ded from an exceſſive courtſhip and ci- 
vility in that great and incomparable 
Scholar to the Jeſaits, of whoſe good 
opinion, and friendſhip he ſeemd at 
that time very ambitious. . 

The Inveftives of Monſteur Arnaud 


are equally unjuſt and groundleſs : who 
3 fetches 


277 


278 The Stateof the Greek Church 


fetches all bis proofs from AZatizs : but 
certainly the paſſion and partiality of 
that Writer , which are both ſo notort- 
ous, ought to have rendred his Teltt- 
mony ſuſpe&ted , which is now invali- 
dated and confounded by the atteſtation 
of two publick Miniſters , then living 
upon the place , which I am confident 
no Romax Catholick , if he be a perſon 
of quality or ſenſe, will ſcruple to pre- 
ferr, notwithſtanding their being Prote- 
ſtants, before that of a hungry Greek, 
who lived at Rome , and wrote for 
bread, - And whereas Monſteur (a) Ar- 
wand makes Cyrillus an Hypocrite , 1n 
communicating with his Greeks ſtill, and 
uſing ſuch Ceremonies as he eſteemed 
ſuperſtitious , I ſhall onely make this 
Appeal to himſelf, whether there are 
not in the Church of Roe ſeveral rites 
of Worſhip and other religious Cere- 
monies praQiſed by himſelf, and eſpect- 
ally inthe ſerviceof the Maſs, which he 
in his Conſcience knows to be vain and 
dle, and wiſhes were altered or aboli- 
ſhed, and onely thinks fit to praftice in 
compliance with the preſent cuſtom and 
eſtabliſhment : and yet I preſume he 


\ 4 )) Laperpetuited* la foy, livre 4. chapitre 11, 
would 


bak, ou 


hu * es ey } hk = £@ _X-«, © »W 


vv a £3 mo A © += © TV, ce mp mo 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 


would take it in great ſcorn to be accu- 
ſd of Hypocriſy - ſo doing. But itis 
not my bafineſs at this time to anſwer 
the objections of Monſieur Arn-ard, but 
ſhall refer the Reader to his learned and 
eloquent Antagoniſt, my very worthy 
and honoured Friend, Monſieur Clad. 
Whart the Aſleſlors of the Bethleemi- 
tick Synod or writer of the book in their 
name prefixed to their determinations 
have faid of Cyril/zs, is 1o ridiculouſly 
idle and ſcandalouſly falſe, that whoſo- 
ever is but a little acquainted with the 
hiſtory and tranſafions of thoſe times, 
he muſt be amazed at the ſtrange confi- 
dence and boldneſs of theſe men, who 
dare thus contradi& plain and notorious 
matter of fa& : as for inſtance, when 
they ſay, that ( 4) Cyri/z2 ſaid nothing 
of what goes under his name either in 
publick or private 3 that none of his 
friends and acquaintance ſay any thing 
of him like this; that ( 6 ) his Con- 
feſſion was not under his hand ; that 
they have a thouſand witneſſes of his 
"ExxAnnzzny wowfuz, I luppoſe, they 
mean, of his being pious and orthodox 


( 4) Smodus Bethleemitica. Pariſiis, 8%. 1676. þ. 33+ 
(5.2) page 34 


T 4 in 


279 


230 


The State of the Greek Church 


in the dodrine contrary to that in his 
Confeſſion; and ( 4) that they have 
a great book of his '"OwAizi, or Sermons 
preached on Sundays and Holy-days in 
Conſtantinople, containing things repug- 
nant to his Confeſhon. But with their 
g00d leave there is nothing in all thoſe 
CaAcai or excerpta, Which they have 
printed, except perchance one citation, 
(if they have not injured him in it , by 
inſerting a word or two not extant in 
the Original,) which contradicts in the 
leaſt his Confeſhon , or Ti; wreuns 
tact rave; xepahalans ,, thoſe Arti- 
cles or Chapters , which, as they idly 
pretend ; falſly go under his name, 
The bare- recital of theſe fooleries 1s a 
ſufficient confutation. : 'And whereas 
they object often ', that the Eaſtern 
Church never received or acknowled- 
ged this Confeſſion of Faith, and that it 
was his private fancy, and done by his 
own ſole ' Authority, : which is alſo ob- 
jected by (b) Grotiws, I ſhall by way 
© 4 4. - hb 

C b ) Credenda defmire Pape non ſolent, nift in concaliis 
unverſalibys, aut ft ea haberi non poſſint , cum conſenſu tal;, 
quz at Concilii Univerſalis auforitatem proxims accedat*: 
contra quam nuper fecit Conſtantinopolt Cyrillus , quz 
foe Patrzarchrs, ſine Mgtrapolitisg ſine Epiſcopis novum nubis 


Propinavit Symbolum. D. Grotius in append. - ad Comm 
fe Antichriſto. Amſtelod. 1641. 89. p. 48, 49+ c 
| =» - 4 OL 


bow” os 


S—_  -m VA a. Au ac ca a amr .£tt Ot aa ak 


— WW” ww » 7M 9 aA aA”, 


TY 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 


of anſwer communicate what I find in 
the cloſe of the Sieur Va Haghe's Letter, 
where he ſays, that there was ſcarce any 
oneamong the Metropolitans, of which 
a great number were then preſent at 
Conſtantinople , who would not adven- 
ture hiseſtate, life and perſon in the de- 
fence of the ſaid Patriarch and his Con- 
feſkon. But of this more hereafter, if 
they who have a power and right of 
command over me {hall think fit and 
neceſlary. | 

( a) Not long after the arrival of 
the French Embaſladour , there came 
from Rome to Conſtantinople two fugi- 
tive Greek Bifhops , the one having 
been ' Metropolite of Sophia, the other 
of Acrida, ſent thither by the Pope and 
the College of Cardinals de propaganda 
fide, to give the Patriarch further dif- 
turbance, and to get him diſplaced, in 
order to the advancing any one of their 
Caball , otherwiſe never ſo unqualified 
either for life or learning. Theſe two 
recommended to the French Embaſla- 
dour, had lodgings afligned them in his 
Palace , and were fully aſſured of his 
proteQion. To ſhew their zeal tothe 


C 4 ) Outof the Letter of the Sicur Van Haghe. 
cauſe, 


281 


2302 


The State of the Greck Church 


cauſe, which they came to advance, they 
fell upon the Patriarch with moſt revi- 
ling language, calling him Heretick, 
Lutheran and Infidel; and threatned 
the Metropolitans , that they would 
give agreat ſumm of mony to the Grand 
Signor for the Patriarchſhip, and take 
it to farm : and this they would doe, as 
ſoon as they received new inſtructions 
and orders from Rome. The French 
Embaſladour appearing ſo much in their 
behalf, the Patriarch, together with 
the Biſhops and chief of the ſecular 
Greeks, who readily and jealouſly joy- 
ned with him, thought, that it highly 
concerned them _ the peace of their 
Church, to inform the Emperour, Vi- 
2ir, and the principal Miniſters of the 
deligns of the Pope and his adhe- 
rents. 

It was ( 4)) not long after , that 
the Metropolites of Adrianople, Lariſſa, 
Chalcedon, Cyzicum and Naupatws en- 
tred into a conſpiracy againſt the Patri- 
arch : but by the help of friends and a 


C 4 )) V. Hotting. Anale#a in append. pag. 558. who 
was fully informed of theſe particulars by Monfieur Leger, 
8 Frenco Divine, who had lived for ſeveral years in Con- 
ftantimople , and was very intimately acquainted with 
Patriarch Cyril. 


Preſent 


rAS<SLOSC 


” "0 "0. W WW. 0 Wy. NS SS 9 Th. Ss hs” —"<<XY 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 


Preſent of ten thouſand Dollers the 
tempeſt was allayed. 

' ( 4.) Odfober 1633. Cyrillus Contari 
Metropolite of Berea, who had been 
formerly (6 ) a Scholar of the Jeſuits, 
made uſe of the mony, which, by vir- 
tue of Letters commendatory from the 
Patriarch , he, bad colleGed in ſeveral 
Provinces for the uſes and neceſſities of 
the Church, to dethrone his Patron , 
who had employed him. The occaſion 
of his diſguſt and hatred of the Patriarch 
proceeded from his not being preferred 
by him to the Archbiſhoprick of Theſſa- 
lonica , which he earneſtly defired, and 
now he was reſolved in the way of re- 
yenge to ſtep into his Seat : for which 
advancement he was to pay no leſs then 
fifty thouſand Dollers. But not bein 
able to make good his undertaking _ 
ſatisfy for this great ſumm, after ſeven 
days huffing and domineering, the Turks 
baniſhed him and the Biſhop of Azzaſia 


(4 J Þ4s- 559+ : _ 

C b _) See the Letter of Dionyſius Guillius, a Jeſuit, 
one of thoſe , who had been baniſhed Conſtantmople , 
where he gives a large account of his ſtudies and behav1- 
our, and of the deference , which he ſhewed to 
thoſe of his Order, apud Leonem Allatium de Eccleie 
Occidentalis Cy Orientalis perpetua conſenſrone, lib, 3. ca. 11s 


(#. 5+ P4ge 1077» 
his 


283 


284 


The State of the Greek Church 


his Confederate, who died there, to 
the Iſland of Teredos : whence writing 
penitential Letters to the Patriarch, in 
which he acknowledged his guilt and 
the juſtice of his pumſhment , he was 
by his favour reſtoredto his former Dio- 
pe | | - 
(4) March 1634. Six tnonths after 
this, Araſtaſins Pattelari of Candia, 
Archbiſhop of Theſ/alonica, bought the 
Patriarchſhip at the price of ſixty thou- 
fand Dollers ; andthis by the inſtigation 
and with the affiſtence of the Romaniſt, 
as Cyril writes in a Letter from Texedor, 
whither he was baniſhed. But this per- 
fidious and ingratefull man, whom Cyril 
had preferred to be a Biſhop , and had 
otherways obliged , continued ſcarce a 
monthin the dignity, which he had gai- 
ned by horrid Simony , Cyrilus being 
reſtored in June following upon the 
hard condition of paying , beſides the 
ſumm which the facnilegious Uſurper 
had contraGed for, an overplus of ten 
thouſand Dollers, almoſt to the utter 
ruine of the poor Greeks , of whom it 
was to be exaGted and levied. 


C 4a )) V. Hotting., Annal. pag. $59. where through 4 
miſtake he 1s called Athanaſius. . 


March 


vw 4yyvy-—_ -,, r_-- 


az ew 453 = EE FR A £2 a 31HEA A a rm w=.4,T9Y 5 -& 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 


March 1635. ( a )) Cyrillus Contari 
begins again to raiſe new troubles in the 
Greek Church, to gratify his own ambi- 
tion and pride, and his Maſters, the 
Jeſuits, and bribing the Trks with fifty 
thouſand Dollers, invades once more 
the Patriarchall Throne, which is now 
wholly influenced and governed by the 
Jeſuits, In the mid(t of his wine in 
April following , not able to keep the 
ſecret, he conteſles, that all was done 
by an agreement with the Pope, to 
whom Cyril was to be ſent, whom they 
had got baniſhed to Rhodes. This man 
was every way fit for their turns, being 
ofa baſe mercenary temper, and wholly 
depending upon Rome + making fre- 
quent mr , that if the Pope 
would but furniſh him with mony 
enough , he would not onely kits his 
hands, but his feet too: and I ſuppoſe 
he would have been content to have 
ſtyled himſelf Patriarch , Imperatoris 
Turcarum &- Romani Pontificis gratid. 
Cyril now an Exile in Rhodes gives an 
account, by Letters to the Dutch Em- 
baſſadour , of his hard and cruel uſage, 
and of the deſigns of ſome of the Chri- 


C 4 ) pag. 551. 


ftiar 


285 


286 The Stateof the Greek Church 


ſtian Corſayrs to have ſeiſed upon him 
in order to his tranſportation into [tal: 
which being made known to the chief 
Officer, who commanded the Souldiery 
inthat Iſland, was happily prevented by 
his removing him thence. 

About eighteen months after , Ju 
1536. he was reſtored , though not 
without the powerfull interceſſion of 
his friends, and great ſums of mony, 
without which be the cauſe never fo juſt 
and clear, nothing is done in Tyrkey. 

Cyril, though reſtored, had the ſame 
difficulties to encounter with as before : 
the ſame enemies {till remained , who 
kept up their animoſities and malice to- 
ward him: thoſe of Cyril/xs of Berea 
his party , advanced during his uſurpa- 
tion to titles and dignities inthe Church, 
who were now diſgraced and ran the 
ſame fortune with him , endeavouring 
by all means poſſible to promote his in- 
tereſt: and we cannot eaſily imagine , 
that the Jeſuits were now reconciled 
and become his Friends. No, they ſaw 
to their hearts grief, how Cyr:/ had ſtill 
prevailed, notwithſtanding his frequent 
depoſitions and baniſhment : and there- 
fore they all were reſolved to be rid of 
him one way or other and get him dit- 

patcht, 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 


patcht. For now they were grown fu- 
rious and deſperately mad againſt him : 
and nothing leſs then his bloud would 
fatisfy their revenge. Which yet God 
would not ſuffer them to effect , ill 
about two years after. 

The Tragical time drew nigh , in 
which this excellent man was to be made 
a Sacrifice, Of the manner of his Death 
I amableto give a particular relation, as 
having received it from the mouth of 
the Reverend DoGour Pocock, Pre- 
bendary of Chriſt Church Oxon, a per- 
ſon of excellent judgment and incom- 
parable learning in the Oriental/ Lan- 
guages, as thoſe many uſctull and curi- 
ous Books, which he has publiſhed, 
fully declare , who then lived at Cor- 
ſtantinople , when the bloudy fact was 
committed, and of which he lent alarge 
account to that excellent man, Arch- 
biſhop Lard , of famous memory, who 
was very inquiſitive to know the mi- 
nute circumſtances of the Patriarch's 
Death, little thinking at that time, that 
his own fad fate was coming on fo faſt, 
The copy of this Letter was unhappily 
loſt in the time of the Civil Wars : but 
this reverend and excellent Perſon has 
been pleaſed often in diſcourſe to give 

me 


287 


288 TheStateof theGreek Church 


me the ſumm of it. Which very much 
confirms the relation of the: ſame Mur- 
ther, written by ( a ) Nathanael Cono- 
pins, Protoſyncellus of the Patriar- 
chall Church under this Patriarch, in 
Greek. | 

Cyril's Enemies not able to get any 
advantage over him, during the Empe- 
rour's ſtay at Conſtantinople , the chick 
Vizir being his Friend , they foreſeeing 
their departure from that City , had 
with their mony gained an intereſt in 
Bairam Baſſa, then in great favour, who 
undertook the buſineſs for them, which 
he thus by a wile effefted. For the 
Grand Signor, having reſolved in the 
year 1638. upon a War upon the Per{.- 
4ns 1n order to the recovering of Bagdat 
out of their hands, into which it had 
faln not long before, ſent this Bairam 
Baſſa before him to prepare the way , 
and to make all neceſlary proviſions for 
the intended Siege: while he and the 
Vizir advanced 1n flow and eaſy mar- 
ches with the groſs of the Army, then 
gathering from the moſt diſtant parts of 
the Empire , though in. two diſtin 


(C a ) V. Epiſtlam Conopii ad Antonium Legerum apud 
Hotting. in appehdice AnaleForum, pag. $64- 


Bodics, 


vv *F x BS” " V_ FF HW” Pp” 2 Gon” og OE cn Ps EO Toon Fn I EO TS Rs 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 


Bodies, and at ſome diſtance, for the 
convenience of forrage and quarter. 
The Emperour finding all things to his 
mind, and agreeable to his expectation, 
was hugely pleaſed and ſatisfied with 
tiis conduct. He taking the advantage, 
and . being often admitted into the Em- 
perour's preſence , affiſted herein by 
Huſain Baſſa, repreſented to him, among 
other thingsrelating tothat conjuncture, 
that Cyril/zs had a great power over 
thoſe of his Religion, that by his inſtt- 
pation the Coſ/acks had bur lately faln 
upon ( 4.) Azac, (aconfiderable Town 
upon the River Tana#s, not far from the 
great lake of Mzotis,) which they took 
and pillaged , that he was a dangerous 
man , and might ſtir up the Greeks, 
which were ſo numerous in Conſtantircos 
ple, to mutiny , at that time eſpecially, 
when the Imperial City was left bare 
and defenſelets , moſt of the Janizaries 
being in the Camp, and therefore that it 
was fitting and necellary to prevent 
ſuch a miſchief, as might eaſtly happen, 
by putting him to death, The jealous 
Emperour poſlefled with theſe plauſible 
ſtories , immediately in a rage ſigned 


C 4) In the ordinary Maps it 1s called Azoph. 
V an 


285 


290 


The State of the Greek Church 


an Hatte Sherif or Order for his being 
ſtrangled : and a Courier was diſpatcht 
away with itin great haſt to the Caima- 
cam or Governour. He, purſuant to 
his Order, forthwith ſent his Officers to 
{cize upon Cyril/us, and ſent him Priſo- 
ner to one of the Caſtles upon the Boſ- 
phorus. In the Evening ( 4 ) June 27. 
they took him thence, and put him 1n- 
to a Boat , telling him, that they were 
carrying him on board a Velſlel lying at 
Santo Stephano , a ſmall Port upon the 
Propontis , a little below the Sever 
Towers, in order to his tranſportation, 
But as ſoon as they had launched forth, 
he perceiving their deſign to murther 
him, fell upon his knees and prayed 
with great fervency and earneſtnels, pre- 
paring himſclf for death, After ſome 
revilings and buffettings, they did not 
long delay to put the foal ſtring about 
his Neck , and ſoon diſpatcht him. 


C 4 )) Anno Domini 1638. Januarii 27. Cyrillus Pa- 
triarcha Conſtantinopolitanus , intmicorum calumniis op- 
preſſus, Imperatoris tum abſentis mandato ſtrangulatus eſt, 
D. Pocockius in ſupplemento Hiſtoris Dynaſtiarum ad 
Gregori! Abulpharagii, pag. 53. Oxon. 1663. Ubi vir 
ille longe preclariſſimus pro Januario menſe reponendum fuiſſe 
_ me pluſquam ſemel admonuit, uti in charta rett8 
criptum erat quam male intellexit Typotheta, nec mendum 
inter legendum ſuſtulit Corre&or. 


Having 


under Cyrillus Lucaris. 


Having done the bloudy work, they 
ſtript him and threw his naked Body 
into the Sea : which was afterward ta- 
ken up by Fiſhermen, and by ſome of 
his Friends buried upon theShore, where 
it had Jain expoſed for ſome time. But 
it ſoon appeared , that the malice of his 
enemies was not yet ſatisfied : for en- 
vying him the honour of a Grave, they 
addreſttothe Caimacar; and got an Or- 
der from him to have his Body dug up, 
and thrown into the Sea again : and it 
was done accordingly. But the Body 
was afterwards recovered, and buried 
obſcurely in one of the Iſlands, that lie 
over againſt the Bay of Nicomedia. 
Thus fel! this great man Cyrillns Lncaris 
by the hands of violence , whom both 
for his Piety and Safferings, which were 
wholly upon the account of Religion, 
I ſhall not be afraid, having juſt reaſon 
fo to doe, notwithſtanding the paſſio- 
nate cenſure of Monſieur Arnaxd, to 
eſteem a Saint and Martyr, 


V 2 APPEN- 


291 


( 292 ) 
APPENDIX. 


Reter ea, que de hac vetuſtiſſuma 

juxta ac piiſſama Doxologia ( a ) ſu 
perius annotavi , paucula hec ſubneFere 
viſum eſt, Exſtat Doxologia hac Gract 
edita in fine Liturgie S$, Chryſoſtomi , 
ab Ambroſio Pelargo Niddano , ordinis 
Predicatorum, Wormatiz, 49, an. I 541. 
quem Symeon Syracuſanus ( uti ille Io 
quitur ) Popponem Trevirorum Archi- 
epiſcopum e Terra Sandi, quam religio- 
7:48 forte causd inviſerat, redeuntem co- 
mitatus , T reverim attuliſſe fertur. Co- 
dicem autem hunc mire vetuſtatis eſſe de- 
predicat, & ante mille annos deſcriptum 
fuiſſe, & ante ofingentos plus minus an- 
20s Treverim allatum. Panculas varia 
tiones in margine appoſui ſub nota Tr. 
Librum autem iſtum , rariſſunum quidem 
&- vix alibi reperiendum, ex ipſpus Bibli- 
otheci quantivis pretii ceimeliis refertiſſ 
m4, utendum dedit vir conſummatiſſume 
eruditionis, © omni laude major, D. Tho- 
mas Marſhallus $S. Theologie Profeſſor, & 
Collegii Lincolnienfis Oxon. Re@or 
perquam dignilſuimus. Facile quoque vi- 


C( 4 ) page 223, Orc. 
debis 


9 ww ca __ ©. ads. cnRS<aCca_@S £4@a4ll a A © <a 


APPENDIX. 
debis formant iſtam, que in Libro Conſti- 


tutionum Apoſtolicarum paulo amplior oc« 
carrit, cur Codice Treverenſ1 magis cor 
wvenire, quam cum noſtro Alexandrino. 
Sed diſcrimen utrinſque adeo leve & nul- 
livs momenti eſt , ut in ceteris mirifica 
conſenſio perplaceat, & invidiſſumum Ca- 
tholice veritatis argurmentum contra nit- 
peros Dogmatiſtas, qui ſub purioris The- 
ologiz titulo antiquam & Apoſtolicam de 
SanGiſſine Trinitatis & divinitatis D. 
noſtri Jeſu Chriſti zzyſterio fidem ſubdole 
O* impie corruperunt , merito debeat eſti- 
mari, Reperi quoque hunc diviniſſumnun 
Hymnum ad finem duorun Pſalteriorun 
Grzcorum MSS. i» Bibliotheci Bodlei- 
and, quorum alter num. 15. in 89. inter 
Codices Baroccianos , ſcriptus erat ante 
quingentos C ſeptuagints plus minus an- 
nos , ut ex circulis Paſchalibus poſt Pre- 
fationem $. Baſilii, Theodoreti, & Colme 
Indico-pleuſtz i4c deſcriptis abunde li- 
quet. Horum enim primus incipit ab 
anno Creationis 6613. ſtve Chriſti 1105, 
ultimus vero deſpnit anno ejuſdem Epo« 
he 6648. ſive Chriſti 1140. Circa bu- 
jus intervalli initia codicem deſcriptum 
fuiſſe he tabule ad computum Eccleſtaſti- 
cum ſpeFantes , que futuris annis, uti 
ſolent Ephemerides & Calendaria, pro» 


. 


T 2 ſprcere 


293 


294 APPENDIX. 


ſpicere meritd cenſende ſint , liquids te- 
ſtantur. Alter verd in 49. manu quiden 
recentiori & vix ante tria ſecula, uti ex 
chara@eribus conjetari fas eſt, exaratus. 
Demnique S. Notkeri P/alterium MS. in 
Archivis Seldenianis pulcherrime, additis 
notulis muſicis , deſcriptum, monitu eru- 
ditiſſimi mes Amici, D. Edvardi Bernar- 
di, S.T. B. & Saviliani Profeſſoris Aſtro- 
nomie , conſulut , quo preter verſtonem 
Latino Sermone expreſſam, quam Eccle- 

: fra Anglicana juxta rituale in Eccleſtis 
Occidentalibus fere ubivis locorune uſu 
recepture , ad amnſſim ſequitur, niſi quod 
& Graco paulo variatum (it , Grace quo- 
que , charaFeribus licet Latinis exſtat,' 
Variantes Le@Fiones literi N. notatas ha- 
bebis, 


( 295 ) 


'H pwezann AoZohoie juxta exemplar 
Alexandrinum, ſgve, uti illic inſcri- 
bitur, v,4v%; Ew 


Az ey vilizus OS 

Kzi 677 ys chem, 

'Ev artÞþpwmros ( 4 ) worn. 
(6b) AdSuw on, 
EUAoySmty ot, 

(©) Texuwiuy or 
AoZoAoyB mes ot, 

( 4) Euyzei3 ws on, 
Aiz Thu mea nw os Sofa, 
Kuzte BznAed9 

Ewzegni, 


C 4 }) Ita pro move mn iſthoe codice vetuſtiſſimo ſcribituy 
pro evoxia, uti quoque in Conſtitut. Apoſt. lib. 7. cap. 47+ 
G& apud S.Athanattum wi mzeSeyiar, ff Pſalter.Oxon. 3% 
Treverenfis Codex (5 S. Notkeri Pſalterium & Pſalterium 
Oxon. 4%. habent euScxttys 

C b ) Vice th aivsuiy on ſubſtituitur apud $. Athanal, 
in Pſalt. Oxon. 8%. 75 in Horologro v,us dy 74. In Cod. Tr. 
inter aiv«u8 on Ty cuncry*uls 94 interponituy T6 Upneulu 
or, uti etiam in Conſtit. Apoſt. 77 Pſalter. Oxon. 4% 

C c ) Poſtponitur 7 1o&cavryr wy on in Conſtit. Apoſt. 
poſt, immediate werbis plans interpolatis ſequitur , Je mh 
Kans 'Aruepior , os + yr Irv, ayorany we, 
& @egorry wovoy, deinde J)s Thy uanlu—— 

(Cd ) Evacis3:8 ov, Pſalt.Oxon. 8%. male deeſt om- 
nno in Tr. (5 Conſt. Apoſt. at habet vetus exemplar 'Nor- 
matienſe, uti annotavit Pelargus. 


V 4 Ott 


( 296) 
Oe (e ) mamhe mWTHRRTUE, 
Kvgre us (*f) provogei, 
"In98 Xeise, 


(g) Kal ay milua' 


Kuzie5 Otos, 
(h ) ©O 2wurs Ts Ots, 
'O ud Ts T1255, (27s, 


'O (4) aizu ( k ) T5 euuagrs TH 
"EAtnmv (1) iuas, 
'O aipwy TH; £Marrits TE 100 js 


TTe e09&Zai 7 Jerov hg, 


Ce ) NNamep munxsro;, Tr. Conſt. Apoſt. Pſalter, 
Oxon. N. (5 Horolog. poſt mavloxo;T»p in Conſt, Apoſt. ce- 
zera, que ſequi debuerant, ita confunduntur, Kuers 6 ©:2s, 0 
T74TIp Te X<1SH, Te Afi pur d pwty Of o; pr TW apagrian Ti 
X69u4, D237 S&f ar Ts Sinmy nw, © 1224 & 6H os 
XepsClu* Gm 00 wr@® a'@, ov wr@r wert® 'Inoig 
Xerrds Ty 3:8 Tons Suvnrhs $0 ws, Te Bamias nw}, 
i s Ea, Tun 4, pa. 

C f ) Ita quoque Phſalter. Oxon. 4®. at Tr. Pſalter, 
Oxon. 8%. una cum libris impreſſis rettius wovorſu is. 
XN. habet imperfe unyoyiy. 

C 2 ) Deſunt hec verba de Spiritu S. in Pſalt. N. ut- 
pore que in fine reponuntur. Ceteri codices hic habent uti in 
proprio Cy debito loco. 

C h }) Deficit articulus 5, Tr. 

C 7 ) dlgsy Tr. mendose : Cy fortaſſe non Librarii ſed 
Typrthete mendum. 

Ch ) TW duapris, numero ſingulari Conſtit. Apoſt. 
Pſalteria Oxon. ut? etiam N. 0 quantum eft codicum 
mpreſſorum, juxta Evangel. $. Joannis cap. I. v. 29+ con- 
cordant wero omnes zn ſequente verſiculo, habentque Plura- 
liter TS apap oy 


C ! ) 1). Tr. malls 


'O x4- 


( 297 ) 
'Ox2 pw .(m)%y3f3T8Tle gs 
*EAtnmv huts, 
( 0 ) "Ona) & we. 224, 
(Pp ) Ev & wor wg, 
Ing; X eUs% 


EZ; 8922y O43 TIzle. Ap. 


( m ) Pſalter. Oxon. 29. % JrEav. 

( n _) Grec in 2%:24% 2 7% vr, Oo alibi, neſcro qui 
authq tate fretz, ſemper hic prefigunt x;, quod plane ve- 
dundare videtur. 

( 0 _) deeft & inConſt. Apoſt. uti ſupra videre eſt. Oc- 
currit quippiam ſumiſe in Conſtit. Apoſt. lib. 8. cap. 13. 6's 
ax@, «5 we!Q@r , 55 *lnons Xets , 61s diSar 58 
males, 

(þ ) poſt ov & werF wor& ſequitur in N. of & 
wort $5 'Tyghe Kerns ow! die Trivual: tig —= 
habet quoque Pſalt. Oxon. 4% aw) d3ip Twuans 


Hyzmus 


(298) 


Hymnus Matutinus, Pfalterio S. Notker;, 


Gloriain excelſis Deo, 

Et in Terra Pax, 

Hominibus bone Voluntatis. 

Landamns Te, 

Benedicimus Te, 

Adoranms Te, 

Glorificanns Te, 

Gratias agimnus Tibi, 

Propter magnam gloriam Tuam, 

Domine Deus, Rex Celeſtis, 

Deus Pater Onmipotens. 

Domine fili Unigenite 

Jeſu Chriſte, | 

Domine Deus, 

Agnus Dei, 

Filins Patric, 

i tollis peccata mundi, 

M5sſerere nobis, 

Oni tollis peccata mundi, 

Suſcipe deprecationem noſtram. 
i ſedes ad dextram Patris, 
iſerere nobis, 
uoniam Tu ſolus SanGus, 

Tu folus Dominus, 

Tu ſolus altiſſanms, 

Jeſu Chriſte, 

Cum Sando Spiritn, 

I: Gloria Dei Patris, Amen. 


Sequuntur 


Ys ed  V Wwe Wt bet 01 


mM, 


(299 ) 


Sequintur in eodem veneraude Antiquite- 
tis Codice hi Verſgenti, e Pſalmis maxi- 
mi ex parte colleFi , tanquam Hynni 
pars , niſdem uncialibus charaFeribus 
O&* plane 513-1295 deſcripti 5 neque du- 
bitandum videtur, quin ſymul ac codens 
tempore olim recitarentur; quod hodit 
faciunt Graci, uti ex Horologiis nrant- 
feftiſſemum eſt + male ergo Hymni Veſe 
pertini, 2 Viro eruditiſſamo, titulo inſig- 
nitus eſt, Variantes le@ ines bic quoque 
annexas habes, | 


(4) Kaff erg5lwiuweeny WAH an Ot, 

Kel aivimo 7D Wo jack Ts tis IT alave, 

Kai eig T aiave Ts ( b ) aiaval 

' A Fe 1 , \ 6 / "19, 
KamrZiwmov rwok t21 TW hudeny (C) TRYVu 
'Areparclite. puray Wiz huds. 
EoAoowlcs &4 xwgie 5 Oct; oft UT av nog. 
Kai aiverty x24 9: ofa Tuivoy T0 


"Ovouuce os 6is Ts; alovz;, *Aplwm. (4) 


C( 4 ) Quando vecitatur &y Smeſtirpois, Yeponunt nal 
brac bu cao4690+ 

C b-) poſt huncVerſiculum ſequitur in Pſalter. Oxon. 8%. 
wen Knamevy? ad finem ; inde repetunt, nalatinon —— 

o c ) & Ty wipes rwTry, Pſalt. Oxon. (f Codices im- 
reſſi. 
, C 4 poſt in 44021214 Ta bp pu O& in So [tr vo Uh» 
yay OF wres inſeritur hic Verſiculus , Tiy:i]o wuery. 78 
En8be on 42” nuds, aihuTip nanionu om £4. Ita etram 
in Pſalt, Oxon. 


EvAomures 


( 300 ) 
Fame; Xugit, OZ per 


Ta Icio MATa Ts,  % 


Evnoure; 6 Xugit, OE rt 
Tz 121 KATH T5. 
EJnorees Koolt, FE WE 
Tz Ina ara 7s. 
Kvgi XZ TREPUY £yevh,ons nul 

y Yves x21 Yared. 
"E200 mz, wer EANTOY Wes 
"Tzom Th uy pus, or ifucclty ol 
Kueie 295 ot ( & ) xaligne, 
AideZtv we TE mov T0 Anat 
Es, on £y & 6 Ot us 
"Om 7ragg oi T1) Conc. 
"Ev Tf guwli os 0\ldurte p35 
(/ ) TIzegmvy 7 tx; os 


N / 
of JVDOTKETI OF. 


Ce _) ita quoque Pſalt, Oxon, 4% at alterum habet 
KETTRUYV: : 
$/ # INagsr El ovs 


Per ſir:- 


( 301 ) 
Per [ingulos dies benedicam Te, 


Et landabo nomen tunm in ſeculum, 

Et in ſeculum ſeculi. 

Dignare Domine die iſto 

Sine peccato nos cuſtodire. (firorum, 
BenediGFus es Domine Dens Patrum no» 
Et laudandum ac glorificandum eſt 
Nomen tunm in ſecula, Amen. 
BenediGFus es, Domine, 

Doce me juſtificationes tuas. 

BenediGus es, Domine, 

Doce me juſtificationes tuas. 

BenediGus es, Domine, 

Doce me juſtificationes tuas. 

Domine, refugium Tu fa@us es nobis, 

In generatione &- generatione. 

Ego dixi, Domine, miſerere mei, 

Sana animan mean, quia peccavi in Te, 
Domine, ad Te confugi, 

Doce me facere voluntatem tuam ; 

ruia Dens mens es Tu. 

Suoniam apud Te eſt fons vite 

In lumine tuo videbinms lumen. 
Pretende miſericordiam tnam 
Scientibus Te. 


\ 
"Yrs 


( 302) 


” 
"Yrs Favtew%;. 


Þ235 iz2g ayias Ons, alzvars The 
le G5, Beavis, ys, puaxze, Inr8 Kew, 
tn0ire; ban TW Aus vow, i) tyre Ps tavr- 


gwy, ( 4) vpriper Thaltex, (6) yy 
2; 219 ThreI waze '( © ) Ofly. "AEvv 
ey Ta71 x22 Luna pwvzis \( dl) al 
o12ts, Vis Os, Calm) 6 Ws5, (e ) 6 
x37 0 Za he 


( a )) avsu\, ita apud $. Bafilium de Spiritu S. ad 
Amphiloch. cap. 29. 

( b ) «,y0y apud S. Bafil. uti etiam ad finem Pſalteri 
in Biblzotheca Bodlciani m 4*. 

C c ) ©#?, apud S. Bafil. & in Pſalt. Oxon. 

C 4d) 60ious, Pſalt. Oxon. 

( e ) d!' % 6 wbou© top Ga Pſalt. Oxon. 


Ita Hymnum hunc exhibent codi- 
ces tmwprela. 


Hymnus .Vefpertinus. 


Lumen bilare Sande gloria, immortas 
lis Patris, Celeſtis, Sandi, Beati, 'Jeſu 
Chriſte , quum ad ſolis occaſnm pervene- 
rims, lumen cernentes Veſpertinum, Lan- 
damus Patrem & Filium &» Spiritum 
SanFum Dei. Dignus es tempore quovis 
SanFis vocibus celebrari, Fili Dei, Vite 
dator, quapropter Manaus Te glorificat. 
Viginti 


WP RL I LIMMIMMIE.MI.NIDTT.-SO- 


( 303 ) 


Viginti KaYouare ſive SeTiones, (a) integro Pſalms 
comprehenſe, hoc modo diſponuntur. 


T. Continet Pſalmos 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8+ 


IL 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, I's, 16. 
nL I7, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23s 
IV. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, ZI» 
V. 32, 33» 34, 35» 36» 
VI. 37, 38, 39,40, 41, 42, 43, 44: 45» 
VII. 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53 54» 
VIIE $53 55, $7, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63+ 
IX, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69. 
X, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74s 75» 7%» 
XI. 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84- 
XII. 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 9Os 
XII. 91, 92, 93, 94, 95 $6, $7, 98, 99, 100, 
XIV, IoL, 102, 103, 104+ 
> 4'A Iog, 106, 107, 108, 
XVI. 109, L1o, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116,117, 
XVII. 118, 
I19, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125,126, 12 
XVIL $2h 129, 130, 131, 132, 133» " 
XIX, 134, 135, 135, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142» 
XX, 143, 144, 145, 1465, 147, 148, 149, 150. 


( 4 ) Vide pag. 221, 


AN 


— —— ———_ —— —— 


INDEX 


SE 105, 


Chickeſt matters contained in this: Book: 


——————<——— — — — ——c—<c— ST— OO; —— — —  — 
. 


A, 
Bſlntiqn. pag. 180 
. Abſtinence from bloud and 
thmngs ſtrangled. 234 
Accounts of time. 215 


Arations ufed by the Greeks, 213 

One Altar onely th a Church _—_ 
ently. 

Alenantrie. The Patriarch of i i 4 


Anachorites. 107 
Aminting of the ſich. 193 
Of others in health. 195 
Aminting after Baptiſm. 117 


A't repeated except in one particu» 
lar caſe. I19 
Antioch, the Patriarch of it, 5g 
Archbifhops, who ſo called. 89 
Armenians hated by the Greeks 
mortally. 48 
Ailumption of the B. Virgin. 26, 45 
Min Athos. G7 


B, 

Baptiſm, 109 
The Greeks, believe an abſolute ne- 

ceſſity of tt. thid. 
The manner of it. LI 
Form of words. 112, 113 
Effe# of it. 112 
S. Baſis Liturgy. 124 
Biſhops, always Kaloirs. 15 
Biſhoprichs ſubje& to the Patriur- 

chate of Conſtantinople. #5 


No Bells, what uſed inſtead L 
them. 
Bread bleſſed and diſtributed. 1 


Sacramental Bread pure. 155 
C. 

Catcchumeni. 132 

Church Cenſures , their good effett. 

178, 183 

Chancel.. 67 

Charity- 


4 


AN 

Charity of the Greeks upon Feſtival- 
days Pag. 29 
chiſat inſeparable from a 


IS 
chrjtiaiy the cauſes of its Fay in 
he Eaſt. 17 


of; £ anfrnnhs, 18 
$. Chryſoſtom's Liturgie. 123 
Church. Their time of going to 

Church. 30 
Churches mean. SI 


Not to be repaired without leave. 52 
The manner of their Fabrich, 62 


I Conſtantinople. 53 
And Galata. $5 
Church of Santa Sophia. $7 
Of the Holy _— $9 
Colle#ion of Chriſtian Children. 1 1 
Colyba. 172 


Commemorations of the Living and 
Dead. 91, 128, 139, 207 
Communicating of Children, 161 


Communion in both binds. 142 
Confeſſion to a Prieſt, 160, 178 
Confirmation. I15 


Conſecration of the Elements. 1 > 
When made. 144 
Conſtantinople. The Patriarch. 


3373 
Expence, 75 
Revenue. 75,79 
His Aſſiſtent s. 78 
Retinue and Title , when they ak 
dreſs to him. 79 
Diſſenſions in the choice. 80 
What places exempt from his juriſ- 
dition. 7 : 
Atitular Patriarch. 


Conſtantinopolitan Creed. 1236196 
Council of Florence. 7,220 
Seven general Councils admitted by 

the Greeks. 217 
The Eighth Council, which. 219 
Croſſing, the manner of it. 215 


- 


LNMI 


INDEX. 


Cyprus, Archbiſhop of it, his pri- 
vilege and juriſdittion. pag. 74 


D. 
Days of the week; how called. 29 


Deacons. 

Dead. Their opinion about the Pie 
of the Dead. 202 

Drvorces frequent. 192 

Doxologte greater and leſſer. 223 


E. 


Eaſter. 
Eaſtern Chureb what, and why [ 
called. 


Elevation of the Saramenel 


Bread. 
Euchariſt celebrated upon F eftival- 
days. 29 


The manner of Conſecration. 125 

European Children prove the beſt 
Souldiers. I k, 

Exaltation of the Holy Croſs. The 
Feſtival of it. 

Excommunication, and the ſuppoſed 


effetts of it. 184 
F. 


Faſts. 34 
Feſtruals, the happy effe and con- 


ſequence of them. 18, 19 
Calendar. 20 
Font. 65, 110 


Forgiveneſs, they as it one of ano» 
ther before they communicate. 143 

Good _ the ſeverities uſed 
upon that 42 

Gates of their Churches how - 


led. 


AN 
Godfather but one. pag. 112 


;overnment Eccleſiaſtical. 7 
raves viſited. 207 
Greek Church, the extent of it. 8 
Greeks, how ſadly oppreſt. 9 
Their temper low and mean. 14 
Orthodox in the great articles of 
Fatth. 
S. Gregorie's Liturgie. 123 
H. 


Head-mony paid by the Greeks. 10 
Heraclea, The Archbiſhop © tt 


crowns the Patriarch of Conſtan 
tinople. 78, 3% 
Hymn morning. 44, 225 
Evening. 228 
Howlings of women at Funerals. 
211 
L 
Jeruſalem. The Patriarch of it” 5 
Images, painted. 63,65 
No Images engraven 0s e d in 
the Churches. 211 
Immerſion threefold. , - 
Impoſition of hands. 


S. John one Evangeliſt his det, 


_ not " from Conflanins: 
IOT 

uſtiniana prima. The Archbiſhop 
J of it, his _— and juriſdic- 


tion. 73 
R. 

Kaloirs. 93 
L, 

Lenten-faft. 35 


INDEX. 


Lamps burning before the Lo ys 


Lay-perſons baptize in caſe oo oe? 
uy. Io 
Leavened bread in the PI 


Life of the Saint read upon his Fe 


ſiival. 28 
Liturgies ſeveral ſorts. 121 
Three onely in uſe. 123 

M. 
Mahomet's Teſtament counterfeit. 9 
Marriages. 180 


Metropolitans and Biſhops under the 
Patriarch of Conſtantinople. 83 


[9g exempt. 237 
Upon Mount Athos. 99 
Monks. 93 
Myſteries or Sacraments ſeven. 107 
N. 
Nicene Fathers. 34 
O, 
Oblation of bread and wine hw 
bleſſed. 129 
Offerings of the Greeks. 29 
Upon recovery from ſickneſs, 215 
For the dead. 209 
Offices long and tedious. 27 
Holy Orders. 92, 176 
Oyl onely made and bleft by the Pa- 
triarch and Biſhops. 118 
The Compoſition of it. 119 
P. 
Painting mean. 63 
Palm Sunday. 


panide 


Tm”  kK©Ks 


ups Frogs ws 


4 


+ I S aws ww 


> © 


» vw 


AN 


Particles of bread. pag. 127; 171, 
s, 208 

Old Paſchal Cycle ſtill - uſe of. 
31 

- WW 39 
Day. 42 
Patriarchs four, their juriſdifions, 


limits and titles. 2 
Particularly prayed for. 6 
Ihaugur, at ton . 70 
Judges in Civil affairs. 77 


Patriarchs of other Communions. 7 
Patriarchal Church at Conſtanti- 
nople. 53 
Penances. 
Piflures admitted in their Phe bn 
and reverenced. 211 
Pillar, to which our B. Saviour was 
tied, part of it remaining. 6o 
Pope not mentioned in the _ 
prayers of the Greeks. 
Now to Saints. 231 
Poſture and behaviour in their 


Churches. 214 
Prieſts. go, 177 
Przſan&ificatorum Liturgia. 123, 

125, 175 


Proceſſion of the H. Spirit. 197 
Proceſſions uſed in their Churches. 


130, 133 
Purgatory. Whether the Greeks be- 


lieve Purgatory. 204 
R, 

Readers. 93, 176 

Renegad®'s. IS 
S 


Sacraments or Myſteries ſeven. 107 
Sacrament but once celebrated the 

ſame day on the ſame Altar. 155 
Upyr Holy-days. 155 
Received four times a years 157 
And Faſting. 158 


INDEX. 


At what time of the day celebrat.1 57 
In Lent mot ti __ Aw ng |: - 


probe oy oy the uſes fer of f ſi +3 per 


ſons. 


Sacriſty. = 9 
Salutations at Eaſter. 32 
Singing mean. 215 
Slaves Chriſtian. 16 
Sub<deacons. 93z 177 
Sunday how called. 3I 
Sundays after Eaſter. 32 
Before Eaſter. 3s 
Superſtition of the Greeks. 231! 
Swearing upon 4 __ 235 
Communton-Table, 68 
Table called Protheſis. 68 
Tranſubſtantiation , a novel Doc- 

frine. 145 
_—_—_—_ prece of Bread in honour 


of the Virgin. 233 
Turkiſh Empire _ ſupplied. 165 


Veneration of the na Ele- 


ment $ . I 34 
Veſtments. 237 
Vigtls. 27 

Good Friday. 42 
Of other Feſtivals. 

Union of Chriſt. _ deſi WW... 3 
The ceremony Waſhing the Feet of 


twelve perſons. 40 
War. The Holy War defended. 13 
Water poured into the Chalice, 127, 


140 
Waters when bleſk. 23, 49, 111 
The ſame Water not uſed a Jn 


time in Baptiſm: 114 
No Holy Water at their Church- 


doors. 216 
Women Profeft, 105 


FINEIS 


A Catalogue of ſome Books Printed for, and to be 
ſold by Richard Davis in Oxford. 


IN FOLIO, 


R. Hammonds Works the 1. Vol. Containing a Colle&ion of Diſ- 
courſes chiefly Pra&tical, with the Life of the author, 1674. 

—— His Paraphraſe and Annotations on the New Teſtament, the 

fourth Edition, 1675. | 

On the Pſalns.—— His Sermons. 

Lucian's Dialogues , made Engliſh from the Original, by 7aſper 
Mayn, D. D. Ct 
Mereator's Atlas, Engliſhed by W. Saltonſtall. 
A Poem to the Duke of Tk on our late Sea-fight with the Dutch, 

by J. M. C. C. Oxon. 

Five New Plays. The Siege of Urbine. Selindra. Love & Frinedſhip. 
Pandora. Imperiale a Tragedy. By Sir William Killigrew, Vice- 
Chamberlain to Her Majeſty, 1656. 

An Elegy on the Death of the Duke of Gloeſter , by M. Lluelln 
Dr. in Phyfick. . 

The Hiſtory of the Pretended Saints, by Hen. Foults the ſecond 
Edition. 1574. 

The' Works of Mr. William Pemble. 

—_— I.2. and 3. Voyces to the Thorow-Baſs with ſome ſhort Sym- 
phonies. Colle&ed out- of ſome of the ſele& Poems of the Incom- 
parable Mr. Cowley and Others: And Campoſed by H. Bowman 
Philo-Muficus. Engraved upon 85 Copper Plates. The 2d. Edition 
correfted and amended by the Author. 1679. 

A Letter of all the Lay, Nobility of England to the Pope, 1300. then 
denying his Suppremacy in things Temporal in the Kings Domini- 
ons, in Latin, with the ſame in Engliſh, and all the ſaid Nobilities 
Names with their Coats of Armes ho, 104- ) Engraved on a 
large Copper Plate : to which 1s adjoyned a brief account of the 
Pope's Pretences to the Crown of England , and an Anſwer there- 
unto. With a Dedication of All to the preſent Nobility. Printed 
on two broad ſheets of Royal Paper. 1679. 

Annalium Mundi Univerſal. Origines Rerum ( (9- progreſſus |) ſacras 
juxta ac Seculares, ab Orbe condito tradentium, Lib. XIV. Authgre 
Hug. Robinſono, olim Wintonienſi Archididaſcalo, poſtea Archidiac jo. 

Fuſſu Regio Recognovit, emaculavit, lacunoſum explevit, multaque notte 
adopertum in lucem edidit, THOMAS PEIRCE, S.7T. P. Deca- 
ns Sarisburienſis. 1677» ; 

Jamblichi 


(1 


(- 


amblichi Chalcidenſis de Myſteriis eg yptor. 
ho. Gale Anglus Grece nunc primum eddit , Latine wertit , Cf notas 
adjecit. (1678.) + Thearro. 

Provinciale, (ſeu Conſtitutiones Anglie ) (oc. Auftore Guliel. Lyndwood, 
F.U.D. Cut adjiciuntur Conſtituriones D. Othonis,C&F D.Othoboni,Car- 
dinalium, Annotationibus Fohannis de Achona. Hutc editioni nunc primum 
acceſſerunt Conſtitutiones Provinciales antedifforum Archiepiſcoporum,(s 
aliorum ſine Gloſſematis in ordinem digeſts. Omnia ab innumerts, qui= 
bus undique ſcatebant,erroribus atque mendis purgata ac reſtituta. 1679 


IN QUARTO. 


Colle&ion of ſeverall Replies and Vindications of the Church of 
England, by H. Hammond, D. D. in 4. Vol. - 

The hurt of Sedir10n,or the true Subje& to the rebel, by Sir Zohn Cheek, 
with a Preface of D. Langbane's. 

A Funerall Sermon on Phil. 1. 23. by 7obn Millet. 

The Vaulting Maſter, or the Art of Vaulting ulluſtrated with ſixteen 
braſs Figures, by W. Stoabs. 

Chriſt and his Church, or Chriſtianity explained in 7..Evangelical and 
Ecclefiaſtical heads, by Edw. Hyde, D. D. ſometime Fellow of Trint- 
ty College in Cambridze,& late Reftor of Brightwell in Berks. 

Cheerfull Ayres or Ballads, for three Voices, by F. Wilſon Dr. 1n Mu- 
ſick, late Profeſſor of the ſame in the Univerfity of Oxford and one 
of the Gentlemen of His Majeſties Chappel, 1n 3. Vol. 

Hoſanna,a Thankſgiving Sermon on the Kings Return on Pſal. 118. ve 
2.2, 23, 24, 25. by Jo. Martin. ES 32 

A Sheer of dire&ions for Daily Examination of Sin, by Biſhop Vſber. 

The Throne of Dawzd, or an Expoſition on the ſecond Book of Samus 
& by W. Guild. 

Howel's Vocal Forreſt the Firſt part. 

\Davenant, Morton, Drury, &c. Good Counſel for Peace. 

Sly and Faples, or the Fatal Union. A Play. 

Some Conſiderations touching the Uſefulneſs of Experimental natural 
Philoſophy, propos'd in Familiar Diſcourſes to a Friend, by way of 
Invitation to the ſtudy of it, by the Honorable Robert Boyle Eſquire, 
The 2d. Edition. 

—— - Conſiderations of the Uſefulneſs of Experimental Philoſophy, the 
2d, Vol. 1671. 

——— The 2d. Vol. of his Experiments of Air, with many Figures en- 
graved on 8 Braſs Plates. Alſo his Treatiſe of the Armoſpheres of 
conſiſtent Bodies. 155g. 

Philoſophical Tranſa&ions of the Royal Socicty. Numb. 6, 7,8. 1566. 

Nehemiah, or the Excellent Governour : A'Sermon Preached ar Dubl/n, 
Ang. 69. before the Right Honourable Thwmas Earl of Offer then 
Lord Deputy of Ireland, by Fo. Parry, D. D. and Dean of the ho- 
ly Trinity in Dublin, 1670. A Ser- 


A Sermon Preached at a Viſitation at Grantham in the County and 
Dioceſs of Lincoln, 8 Oob. 1641. on Mat. 15. 9. by the Right Reve- 
rend Father in God, Robert Sanderſon, late Lord Biſhop of that Dio- 
ceſs; ji Folio and Quarto. 1671. 

Two Patterns of Goodneſſe and Charity; one of Job in the midſt of his 

' Honour and Wealth, the other of the Widdow of Sarepta in the 
Extremity of her Poverty. In two Sermons by David Stokes, D. D. 

A cenſure upon certain paſſages contained in the Hiſtory of the Royal 
Society, as being deſtruftive to the Eſtabliſhed Religion and Church 
of England, by Henry Stubbs, Phyſician in Warwick, , the ſecond E- 
dition with additions, 1671. 

——— His Replyes to Glanvil, More, &c. 1671. 

A Colle&ton of Sermons upon ſeveral occaſions by Tho. Pierce, D. D. 

—— His Corre& Copy of ſome Notes concermng Gods Decrees. 

»--H1s Decad of Caveats to the People of England,being a 2d. Vol.of Ser- 
mons; to which is added an Appendix for Convi&tion of the Atheiſt, 
= Infidel,and the Setter up of Science to the prejudice of Religion. 
I 79, ; 

A Sermon Preached in Lent Aſſizes at Alesbury, Mar. 8. 1671. being 
Aſb-wedneſday, by A. Littleton, D.D. _ in Ordinary to His Maj. 

The Atrique antiquities in ſeven Books, the three firſt by Fra. Rows, 
the four laſt by Z2. Bogan. The Eighth Edition. 1675. 

A Sermon of the Credibility of the Myſteries of the Chriſtian Religion. 
With an Appendix to the ſame by Tho. Smith Fellow of St. Mary 
Mazdalen College. 

Propoſitions concerning Optic-Glaſſes,with their naturall Reaſons,drawn 
from Experiments. At the Theater, 1579. | 

Of the Benefits of our Saviour Feſus Chriſt ro Mankind.At theThea. 1680. 

The Ends of Chriſtian Religion juſtificd in 10, Sermons, by R. Shar- 
rock, L.L.D. 16573. 

Moxm of the Globes Celeſtial and Terreſtrial, the 3d. Editzon. 1674 

Joan. Buridani Queſtiones in' oo Libros Politicorum Ariſtotelis. 

Porta Moſis ; ſroe Diſſertationes aliquot R. Moſis Maimonidis, nunc 
primum Arabice prout ab ipſo Authore conſcripta ſunt, CF Latine edite, 
una cum Appendice Notarum Miſcetlan. Opera ( ſtudio E. Pocockit 
Ling. Hebr. & Arab. in Acad. Oxon. Profeſſoris. ; 

Hiſtoria Dynaſtiarum Arabice. Auth. Gregorio Abul Pharagio.Edt. Inter- 
pret.Cy continuat. = E.Pocock, L.Hebr. & Arab.Profeſſ. in Acad.Oxon. 

Idea Trigonometrie demonſtrate. ſtem de Cometis, (5 inquiſitio in Bulliad? 
Aftronomie Philolaice Fundamenta, Authore Setho Ward. nunc Ep. Salif. 

Sqvilt Oratio coram EliZ. Regina. 

Britannia Rediviva. Muſarum, Acad. Oxon. 

Epicedia Acad. Oxon. in obitum Hen. Ducts Gloceftrienſis. 

Epicedia Acad. Oxon. in obitum Marie Principis Arauſionenſis. 

Academie Oxonienſis Notitia. Edit. 2da. 167 5+ 


Diſſertationes quatuor, Nuibur Epiſcopatus jara, (Fc. contra fententiam D. 
I & Alicrum, Auth. H. Hammond, S. Theolog. D. 

Oxonzum Poema per ]. Vernon. ex Ade Chriſti. 

De anima Brutorum que Hominis vitalis eft, exercitationes due. Authore 
Tho. Willis, 2. D. & Profeſſore Sedlatano. 1673. 

Pharmaceutice rationalisſrue dtatriba de Medicamentoram operationibus in 
Corpore humano pars 14+ CF 24. vol.2. Auth. T.Willis M.D. 1674-09 7 5: 

De Canſis Remediiſque Diſſidiorum, que orbem Chriſtianum hodie affligunt, 
exercitatio Theologica. Authore Tho. Smith S.T. B. ( Col. B. Mar. 
Mag. Oxon. Socio. 1675. 

Examen Cenſure : ſrve Reſponſio ad quaſdam Animadverſiones antehac in- 
editas, in Librum cut titulus Harmonia apoſtolica 3c. per Geor.Bullum 
Anglicans Eccl. Presbyterum. Acceſſit Apologia pro Harmonia ejuſque 
Authore contra Declamationem Thome Tull, $S.T. P.in libro nuper 
Typis evulgato, quem juſtificatio Paulina,@Fc.inſcripſit, per eundem.1675, 

Catalogus plerorumque omnium authorum ( tam antiquorum quam recentio- 
rum_) qui de Re Heraldica Latine, Gallice, Italice, Hiſpanice, Germani« 
ce, Anglice ſcripſerunt. Interſperſts hic illic, qui claruerunt in Re Amti- 
quaria, CF jure civilt, ea ſaltem parte que HERALDRLA facem accen- 
dit, (5c. A Tho. Gore, Armig. 1680. 

IN OCTAYVO. 
R Hammond's Practical Catechiſm, with the reaſonableneſs of 
Chriſtian Religion. 

A View of the threats and puniſhments recorded in the Scriptures, 
Alphabetically compoſed, with ſome Obſervations upon ſeveral Texts, 
by Zachary Bogan of C. C. C. in Oxon. 

— The Mirth of a Chriſtian Life, and the ſorrows of a wicked Life, 
by the ſame Author. : 

Fides Apoſtolica, or a Diſcourſe aſſerting the received Authors and Au- 
thority of the Apoſtles Creed : rogether with the grounds and ends 
of Compoſing thereof by the Apoſtles, the ſufficiency thereof for 
the Rule of Faith, G&c. by George Aſhwell, B. D. 

wGeftis Euchariſlicus, a Diſcourſe concerning the Geſture at the 
receiving of the Lords Supper. 

A Treatiſe of the preſervation of the Eye-ſight, by Dr. Baily. 

The Circles of Proportion, and the Horizontal Inſtrument, 4c. Both 
invented, and their uſe written, by W. Oughtred Aronentis. 

The natural Mans blindneſs, in 3. Sermons on Rom. 7.7. by H. Hurſt. 

Effays and Obſervations on the Humours of the Age, Diſcovered and 

Tze&d, by W. Maſters, A.M. late Fellow of Merton College. 

Ovid's Inve&tive againſt 76zs, tranſlared into Engliſh Verſe, by 7. Jones 
Schoolmaſter in Hereford, 24. Edition. 

A = and profirable Catechiſm, with a Sermon on Ex. 23. 2. by 

r. James Bacon, publiſhed by Dr. Henry Wilkinſon. 

A Divine Theater, or a Stage for Chriſtians, a Sermon at C. C. in Ox- 

ford by John Wall, D, D. Shep- 


Shepheard of Sincerity and Hypocrifie, with a Tra annexed, to prove 
that true Grace doth nor he ſo much 1n the Degree, as in the Nature 
of it. By a Reverend Divine. 

Downham, of Chriſtian Liberty. 

Homer a la mode, a Mock Poem upon the firſt and ſecond Books of 
Homer's Iliads, 2d. Edition. 

Chriſtian Liberty rightly ſtared and enlarged, in a brief Vindication of 
the Lawfulneſs of Eating things ſtrangled, or Meats confeRed with 
Blood, by W. Rye. 

The Nullity of the Romiſh Faith, or a Blow at the Root of the Ro- 
miſh Church, being an Examination of their Fundamental Doctrine 
concerning the Churches Infallibility, by Matthew Pool, late Miniſter 
of the Goſpel in London, 1571. the 4th Edition. 

The Origine of Forms and Qualities (according to the Corpuſcular 
Philoſophy) Illuſtrated by Conſiderations and Experiments, by the 
Hon. Robert Byyle Eſq; Fellow of the Roval Society, 157 r. the 2d Ed. 

—— Hydroſtarical Paradoxes, made out by new Experiments (for the 
moſt part Phyfical and cafie,) 1566. 

CThe Coſmical qualities of things. 
| Coſmical Suſpicions. 

Trats | The Temperature of the Subterraneal Regions. 

about < The Temperature of the Submdfine Regions. 

The Bottom of the Sea. To which 1s Prefixt, an Intro» 
L duQtion to the Hiſtory of particular Qualities. 8® 1. wo. 

New Experiments of the Relation betwixt Flame and Air, and a- 
bout Exploſions, with an Hydroſtarical Diſcourſe in Anſwer to 
Dr. More. Of weighing water in Water, of the Levity of Bodies 
under Water. Of the Airs ſpring on Bodies under Water. Of the 
Differing Preſſure of Heavy Solids & Fluids (1573.) in onevol. 

—Tra&s of the faltneſs of the Sea, Of a ſtaticall Hygroſcope and its 
Uſes. Of the force of the Airs moiſture. Of the Natural and Preter- 
natural ſtate of Bodies. Of the poſitive Nature of Cold, (yc. 1674 

——The Sceprtical Chymiſt, or Chymico-Phyfical Doubts and Paradoxes, 
touching the Experiments whereby Vulgar Spagiriſts endeavour to 
evince their Salt, Sulphur, and Mecury, to be the true Principles of 
Things. To which in this ſecond Edition, are ſubjoined divers Ex- 
periments and Notes about the producibleneſs of Chymicall Prin- 
ciples. 1680. 

Whitby's Anſwer to ſure footing, and Fiat Luz. 

A Funerall Sermon on 1 Cor. 7.v. 29, 30, 31. by Tho. Hawhins. 

Holland of taking the height of a Comer. 

— His Globe Notes. 1578. 

The City Match, and Amorous War,two Plays by Faſ. Maine of C.C.0rx. 

The Devil of Maſcon, or a true Relation of the chief thing an unclean 
Spirit did and faid at Maſcon in Burgundy, 1n the houſe of Mr. P 

Preca 


C 
C 


7, we 


as us 


Precand, Miniſter of the Reformed Church there, Pubbſhed in French 
by the ſaid Minifter, and made Englifh by one that hath a particular 
knowledge of che Truth of this Story, the fifth Edition. 1579, 

The Hiſtory of the Propag ation and Improvement of Vegetables by the 
Concurrence of Arr and Nat ure, oc. WIIttcn according ro Ob ſerva- 
tions made from Expericnce and Practice, the tecond Edit. much 
Enlarged by Ro. Sharroch late Fellow of Now Coll. 1572. 

Chara&crs ot a frcere Heart and the Comforts thereof, Collefed 
out of the Word of God by Zn, Wilkinſsn. D. D. late Princ1pal of 
Magd. Hail. 157.4. 

An Explication of the Divine Goodneſs, in the Words of the moſt 
Renowned BOETIUS, Trauflared by d Lover of Truth aud Vir- 
tuC. 1597.4. 

fnimadvert.ons upon Sir R. Buleci's Chronicle, and his Continuation, 
wherem are many Errors diforer q aud foiue Truths advanc'd by 

' T. Blunt, Ei G. 1572. 

A View of the Civil and Ecclefta ſtica al Law : by Sir Tho. Ridley Knight, 
with the Norcs of be Greg ury | are of Chr. Cli. > a the 4th Edition, 

Experiments, Notes, &c. about the Origine of go we Qualities of 

Alkali and Acidum, c. by the Hon. Rb. Byzle, Eſq, 1595. 

Wotitia HiIricorum ſ*/, Jsforum, or An imadverf;ons on the Anti ent and 
Famons Greck and Latin Hiſtorians, Enghihed 1th tome Additions, 
by W. Davenant, ef .3{.;gd. Hal, Oxon. 1573, 

*rmons Preached unon Several Occalions by R:i527t South, D. D. 
Prebend of Chr. Ch. 0:27. 127 5. 


Decrees of Pope Innocent the 1 1th. contain! ng the ar 6 Non of an 
Office of the immaculate Conception of the moſt Holy Virgin; Ahd 
of a Mulritude c of Indulgences. pede -noks to the Copies at Rome : 
from the Printing-Preis of the moſt Revercnd Apoſtolick Chamber. 
Trarnflarcd 1ite | Engiih ut of the French Copy: . (ro which the 
I in was adio!'d, 25 allo here it 1s) by the dircHzonof an Eminent 


Perion of Ho NOUT. 1 79. 
A Guide to the Holv City, cf Dircftions and Ik!rs to an Holy Lite, 
by 74. Reading B. D. 


Script; re vindicated from the Mifapplications of Mr. $ t. Marſha? mn 
his Sermon enticldd Aero Purſed, Þy Etw. Simmons. 

The Chriſtian Race. A Sermon on Z*%. i 2. 1. by Tha, Barton, D. D. 

A Sermon on the 2 Timthy Cap. 3. I, 2 ,; 4» 5 s. V.ith the "Aefalicd 
Infiirucion of Epilcopacy, by W. Chill:agworts 

Certain Sermons and Letters of Defence _ Relolurion ro ſme of the 
late Controverſ:ces of our times, by Zaf. Maine, D. D. 


Col. Henry Martin's Letters to his Lady of Deli: ohe, with hcr kind Re- 

turns, Cc. pu! Wiſhed from the Ore ''nal Papers, by Ed'm. Gam. 
A ſhore ; ved ae” ton of Grammar generally to be uled, Comviled and 
ſer forth for the bringing up of all thoſe that intend to atrain to the 
Y knowledge 


knowledge of the Latin Tongue. To which are added v{cſall O), 
ſervations, by way of Comment, out of Ancicne and Learned Gram- 
mar1ans, the third Edirion.at the The arcr, Oxon. 167 9, 
De Confirmatione, ſruc Renediitone pl Baptiſmaun ilennt, &c. Anthire 
 H. Hammond..S. 7: D. 
Ailmeri Maſe Sacre, ſeu Jonas, Tercmiz Threni 7 Danicl-Graco reddite 
CA FITZNCs 
Ad Grammaticem ordinariam ſupplementa qusd an, Editn 3. multis au- 
Fir, a Guil, Phalcrio. 
Contemplatiories Metaphyſice ev Natura Rerim' Gy refs Rationis Hiuming 
dedude, Auth. G. Ritlchel, Bohemo. 
Delphi Phznicizantes per Edm. Dickinfon, 7. D. Coll. Mert. Socjo. 
Artis Logice Compendium a Roberto Sandcrſon, lm Epiſ. Lincoln. Edit, 
Nona. 1630. - 
| Compend'; m Ph Hcg. 157; K 
Exercitatio Epiltolica in Tho, Hol 11 Philſphi am, Auth Seth. Ward.S T.D. 
— Aſtronma Genmetrica. Ub; Methodie propomttur qua primarinium” 
Planetarium Ajtronomia ſive Eifiptica Circul ris poſſit G, "MNECTICE atflu, 
Carmen Tograt Poete Arabis Do. Hyun, una cum Verſrme Latins 0 Notis 
Praxin illins exhibentibzs, Opera Ed. Pocokit L. Heb. Gy Arab. Profeſ) j 
Vis. _— Tratatns de profpdia Arabica, per Sam. Clericum. 1551. 
Fueili Apologia Eccl:ſig Angl. Grece Lat. 
Hmm as 79 Syrmvna linz. Lat. cx Ott) &f Opera H. Edmunſon. 1657, 
Acmntit Stratagematin Satang. 
Elawel : le D: monſtr. LORG. 
Arati Phennnena 0s Eratoſthenes.Scholizs Grew 1672, 
KXenion Cytus. Gr. 2 Ter tt). 1975s. 
Faujtini & Marceliu Lives Precum. 7 ws : 
—_—_—_.. Pi " TinNcAti). 19766. 
—d Timate contra Aran. / 
Zum Hithirie Noue librt] eX Gr. Lat. Ants Iiluftrat. e Theatio. 15 3+ 
Richardon de (iro Latino formand?, 6 Tre.ttro. 1578, 
Aſhirell de Socam && S10iniani (rn Diſſertatin, 1629, 
Ethica, ſfroe 1 th Piiſiopiria ex weterum &F recentiorum Son ont, 
* ad D Fputatior wit iuxta ac Concionum, tat mſgs Vite humane iſnt con- 


gr 0761 're re (7 rerurr apparatu cmcrnnat a. Opera ' (7 {ind'9 Anudr. Sally 
8.7. D. oa oli Pr fejÞres- I589, 


—+-Pe Inc ntinenti, # 
ral:ſis Libri Ariftotelis de Sophiflic. El?nchis, Opera Ox ſtuds G. Pod. 
1554. 
1H ONM E RU IJ EBPATZONW for e Co17: hb; wat Homer cum Sc FM M104 
Sacris grad Nov mam lyquendiSubne G,HESIODUS OMELLZQN, 
Aliith. Tach. B Eoga an, # Go Gobe Oxon. 
Pucriles Confzbulatiunculz, Greco-Latine. Ad calcem adjrfine oft Ind'x 
Greco Oo Latin in quibiys omnia fere Gr, C3 1at, Vocabuls ae in oper: 


- { F , Tis 
V- 


gccurrunt, comprehenduntur. Authore W, Jackſon. 

Diaconi Epitome Ariſiit. Logics. Gr. Lat. 

Scheibl 11 Comp end. Phil. Elit. Nrua. I57t. 

Alcinng de Dictr. Platon. Gr. Lat. .1557. 

Nemeſis de Natura Hmnns Gr. Lat. 1971. 

4 EAI p22 7ijir MH; we mang e Re IM aliiCue in Corp POP. Tum cont a- 
ety maxta Ordinem Alphabett diipfite BONO [UVENTUTIS. 
Oper, tC ba ſta di2 Fit, } Hildebr. Edit. Fertia autFrnr &&7 cOrrediw. 1574. 

Epiſtol s Quatus W, QHATHON due de Mortbus ac Fu Diratis Turcarum agunt. 
Dus Septeim Alt e Eccl: {1 wm WT Con 1. 1mplens Nnittiam continent. 
Auth. Tho. Smith, Coll. D. Maite Ma? l. Ox SI2) 167 4 

Bleau de Gl-bis, 

Carpentert Decadis Fhitſphia Libera. Edit. quatta. 157 ge 

C. Suetonit Trang. Opera Omnia, N _ 5 zuſtiatg. 6 Theatro. 1675, 

De Unitaio Ecclofr 2 Britannic Mea ttationes Sacre. Auffore ]: Scobaldo 
FabrictoThe:l. Doffwe, Prof ire Herdelberaenſt, Come 1 =- 1676, 

Animdio ſrones in Libie. Now: Ie in, tm nt: 14m _ 14 Cura auto iy emens 
dite. Authwe Þ. Nortono Enarchiwull, E{4, & _ a 

Herediani Hiſtriarum [1971 8. Gr. Lat. Recognitt 'S Notts Illuftrati, 8 
Toeatin. 1573. 

Pharma ewiceRatianalis,frue Diut-tha Ate edrcameniorum Operat !nibus in 
Human Corpcie, \ pars prima & fecunda un) vol. Editio Teitias 1579s 


IN DUODECIMO. 


A Chriſtian Leecacy, or proparations for, and Confolations againſt 
Death ; with the fc; Mans Cordial, by Edw. Hide, D. D. 

— A Vindication of Truth avgainit Error: 12 k ven Controverſies, 1.Of 
Sinners Praycrs, 2.Prieſts Marriage 3-Purgatory. - 4. Tmages. 5s Praying 
to Saints and Angels. 6. Juſtification |! by Faith. 7. Of Chrifts New 
Teſtament or Corcuant, 

Dirc&jons to a Gudly Life, Inftriftions for the worthy receiving of the 
Lords Supper, by #. Tizer, The ninth Edition. 1580, 

Two Aſie Sermons Preached at Reading and Abbingdoin,on Cant. 7. 4+ 
Pf. 82. 1. with two other Scrnwns Preached at Sr. Mary's 1n Oxon. on 
I Cor. 15. 10, Pf. 58. 11. by fo. Hinkley. 

A ſhort review of {ome Dircct 10s for pcriormance of Cathedral Scr- 
vice, by Ed Lowe Ar e 24 E dition, with additions. 1554. 

A compleat Her! al, by Robert Lovel. The 24 Edition. 

Dr. Stobe's Directions for private Devotions and Retirements, to which 
are adjoyned ſome private D<vorions of the lite Learned Bp. An: 
arews ; never before extant. 1552, 

Drexelins of Eternity, 1 wel, h. 

The Trial of a Chriſtians Sincere Love to Chriſt 1n four Sermons, by 
W. Pinb. The fifth Edition. 

The Gentile Sinner, or Englands brave Gentleman CharaQcr'd in 3 

Y 


2 I ctier 


| _ 

Letter toa Friend : both as he is ga as he ſhould be, by Cl-m.Ellis, 

M.A. late Fellow of Qu. Coll. O10. The fixth Edition. 1579. 

Th 1 Chriſtian Sacrament and Sarrince, by way of difcourſe, Medirg. 
tion and Prayer, upon the Narure. Parts and Blcflings of the Holy 
Communion, by Dan. Brevint,D.D. The 34 Edition.at the Thea. 1579, 

A Nomenclator of ſuch Trafts and Sermons 2s have heen Printed of 
tranſlated 1 no Eng!ith upon any place or book of the Holy-Scrip» 
ture now to be had in the Fublick Library in Oxan.by 7obn Yernemnl, 

Croſs, d$ Febre intermttente, 

Pavonii Diſputat. E thie e, 

Paradoxa Hydroftatica pe # Rob. Boyle. 

— Origo forma im (Ty Qualitatum, &C. 

m— "itationes C&S » SOT f, Styl J, 

m—Tratatus Novem de Qualitat. Reriim Cofmicit, ds ſuſpicinilin Cf 
micts, &c. 

Tlementis tap G. L. 15 

Theſes Philvph. Nove, a Cirol 0 Potter. 

Aditus ad 17icam, Authore Samucle Smith. 

Elementa Lvice, Author? F.dvardo Brerewond. p 

Roberti Baroni1 P/.7l-/ ph. Theolog. Ancillans, 

De Peccato Mortali S] Vemalr. 

Prolufiones Acafemicg in duas partes diftribut . de Judcits, 2. de 
Origire Domini by | (erwitutts, &c., Tho, Ton WA L. D.e C:?}.,Mert. $: 

Burgerial dicti Tdea Philoſophie. 

— Metaphyſic Le 167 5. 

Bradſhaw de Tuflifcatione, 

Tendon Curſics Logics, 

Combachi Metaphvſica 

Minutnss Felix cu Nitis Regaltit, Be. 15, 

Galateus de Mrib:us (o Bartholini Enchiridion ; Eebicrnn ho 

N. Curtis Notis Loceentt. 1572, 

PemPli Tradtatus Tres de Formarum Or:icinede ſonſi bus Trtornts Sc 1556, 

Pharmaceutice Ratinnali::ſive Diatriba de Medicamentorum «py him ap 
in Human) Coypore. Authore Tho, Willis 2M. D. duo Vol. 1674.07 157% 

Rev. Patris Lanc. Andrews, Epiſe, Wititon. Preces P; rvare Grece & 
Latine, e Theatro, 

Richardi Gardiner Herefordenſi's, Adis Chriſti Oxon, Cann, Specime:? 
Oratortum cum G—_— Novifſurm. Editio quinta. 157 36 

M. Antonint Imperatoris, de ſe eirſo & ad ſeipſum, libji X IT. Gr. Lat. Re: 
ragniti CF Notis iluftrati, 6 Theatro. 1580, 


Ia 24 FT Ijſrus de Conſt nt a. 
B:itizus de Conſolatione Phil'ſ. 


FINIS 


4 ww -v* + 


