Title: Suetonius (De Vita Caesarum / Lives of the Twelve Caesars), Loeb Classical Library, two volumes bound together
Creator: Suetonius (Latin text with English translation by John C. Rolfe)
Publisher: London: William Heinemann; New York: The Macmillan Co., 1914 (Loeb Classical Library)
Publication Date: 1914
Rights: Public Domain
Language: lat (mixed: Ihm's Latin text on the left-hand pages with Rolfe's English on the facing pages, roughly balanced -- not a pure-Latin witness)
Source: Internet Archive item suetonius-loeb (a Google Books scan), full-text OCR file Suetonius_Loeb_djvu.txt, fetched directly by the library/source-research thread, 2026-09-29. The item page gives no date or copyright field, so rights rest on the printed title page (MCMXIV) alone.
Provenance note: Header prepended by the library thread; the OCR text follows unchanged, apart from this header, including the Google Books front-matter notice. Rights basis: the title page states MCMXIV (1914), more than 95 years before 2026, so it clears this registry's public-domain-by-date rule. OCR artifacts left as found; Latin and English pages interleave in the OCR, so line-by-line matching needs the page images.
Content note: Both volumes are in the file: Vol. I (Julius to Nero's predecessors) and Vol. II, which opens at file line about 23359 and carries the Deified Claudius and Nero. Claudius 25.4 (the Chrestus notice, English at file line about 25896) and Nero 16.2 (the Christians, Latin at about 28447, English at about 28512). Rolfe's introduction and footnotes are 1914 scholarship.

---

This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized 
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the 
information in books and make it universally accessible. 


Google books 


https://books.google.com 


SUETONIUS 


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY 
J. C. ROLFE, PuD. 


PROFESSOR OF THE LATIN LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 
IN THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA 


IN TWO VOLUMES 
I 


LONDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN 


NEW YORK : THE MACMILLAN CO. 
MCMXIV 


206975 


-——— wee 09€ 


. 
. po e DE MR 
. 
0 > 


PREFACE 


Tue translation of the Lives of the Caesars is based 
upon the text of Maximilian Ihm, Leipzig, 1907 
(editio minor, 1909) with some slight changes in 
punctuation, capitalisation, and orthography, to con- 
form more nearly with English and American usage. 
Where Ihm does not offer a readable text, con- 
jectures have been admitted and mentioned in the 
footnotes, and in a few other cases a different reading 
than his has been adopted. 

The aim has been a translation, rather than the 
easier task of a paraphrase. "The version of Philemon 
Holland (London, 1606) cannot be surpassed in style 
and spirit, and it is more accurate than any other 
English translation. An attempt has been made to 
compete with it in the only possible way, namely in 
greater fidelity to a better text than was available in 
his day, and in a nearer approach to the manner of 
Suetonius. The text and interpretation of Suetonius 
offer many difficulties, all of which have received 


-careful consideration; but it is hardly to be hoped 


that the results have been satisfactory in all cases. 


V 


PREFACE 


I am indebted for many valuable suggestions to the 
excellent German translation of Adolf Stahr, Stutt- 
gart, 1857, in the new edition published at Munich 
in 1912. 

To the Lives of the Caesars have been added those 
extracts from the Lives of Illustrious Men which 
afford a continuous text and are generally regarded 
as authentic. See the Prefatory Note to Part II. 

A complete Index to the whole work will be found 
at the end of Volume II. 


| JOHN C. ROLFE. 
PHILADELPHIA, April, 1913. 


CONTENTS 


P REFACE » * ». * . LI . . . e . LJ * 


THE LIFE AND WORKS OF SUETONIUS . 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS. 
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS . . 
THE MANUSCRIPTS . . . . . . 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE. . . . . 
SIGLA 2 x9 30€ v wy PRA 
BOOK I.—THE DEIFIED JULIUS . 
BOOK II.-—THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 
BOOK II.—TIBERIUS . . . . . . 
BOOK IV. —GAIUS CALIGULA. . . 


STEMMA OF THE JULIO-CLAUDIAN 


* . LJ 


EMPERORS . 


Hosted by Google 


THE LIFE AND WORKS OF 
SUETONIUS 


Gaius SuETONIUS TRANQUILLUS is one of the numerous 
Roman writers who give us little information about 
themselves. He only tells us! that he wasthe son of 
Suetonius Laetus, a Roman knight, who took part in 
the battle of Betriacum as tribune of the thirteenth 
legion; for four other casual allusions? add nothing 
of importance, although they are of assistance in 
conjecturing the date of his birth, which Mommsen ? 
assigns to the year 77 a.p., Macét with somewhat 
greater probability to 69. The rest of our informa- 
tion is derived from the Letters of the Younger 
Pliny and from a single allusion in Spartianus, who 
in the time of Diocletian wrote a biography of 
Hadrian. 

His birthplace is unknown, and it is possible that 
he was one of the few Roman writers who were born 
in the city of Rome? The date of his death is also 
uncertain. Our last reference to him is in 121, but 


1 Otho, x. 1. 

? Calig. xix. 3; Nero, lvii. 2; Dom. xii. 2; Gr. iv. 

5 Hermes, iii. p. 43. 5 Essai sur Suétone, pp. 35 ff. 

5 There is no prominent writer of whom this can be asserted 
positively ; it seems probable in the case of Caesar and 
Lucretius ; for Suetonius see Macé, Essai, p. 33 f. 


Ix 


THE LIFE AND WORKS OF SUETONIUS 


the number and extent of his works, and the impli- 
cation in one of Pliny’s Letters! that he was slow to 
publish, suggest that he must have lived toa good 
old age, perhaps including a part of the reign of 
Antoninus Pius. From Pliny we learn that he 
practised at the bar,? although it was apparently 
only for a short time. That he was a schoolmaster, 
which is asserted by Macé and others, seems to lack 
evidence. He took no part in political life, and 
although he secured a military tribuneship through 
Pliny's good offices, he soon had it transferred to a 
relative. He received from Trajan the tus trium 
liberorum but this was not justified by the number 
of his offspring. Apparently he had no children, 
but there is no evidence that his marriage was 
unhappy as well as unfruitful$ as some assert. That 
he received the privilege from an emperor so 
reluctant to grant it to those who could not legally 
lay claim to it, is perhaps evidence of his high 
character. In his letter to Trajan Pliny refers 
to Suetonius as contubernalis, which indicates an 
intimate friendship and an approximately equal age. 
The latter is not inconsistent with Pliny's language 
in Epist. 3. 8. 1,7 since his position was so much higher 
than that of Suetonius, and it is in accord with Epist. 
9. 34, where Pliny consults his friend as to the 
advisability of reading his verses in public. 

The letters of Pliny which refer to Suetonius 
cover approximately the period from 96 to 112. 


1 5. 10. 2 Epist. 1. 18. 
3 Scholasticis dominis, in Pliny, Epist, 1. 24. 4, means 
** scholars turned landowners.” 4 Pliny, Epist. 3. 8. 


5 Pliny, Epist. 10. 94 and 95. 
6 parum felix, Pliny, Epist. 10. 94. 2. 
1 reverentia, quam mihi praestas. 


THE LIFE AND WORKS OF SUETONIUS 


From Spartianus ! we learn that he held the position 
of secretary ? to Hadrian, probably during the period 
when his friend and patron Gaius Septicius Clarus 
was a prefect of the praetorian guard (119 to 121). 
It was doubtless at this time that Suetonius gave 
Hadrian the little statuette of Augustus, referred to 
in Aug. vii. l. Spartianus tells us that both Suetonius 
and Septicius were discharged by Hadrian, “quod 
apud Sabinam uxorem tniussu eius familiarius tunc se 
egerant quam reverentia domus aulicae postulabat." 
While this statement is far from clear or definite, the 
words :miussu eius suggest some violation of court 
etiquette, rather than any more serious misconduct. 
From this time on we lose sight of Suetonius, and it 
seems probable that he lived in retirement and 
devoted himself to literary work. 

The references to his works are considerably more 
numerous. A catalogue of them is preserved by 
Suidas,? to which additions have been made from 
other sources. He was a man of scholarly tastes 
and habits, and according to the fashion of his later 
years, when the greater part of the work appears to 
have been done, apparently wrote in Greek as well 
as in Latin. His writings were in the fields of 
history (biography), antiquities, natural history and 
grammar, and inay be listed as follows :— 


I.—B:iocRAPurcaAL AND HISTORICAL. 


1. The Lives of the Caesars. 

2. On Illustrious Men (in the field of literature). 

3. On Famous Courtesans. 

4. On the Kings. 

1 Vit. Hadr. 11. 3. 

2 Ab epistulis, referred to by Spartianus by the later title 
of magister epistularum. 3 gu. Tpá-ykvAAos. f 

xi 


THE LIFE AND WORKS OF SUETONIUS 


II.— ANTIQUITIES. 


1. On Rome (Roma). 
(a) Manners and Customs. 
(6) The Roman Year. 
c) The Roman Festivals. 
(d) Clothing. 
The Games of the Greeks. 
On Public Offices. 
On Cicero's De Re Publica. 


POS bo 


III.—NaTuRAL Hisronv (Pratum). 


On Mankind (On Bodily Defects). 
On the Reckoning of Time. 
. On Nature. 


Q5 bo m 


IV.—GRAMMATICAL. 


. On Terms of Abuse in Greek. 
. Grammatical Questions (De Rebus Variis). 
. On the Critical Marks used in Books.! 


e bo et 


Of all these the only work which has come down 
to us entire, or nearly so, is the Lives of the Caesars, 
published in 120. lt includes the biographies of 
twelve “Caesars,” from Julius to Domitian, and 
except for some inconsiderable lacunae, lacks only 
the first few chapters of the life of Julius. From a 
reference of Johannes Lydus,? of the sixth century, 
it appears that he used a codex with the dedication 

1 Schanz, Gesch. d. róm. Litteratur, in Müllers Handbuch | 
d. klass. Altertumswissenschaft, vii. 3, pp. 93 f. Various 
arrangements of these eighteen titles are made by different 


scholars ; see for example Macé, Essai, p. 355, and the editions 
of Suetonius. * De Magistr. 2. 6, p. 102 Fuss. 


Xli 


THE LIFE AND WORKS OF SUETONIUS 


to Septicius Clarus, and hence presumably with the 
missing portion of the Julus. This must therefore 
have been lost between the sixth century and the 
early part of the ninth century (see p. xxi). Preud’- 
homme! believes that he has demonstrated the 
existence of a complete manuscript of the fifth 
century, written in capitals. | 

Besides the Lives of the Caesars we have consider- 
able fragments of the Lives of Illustrious Men, of 
which those which are generally regarded as authentic 
and offer a continuous text of any length are given 
in Part II.? 

The voluminous publications ot Suetonius gave 
him lasting fame and were used as sources by later 
writers in various fields. In this way a great number 
of detached passages from his lost works and from 
the missing portions of the De Viris Illustribus have 
been preserved, in the form of more or less literal 
excerpts. The historical writers, such as Eutropius, 
Aurelius Victor, and Orosius drew on him freely, and 
so frequently reproduce his exact language as to be 
of occasional help in the criticism of his text. 
|. He exercised a great influence on the form of 
historical writing, which took a biographical turn for 
some centuries. He found imitators and successors 
in Marius Maximus (165-230), whose works have 
perished, and in the writers of the Augustan History 
(Scriptores Historiae Augustae), whose biographies have 
come down to us, while Tacitus did not find a follower 
until the time of Ammianus Marcellinus (330-400). 
His influence extended to the Christian writers and 

! Mémoires couronnés et autres mémoires publiées par 
PAcadémie royale de Belgique, lxiii. pp. 84-88. 

2 See Schanz, l.c. p. 47, and the Prefatory Note to Part II. 


xiii 


THE LIFE AND WORKS OF SUETONIUS 


is seen in the form of the Life of Ambrosius by his 
secretary Paulinus, and even to the Middle Ages, 
when Einhardus wrote a Life of Charles the Great on 
the model of Suetonius, perhaps using the manuscript 
which is the archetype of those that have come down 
to us (see p. xxi). 

His other works were no less esteemed as authori- 
ties. Tertullian in his De Spectaculis made use of 
Suetonius's work of a similar title, and we find his 
influence in Censorinus, Solinus, Macrobius, in the 
scholiasts on Germanicus, Horace, and Juvenal, in 
the commentator Servius, and especially in Isidore, 
who has preserved many fragments of the lost works 
of Suetonius. 


xiv 


PART I 
THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS 


Hosted by Google 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS 


GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS 


Tue biographies of Suetonius are interesting both 
for their contents and as a form of literature. Strictly 
speaking they are neither history nor biography. 
Great historical events, such as Caesar's campaigns 
in Gaul, are dismissed in a brief chapter, or with a 
casual allusion, like the defeat of Varus. The acts 
of the senate and people, and the edicts of the 
emperors, receive fuller attention, but are wholly 
subordinate to the personal element. On the other 
hand no ideal life is presented, to inspire imitation 
and point a moral, and no attempt is made to trace 
the development of character as influenced by 
heredity, education, and environment. The Lives,as 
Leo has shown, are of the ** grammatical ” type, and 
they furnish material for biographies in the true 
sense of the word, giving the thoughtful reader 
abundant opportunity for the reflexions and deductions 
which the writer has omitted. 

1 Die griechisch-rómischen Biographie, Leipzig, 1901. 

? These were originally designed as introductions to works 
of literature, and their material was drawn in a great 
measure from those works themselves ; but they were after- 
wards extended to men eminent in other fields. For fuller 
details on this and other points I may refer tomy paper 


** Suetonius and his Biographies” in the Proc, of the Amer. 
Philosophical Soc., lii. pp. 206 ff. 


xvii 


GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS 


Suetonius was rather a student and a searcher 
of records than an observer or inquirer, and his 
interests lay in the past rather than in the present. 
The Lives become shorter as he approaches his own 
timé, when the written sources were fewer and the 
opportunities for obtaining personal information 
greater. He had at his disposal a great amount 
of material in the form of histories and memoirs 
which are now lost; he had access either directly or 
indirectly through his colleague 4b studus, to the 
imperial archives while he was Hadrian's secretary ; 
and his intimacy with Pliny must have made him 
familiar with senatorial records and opinions. Occa- 
sionally he made use of hearsay evidence! and of 
personal observation.? That he seems to have made 
little use of inscriptions? is doubtless due in large 
measure to his possession of other material which is 
not available to-day. 

On the rare occasions when he gives us an insight 
into his method of handling his sources, as in Calig. 
viii, it seems clear that he examined conflicting state- 
ments with care and intelligence, whenever he 
thought it necessary to do so; but the plan of his 
work does not often call for such an investigation. 
Although he aims to be strictly impartial, scrupu- 
lously recounting the virtues and vices of the 
emperors in separate lists, he seems as a rule to 
pay little regard to the source from which his 
information comes, and rarely makes any personal 
comment. 

! Calig. xix. 3. ? Nero, lvii. 2; Dom. xii. 2. 

M Dennison, Amer. Jour. of Arch., sec. series, ii. pp. 

4 See Aug. ix., lxi.; Trb. lxi. 9.; Cal. xxii, 1.; Nero, 
xix. 3. 5 See, however, Tib. xxi. 2; Tit. i. 

xviii 


GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS 


This apparent impartiality does not give us a fair 
and unbiassed estimate of the emperors. To be con- 
vinced of this we have only to imagine a biography 
of some prominent man of our own day, made up of 
praise and blame drawn indiscriminately from the 
organs of his own party and of the opposition, and 
presented without comment, Just as such a method 
would yield a considerable number of absolute false- 
hoods, so many of the statergents of Suetonius must 
be rejected for one reason or another. 

He is often, perhaps generally, regarded as a 
scandal-monger and a man of prurient mind, but 
neither of these charges seems justified. The details 
which give rise to the latter are relatively few in 
number and are presented with the same judicial 
coldness which characterises his work in general; 
while the so-called scandal-mongery is in reality a 
feature of the development of realism ! in the writing 
of the early Empire and of the prevailing interest 
in the personality and private life of prominent 
men. 

The style of Suetonius is rather that of the scholar 
and investigator than of the man of letters. - It is 
plain and concise, with no attempt at fine writing or 
rhetorical embellishment, ànd has been well charac- 
terised as “businesslike.” His brevity is rarely 
obscure, and when it is, the obscurity is generally 
the result of our imperfect knowledge. At times 
his conciseness yields sentences worthy of Tacitus, 
but these, like his intensely dramatic passages, are 
due rather to the subject matter than to any departure 
from his usual style. He has the grammarian’s feeling 


1 See H., T. Peck, Julius and Augustus, Introduction, 
pp. v ff. 
xix 
b 2 


GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS 


for language, and his words are always well chosen 
and effective. While at times the catalogues of crimes 
and of petty personal details are somewhat mono- 
tonous, the Lives as a whole are of absorbing interest, 
and give us a wealth of anecdotes, witticisms, and 
curious information of great variety. 


XX 


THE MANUSCRIPTS 


Two critical editions of the Lives of the Caesars 
have appeared within the past few years, those of ` 
M. Ihm, Leipzig, 1907, and of L. Preud'homme, 
Groningen, 1906, each based on a painstaking and 
independent study of the manuscripts. These show 
remarkably few deviations from the work of Roth 
(1858) and from each other. The text therefore 
may be regarded as practically settled, at least until 
the independent value of the fifteenth century 
codices has been demonstrated. (See p. xxv.) 

It is generally agreed that all our existing manu- 
scripts are derived from one at Fulda, written in 
rustic capitals (Ihm) or uncials (Preud'homme). This 
seems to have been the only one in existence at the 
time, and it is known to us from a letter of Servatus 
Lupus, abbot of Ferriéres, of the year 884. "This 
codex and a copy of it in minuscules, which was sent 
to Servatus Lupus at his request, are now lost; but 
the latter was extensively copied, and the number of 
manuscripts at present existing is very large. The 
Fulda codex (Q, Ihm ; P, Preud'homme !) lacked the 
beginning of the Life of Julius Caesar and had other 
lesser lacunae and numerous errors, but seems to 
have been free from interpolation. The copies how- 


1 9 is used by Preud'homme to designate the se 
mentioned on p. xiii. 


xxi 


THE MANUSCRIPTS 


ever were extensively emended, so that by the twelfth 
century the text was in bad condition. 

The manuscripts used by Ihm, with the sigla 
which he employs, are the following; the sigla of 
Preud’homme are given in parentheses : 

M (A). The codex Memmianus of the ninth century. 
Our oldest and best manuscript, either a copy of the 
.one sent to Servatus Lupus or closely related to it, 
apparently free from interpolations, though not 
without errors and lacunae. None of our other 
manuscripts is derived from it. It contains corrections 
made by another hand, not later than the twelfth 
century (M?) | 

This codex came originally from the monastery ot 
St. Martin of Tours, was later in the possession of 
Henri de Mesmes, and is now in the National Library 
in Paris. It is commonly called Memmianus, from 
de Mesmes, but was formerly called Turonensis; its 
present designation is Codex Parisinus, 6115, formerly 
0984. 

G (C). The codex Gudianus of the eleventh century, 
now at Wolffenbuttel (Gudianus, 268) Closely 
related to M and derived from a similar original, but 
inferior to it. It has numerous corrections, made in 
part by the scribe (M?) and in part in the fifteenth 
century (M?). 

V (B). The codex Vaticanus, 1904, of the eleventh 
century, a little younger than G but more trust- 
worthy. It frequently agrees with M, and is of 
almost equal value ; but it comes to an end at Calig. 
iii, detecta sua re. It was used by Lipsius in 1574. 
It contains glosses of the same general character 
as M?. 

Preud'homme regards his D (Parisinus, 5804), of 


xxii 


THE MANUSCRIPTS 


the fourteenth century, as in the same class with the 
above; Ihm, who assigns it to the fifteenth century, 
rates it much less highly. 

The other important manuscripts fall into two 
classes, each represented by a large number of 
examples. The first class is represented by the 
following : 

L (a). The codex Laurentianus, 68. 7, of the twelfth 
century, in the Medicean Library at Florence, the 
Mediceus Tertius of Oudendorp. It also contains 
Caesar, De Bello Gallico, and has corrections by an 
earlier (L?) and a later hand (L?). 

P (b). The codex Parisinus, 5801, of the twelfth 
century, with corrections from a manuscript of the 
second class (P2), according to Ihm. 

O (c). The codex Laurentsanus, 66. 39, of the twelfth 
century, in the Medicean Library at Florence. Has 
corrections similar to those in P (O?). 

S (f). The codex Montepessulanus, 117, of the 
twelfth century, at Montpelier. Corrected in the 
same manner as P and O. 

T. The codex Berolinensis, Lat. 337, of the four- 
teenth century, formerly Hulstanus or Hagianus. 
Frequently agrees with V and L. Corrected by 
a hand of about the same date as the original 
scribe. 

From the agreement of L, P, O, S, and T, the 
readings of their archetype are recovered, a lost 
manuscript from the same original as V, but inferior 
to V, designated by X (X). The agreement of X 
and V gives the readings of X', a lost codex of the 
class of M and V. 

The second class contains more errors and inter- 
polations than the first. It is represented by a very 


XXiil 


THE MANUSCRIPTS 


large number of manuscripts, of which Ihm uses the 
following : 

II (8). The coder Parisinus, 6116, of the twelfth 
century, corrected from a manuscript of the variety 
represented by R. | 

Q(y) The codex Parisinus, 5802, of the twelfth 
century, corrected in the fifteenth. 

R (a). The codex Regius of the twelfth century, in 
the British Museum (15. C. iii) and rated high by 
Bentley. It comes to an end with Dom. xiv, non 
alias magis, but seems to have been complete in the 
sixteenth century. 

The agreement of these codices gives the readings 
of their archetype (Y), a lost codex of about the same 
date as X, but inferior to it; and since P,O, S, and T 
were corrected from a manuscript of this class, their 
agreement with Y gives the readings of another lost 
manuscript Y". 

Besides the manuscripts of the whole work we 
have two collections of selections, which have some 
critical value. The earliest of these was made by 
Heiric of Auxerre between 871 and 876 and based on 
Lupus’s copy of the codex Fuldensis. It is of con- 
siderable value, but has suffered from emendation ; 
H (Y) A fuller epitome of the thirteenth century, 
of comparatively little value, is preserved in codex 
Parisinus, 17903, formerly Notre-Dame, 188; N. 

Ihm and Preud’ homme are in substantial agreement 
in their classification of the manuscripts. The 
latter divides them into two classes, X and Z, the 
first including M, V, X, G,6, and H (or in his nomen- 
clature, A, B, X', C, D, and Y); the second, R, IT, Q, 
and Suessionensis, 119 (in his nomenclature, a, B, y, €). 

The only important difference of opinion is as to 


xxiv 


THE MANUSCRIPTS 


the independent value of the fifteenth-century manu- 
scripts, which frequently offer good readings not 
found in the earlier codices. Roth came to the con- 
clusion that these were mere conjectures, without 
value in determining the readings of the archetype, 
and the: careful and independent investigations of 
Jhm and Preud’homme led them to the same opinion. 
The contrary view is held by some scholars, but 
cannot be regarded as sufficiently established. 


! See especially C. L. Smith and A. A. Howard, Harvard 
Studies in Class. Phil., xii. pp. 54 ff. and 261 ff. 


XXV 


Hosted by Google 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 


Tue earliest editions are two published in Rome 
in 1470, one in July by Johannes Campanus, and the 
other in December by Johannes Aleriensis; these 
were immediately followed by a Venetian edition of 
1471, and all three are regarded as editiones principes. 
Among other early editions are those of Beroaldus, 
Bologna, 1493 and 1506, the latter with a valuable 
commentary; Erasmus, ‘Basle, 1518; R. Stephanus 
(Robert Etienne), Paris, 1543; and Casaubon, Geneva, 
1595 and Paris, 1610. 

Down to 1820 more than forty editions were issued, 
including some second editions, among them those 
of Gronovius, Leyden, 1698; Burman, Amsterdam, 
1763, with the full commentary of a number of his 
predecessors and selections from those of others; 
Ernesti, Leipzig, 1748 and 1775; Oudendorp, Ley- 
den, 1751; Baumgarten-Crusius, Leipzig, 1816, with 
a commentary and very full indices (Clavis Suetoniana). 
This is still the standard annotated edition. It was 
issued with some additions by C. B. Hase at Paris in 
1828. Bentley planned an edition which was never 
finished, but his material is preserved in the British 
Museum. 

In later times the editions have been few in 
number. That of C. L. Roth, Leipzig, 1858, was 


xxvii 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 


the standard text until the appearance of those of 
Ihm and Preud' homme. 

The Lives of the Caesars still lacks a commentary in 
English and a full and satisfactory one in any language. 
There are annotated editions of separate lives by H. T. 
Peck, Julius and Augustus, New York, 18937; E. S. 
Shuckburgh, Augustus, Cambridge, 1896 ; : and J. B. 
Pike, Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius and Nero, Boston, 
1903; to these may be added H. Smilda, Claudius, 
Groningen, 1896, and C. Hofstee, Galba, Otho and 
Vitellius, Groningen, 1898. 

The Caesars have been translated into English by 
Philemon Holland, London, 1606; John Clarke, 
London, 1732, with the Latin text ; and by Alexander 
Thomson, London, 1796. <A revision of Thomson’s 
translation was made by T. Forester, and published 
in the Bohn Library (London) without a date. 

Of books and monographs dealing with Suetonius 
the following may be mentioned : A. Macé, Essai sur 
Suétone, Paris, 1900 ; Fr. Leo, Die griechisch-rümischen 
Biographie, L eipzig, 1901; L. Preud'homme, Premiere, 
deuxième, troisième étude sur l'histoire du texte de Suétone 
de vita Caesarum, Bulletins de l Académie royale de 
Belgique, 1902 and 1904; Ihm, Hermes, 36, 37 and 
40; H. R. Thimm, De usu atque elocutione. C. Suet. 
Tranq., Regimonti, 1867; P. Bagge, De elocutione 
C. Suet. Tranq., Upsala, 1875; I. W. Freund, De 
Suelonii usu atque genere dicendi, Breslau, 1901; W. 
Dennison, * The Epigraphic Sources of Suetonius," 
Amer. Jour. of Archeology, Second Series, IL., pp. 26 ff.; 
L. Damasso, La Grammatica di C. Suet. Tranq., Turin, 
1906; C. L. Smith, Harvard Studies in Class. Phil., 
xii. pp. 54 ff; A. A. Howard, :dem, vii, 210 f., x. pp. 
23 ff., and xii. pp. 261 ff. ; J. C. Rolfe, * Suetonius 


xxviii 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 


and his Biographies," Proc. Amer. Philosophical Soc. 
lii, pp. 206 ff. 

The reader may be reminded of S. Baring-Gould's 
Tragedy of the Caesars, London, 1902 ; Sienkiewicz's 
Quo Vadis; Gardthausen's Augustus und seine Zeit, 
Leipzig, 1891; Shuckburgh's Augustus, London, 1903; 
and of other general and special works dealing with 
the period. 


xxix 


Hosted by Google 


SIGLA 


Q =the archetype of our existing codices, restored 
by the agreement of X’ and Y”. 


M =Codex Memmianus. 
G =Codex Gudianus. 


X' = the archetype of V and X. 
V = Codex Vaticanus. 
X =the archetype of 
L 2 Codex Laurentianus, 68.7. 
P= Codex Parisinus, 5801. 
O = Codex Laurentianus, 66.39 
S — Codex Montepessulanus. 
T = Codex Berolinensis. 
Y =the archetype of 
II = Codex Parisinus, 6116. 
Q = Codex Parisinus, 5802. 
R= Codex Regius. 


Y’=the agreement of Y with S and T, usually 
accompanied by that of P? and O (O°). 


© —all the codices not included in the above list. 


XXxi 


Hosted by Google 


THE 


LIVES OF THE CAESARS 


BOOK I 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


Vol. I. B 


DE VITA CAESARUM 


LIBER I 
DIVVS IVLIVS 


* * * * * * * *1 


I. Annum agens sextum decimum patrem amisit ; 
sequentibusque consulibus flamen Dialis destinatus 
dimissa Cossutia, quae familia equestri sed ad- 
modum dives praetextato desponsata fuerat, Cor- 
neliam Cinnae quater consulis filiam duxit uxorem, 
ex qua ill mox lulia nata est; neque ut re- 
pudiaret compelli a dictatore Sulla ullo modo 
potuit. Quare et sacerdotio et uxoris dote et gen- 
tilicis hereditatibus multatus diversarum partium 
habebatur, ut etiam discedere e medio et quam- 
quam morbo quartanae adgravante prope per sin- 
gulas noctes commutare latebras cogeretur seque 
ab inquisitoribus pecunia redimeret, donec per vir- 
gines Vestales perque Mamercum Aemilium et Aure- 
lium Cottam propinquos et adfines suos veniam 
impetravit. Satis constat Sullam, cum deprecantibus 


1 See p. xxi. 


a 85/84 B.C., according to the chronology of Suetonius, 
which makes the year of Caesar's birth 100 B.c. The argu- 
ments in favour of 102 are however very strong. 

è By Marius and Cinna, consuls in 86; see Vell. 2. 43. 1. 


^ 
dm 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS 


BOOK I 
THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


* * * * * of * us 


I. IN the course of his sixteenth year? he lost his 
father. In the next consulate, having previously 
been nominated priest of Jupiter, he broke his en- 
gagement with Cossutia, a lady of only equestrian 
rank, but very wealthy, who had been betrothed to 
him before he assumed the gown of manhood, and 
married Cornelia, daughter of that Cinna who was 
four times consul, by whom he presently had a 
daughter Julia; and the dictator Sulla could by no 
means force him to put away his wife. Therefore 
besides being punished by the loss of his priesthood, 
his wife's dowry, and his family inheritances, Caesar 
was held to be one of the opposite party. He was 
accordingly forced to go into hiding, and though 
suffering from a severe attack of quartan ague, to 
change from one covert to another almost every 
night, and save himself from Sulla's detectives by 
bribes. But at last, through the good offices of the 
Vestal virgins and of his near kinsmen, Aemilius 
Mamercus and Aurelius Cotta, he obtained forgive- 
ness. Everyone knows that when Sulla had long 


3 
B 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


amicissimis et ornatissimis viris aliquamdiu denegasset 
atque illi pertinaciter contenderent, expugnatum 
tandem proclamasse sive divinitus sive aliqua con- 
iectura: vincerent ac sibi haberent, dum modo 
scirent eum, quem incolumem tanto opere cuperent, 
quandoque optimatium partibus, quas secum simul 
defendissent, exitio futurum ; nam Caesari multos 
Marios inesse. : 

II. Stipendia prima in Asia fecit Marci Thermi 
praetoris contubernio ; a quo ad accersendam classem 
in Bithyniam missus desedit apud Nicomeden, non 
sine rumore prostratae regi pudicitiae; quem ru- 
morem auxit intra paucos rursus dies repetita Bithynia 
per causam exigendae pecuniae, quae deberetur 
cuidam libertino clienti suo. Reliqua militia se- 
cundiore fama fuit et a Thermo in expugnatione 
Mytilenarum corona civica donatus est. 

III. Meruit et sub Servilio Isaurico in Cilicia, sed 
brevi tempore. Nam Sullae morte comperta, simul 
spe novae dissensionis, quae per Marcum Lepidum 
movebatur, Romam propere redit. Et Lepidi quidem 
societate, quamquam magnis condicionibus invitaretur, 
abstinuit, cum ingenio eius diffisus tum occasione, 
quam minorem opinione offenderat. | 

IV. Ceterum composita seditione civili Cornelium 
Dolabellam consularem et triumphalem repetun- 


a A chaplet of oak leaves, given for saving the life of a 
féllow-citizen, the Victoria Cross of antiquity. 


4 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


held out against the most devoted and eminent men 
of his party who interceded for Caesar, and they 
obstinately persisted, he at last gave way and cried, 
either by divine inspiration or a shrewd forecast: 
* Have your way and take him; only bear in mind 
that the man you are so eager to save will one day 
deal the death blow to the cause of the aristocracy, 
which you have joined with me in upholding ; for in 
this Caesar there is more than one Marius." 

II. He served his first campaign in Asia on the 
personal staff of Marcus Thermus, governor of the 
province. Being sent by Thermus to Bithynia, to 
fetch a fleet, he. dawdled so long at the court 
of Nicodemes that he was suspected of improper 
relations with the king ; and he lent colour to this 
scandal by going back to Bithynia a few days after 
his return, with the alleged purpose of collecting a 
debt for a freedman, one of his dependents. During 
the rest of the campaign he enjoyed a better reputa- 
tion, and at the storming of Mytilene Thermus 
awarded him the civic crown.” 

III. He served too under Servilius Isauricus in 
Cilicia, but only for a short time; for learning of the 
death of Sulla, and at the same time hoping to profit 
by a counter revolution which Marcus Lepidus was 
setting on foot, he hurriedly returned to Rome. But 
he did not make common cause with Lepidus, 
although he was offered highly favourable terms, 
through lack of confidence both in that leader's 
capacity and in the outlook, which he found less 
promising than he had expected. 

IV. Then, after the civil disturbance had been 
quieted, he brought a charge of extortion against 
Cornelius Dolabella, an ex-consul who had been 


5 


81 B.C. 


80 s.c. 


78 B.C. 


T7 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


darum postulavit; absolutoque Rhodum secedere 
statuit, et ad declinandam invidiam et ut per otium 
ac requiem Apollonio Moloni clarissimo tunc dicendi 
magistro operam daret. Huc dum hibernis iam 
mensibus traicit, circa Pharmacussam insulam a 
praedonibus captus est mansitque apud eos non sine 
summa indignatione prope quadraginta dies cum uno 
medico et cubiculariis duobus. Nam comites servos- 
que ceteros initio statim ad expediendas pecunias, 
quibus redimeretur, dimiserat. Numeratis deinde 
quinquaginta talentis expositus in litore non distulit 
quin e vestigio classe deducta persequeretur abeuntis 
ac redactos in potestatem supplicio, quod saepe illis 
minatus inter iocum fuerat, adficeret. Vastante 
regiones proximas Mithridate, ne desidere in discri- 
mine sociorum videretur, ab Rhodo, quo pertenderat, 
transiit in Asiam auxiliisque contractis et praefecto 
regis provincia expulso nutantis ac dubias civitates 
retinuit in fide. 

V. Tribunatu militum, qui primus Romam reverso 
per suffragia populi honor optigit, actores restituendae 
tribuniciae potestatis, cuius vim Sulla deminuerat, 
enixissime iuvit. L. etiam Cinnae uxoris fratri, et 
qui cum eo civili discordia Lepidum secuti post 


a See chap. Ixxiv. 1, 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


honoured with a triumph. On the acquittal of 
Dolabella Caesar determined to withdraw to Rhodes, 
to escape from the ill-will which he had incurred, 
and at the same time to rest and have leisure to 
study under Apollonius- Molo, the most eminent 
teacher of oratory of that time. While crossing to 
Rhodes, after the winter season had already begun, 
he was taken by pirates near the island of Pharmacussa 
and remained in their custody for nearly forty days 
in a state of intense vexation, attended only by a 
single physician and two body-servants ; for he had 
sent off his travelling companions and the rest of 
his attendants at the outset, to raise money for his 
ransom. Once he was set on shore on payment of 
fifty talents, he did not delay then and there to 
launch a fleet and pursue the departing pirates, and 
the moment they were in his power to inflict on 
them the punishment which he had often threatened 
when joking with them. He then proceeded to 
Rhodes, but as Mithridates was devastating the 
. neighbouring regions, he crossed over into Asia, to 

avoid the appearance of inaction when the allies of 
the Roman people were in danger. There he levied 
a band of auxiliaries and drove the king's prefect 
from the province, thus holding the wavering and 
irresolute states to their allegiance. 

V. While serving as military tribune, the first 
office which was conferred on him by vote of the 
people after his return to Rome, he ardently 
supported the leaders in the attempt to re-establish 
the authority of the tribunes of the commons, the 
extent of which Sulla had curtailed. Furthermore, 
through a bill proposed by one Plotius, he effected 
the recall of his wife's brother Lucius Cinna, as well 


7 


74 B.C. 


70 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


necem consulis ad Sertorium confugerant, reditum in 
civitatem rogatione Plotia confecit habuitque et ipse 
super ea re contionem. 

VI. Quaestor Iuliam amitam uxoremque Corneliam 
defunctas laudavit e more pro rostris. Et in amitae 
quidem laudatione de eius ac patris sui utraque ori- 
gine sic refert : 

* Amitae meae Iuliae maternum genus ab regibus 
ortum, paternum cum diis inmortalibus coniunctum 
est. Nam ab Anco Marcio sunt Marcii Reges, quo 
nomine fuit mater; a Venere Iulii, cuius gentis 
familia est nostra. Est ergo in genere et sanctitas 
regum, qui plurimum inter homines. pollent, et 
caerimonia deorum, quorum ipsi in potestate sunt 
reges." 

. In Corneliae autem locum Pompeiam duxit Quinti 
Pompei filiam, L. Sullae neptem; cum qua deinde 
divortium fecit adulteratam opinatus a Publio Clodio, 
quem inter publicas caerimonias penetrasse ad eam 
muliebri veste tam constans fama erat, ut senatus 
quaestionem de pollutis sacris decreverit. 

VII. Quaestori ulterior Hispania obvenit; ubi cum 
mandatu praetoris iure dicundo conventus circumiret 
Gadisque venisset, animadversa apud Herculis 
templum Magni Alexandri imagine ingemuit et 
quasi pertaesus ignaviam suam, quod nihil dum a se 


^a The festival of Bona Dea, from which all men were 
excluded, 


8 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


as Of the others who had taken part with Lepidus 
in his revolution and after the consul’s death had 
fled to Sertorius; and he personally spoke in favour 
of the measure. 

VI. When quaestor, he pronounced the customary 
orations from the rostra in praise of his aunt Julia 
and his wife Cornelia, who had both died. And in 
the eulogy of his aunt he spoke in the following 
terms of her paternal and maternal ancestry and 
that of his own father: “The family of my aunt 
Julia is descended by her mother from the kings, 
and on her father’s side is akin to the immortal 
Gods; for the Marcii Reges (her mother's family 
name) go back to Ancus Marcius, and the Julii, the 
family of which ours is a branch, to Venus. Our 
Stock therefore has at once the sanctity of kings, 
whose power is supreme among mortal men, and the 
claim to reverence which attaches to the Gods, who 
hold sway over kings themselves." 

In place of Cornelia he took to wife Pompeia, 
daughter of Quintus Pompeius and granddaughter of 
Lucius Sulla. But he afterward divorced her, 


suspecting her of adultery with Publius Clodius ; and 


in fact the report that Clodius had gained access to her 
in woman's garb during a public religious ceremony ? 
was so persistent, that the senate decreed that the 
pollution of the sacred rites be judicially investigated. 

VII. As quaestor it fell to his lot to serve in 
Farther Spain. When he was there, while making 
the circuit of the assize-towns, to hold court 
under commission from the praetor, he came 
to Gades, and noticing a statue of Alexander 
the Great in the temple of Hercules, he heaved 
a sigh, and as if out of patience with his own 


9 


67 B.C. 


62 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


memorabile actum esset in aetate, qua iam Alexander 
orbem terrarum  subegisset, missionem continuo 
efllagitavit ad captandas quam primum maiorum 
rerum occasiones in urbe. Etiam confusum eum 
somnio proximae noctis—nam visus erat per quietem 
stuprum matri intulisse—coniectores ad amplissimam 
spem incitaverunt arbitrium terrarum orbis portendi 
interpretantes, quando mater, quam subiectam sibi 
vidisset, non alia esset quam terra, quae omnium 
parens haberetur. 

VIII. Decedens ergo ante tempus colonias Latinas 
de petenda civitate agitantes adiit, et ad audendum 
aliquid concitasset, nisi consules conscriptas in 
Ciliciam legiones paulisper ob id ipsum retinuissent. 

IX. Nec eo setius maiora mox in urbe molitus est ; 
siquidem ante paucos dies quam aedilitatem iniret, 
venit in suspicionem conspirasse cum Marco Crasso 
consulari, item Publio Sulla et L. Autronio post 
designationem consulatus ambitus condemnatis, ut 
principio anni senatum adorirentur, et trucidatis quos 
placitum esset, dictaturam Crassus invaderet, ipse ab 
eo magister equitum diceretur constitutaque ad arbit- 
rium re publica Sullae et Autronio consulatus resti- 
tueretur. Meminerunt huius coniurationis Tanusius 


a The towns beyond the river Po, such as Verona, Comum, 
and Cremona, wished to obtain the rights of citizenship, 
which had been given to many of the Italian towns at the 
close of the Social War (89-88 s.c.). 


IO 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


incapacity in having as yet done nothing noteworthy 
at a time of life when Alexander had already brought 
the world to his feet, he straightway asked for his 
discharge, to grasp the first opportunity for greater 
enterprises at Rome. Furthermore, when he was 
dismayed by a dream the following night (for he 
thought that he had offered violence to his mother) 
the soothsayers inspired him with high hopes by 
their interpretation, which was: that he was 
destined to rule the world, since the mother whom 
he had seen in his power was none other than the 
earth, which is regarded as the common parent of all 
mankind. 

VIII Departing therefore before his term was over, 
he went to the Latin colonies which were in a state of 
unrest and meditating a demand for citizenship“; and 
he might have spurred them on to some rash act, had 
not the consuls, in anticipation of that very danger, 
detained there for a time the legions which had been 
enrolled for service in Cilicia. 

IX. For all that he presently made a more daring 
attempt at Rome; for a few days before he entered 
upon his aedileship he was suspected of having made 
a conspiracy with Marcus Crassus, an ex-consul, and 
likewise with Publius Sulla and Lucius Autronius, 
who, after their election to the consulship, had been 
found guilty of corrupt practices. The design was 
to set upon the senate at the opening of the year 
and put to the sword as many as they thought good ; 
then Crassus was to usurp the dictatorship, naming 
Caesar as his master of horse, and when they had 
organized the state according to their pleasure, the 
consulship was to be restored to Sulla and Autronius. 
This plot is mentioned by Tanusius Geminus in his 


JI 


65 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


Geminus in historia, Marcus Bibulus in edictis, C. 
Curio pater in orationibus. De hac significare videtur 
et Cicero in quadam ad Axium epistula referens 
Caesarem in consulatu confirmasse regnum, de quo 
aedilis cogitarat. Tanusius adicit Crassum paenitentia 
vel metu diem caedi destinatum non obisse et idcirco 
ne Caesarem quidem signum, quod ab eo dari con- 
venerat, dedisse; convenisse autem Curio ait, ut 
togam de umero deiceret. ldem Curio sed et M. 
Actorius Naso auctores sunt conspirasse eum etiam 
cum Gnaeo Pisone adulescente, cui ob suspicionem 
urbanae coniurationis provincia Hispania ultro extra 
ordinem data sit; pactumque ut simul foris ille, ipse 
Romae ad res novas consurgerent, per Ambranos? et 
 Transpadanos ; destitutum utriusque consilium morte 
Pisonis. 

X. Aedilis praeter Comitium ac Forum basilicasque 
etiam Capitolium ornavit porticibus ad tempus. 
extructis, in quibus abundante rerum copia pars 
apparatus exponeretur. Venationes autem ludosque 
et cum collega et separatim edidit, quo factum est, 
ut communium quoque inpensarum solus gratiam 
caperet nec dissimularet collega eius Marcus Bibulus, 
evenisse sibi quod Polluci; ut enim geminis fratri- 
bus aedes in Foro constituta tantum Castoris vocare- 
tur, ita suam  Caesarisque munificentiam unius 


! Ambranos] Lambranos, Sabellicus ; Ambrones, Beroaldus ; 
Ambarros, Urlichs; Arvernos, Mommsen ; Campanos, Madvig. 


^ Forum ornare was the technical term for the display 
there by the aediles of the material to be used in their 
publie shows. 


12 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


History, by Marcus Bibulus in his edicts, and by 
Gaius Curio the elder in his speeches. Cicero too 
seems to hint at it in a letter to Axius, where he 
says that Caesar in his consulship established the des- 
potism which he had had in mind when he was aedile. 
Tanusius adds that Crassus, either conscience-stricken 
or moved by fear, did not appear on the day ap- 
pointed for the massacre, and that therefore Caesar 
did not give the signal which it had been agreed 
that he should give ; and Curio says that the arrange- 
ment was that Caesar should let his toga fall from 
his shoulder. Not only Curio, but Marcus Actorius 
. Naso as well declare that Caesar made another plot 
with Gnaeus Piso, a young man to whom the pro- 
vince of Spain had been assigned unasked and out of 
the regular order, because he was suspected of 
political intrigues at Rome ; that they agreed to rise 
in revolt at the same time, Piso abroad and Caesar 
at Rome, aided by the Ambrani and the peoples 
beyond the Po; but that Piso’s death brought both 
their designs to naught. 

X. When aedile, Caesar decorated * not only the 
Comitium and the Forum with its adjacent basilicas, 
but the Capitol as well, building temporary colon- 
nades for the display of a part of his material. He 
exhibited combats with wild beasts and stage- 
plays too, both with his colleague and independently. 
The result was that Caesar alone took all the credit 
even for what they spent in common, and his 
colleague Marcus Bibulus openly said that his was 
the fate of Pollux: “For,” said he, “just as the 
temple erected in the Forum to the twin brethren, 
bears only the name of Castor, so the joint liberality 
of Caesar and myself is credited to Caesar alone." 


13 


65 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


2 Caesaris dici. Adiecit insuper Caesar etiam gladia- 
torium munus, sed aliquanto paucioribus quam 
destinaverat paribus; nam cum multiplici undique 
familia conparata inimicos exterruisset, cautum est de 
numero gladiatorum, quo ne maiorem cuiquam 
habere Romae liceret. 

XI. Conciliato populi favore temptavit per partem 
tribunorum, ut sibi Aegyptus provincia plebiscito 
daretur, nanctus extraordinarii imperii occasionem, 
quod Alexandrini regem suum socium atque amicum 
a senatu appellatum expulerant resque vulgo impro- 
babatur. Nec obtinuit adversante optimatium fac- 
tione; quorum auctoritatem ut quibus posset modis 
in vicem deminueret, tropaea Gai Mari de Iugurtha 
deque Cimbris atque Teutonis olim a Sulla disiecta 
restituit, atque in exercenda de sicariis quaestione eos 
quoque sicariorum numero habuit, qui proscriptione ob 
relata civium Romanorum capita pecunias ex aerario 
acceperant, quamquam exceptos Corneliis legibus. 

XII. Subornavit etiam qui Gaio Rabirio perduel- 
lionis diem diceret, quo praecipuo adiutore aliquot 
ante annos Luci Saturnini seditiosum tribunatum 
senatus coercuerat, ac sorte iudex in reum ductus 


a As iudex quaestionis, an office held by Caesar between the 
aedileship and the praetorship. | 

> As iudex perduellionis, or duumvir perduellionis, one of a 
commission of two men appointed to try cases of high treason. 
Of these one was selected by lot (sorte ductus) to conduct the 
trial, if one were necessary, and pass sentence. An appeal 
was allowed and the duumvir then brought the case before the 
comitia centuriata (in the regal period before the comitia 
curiata). See Livy 1. 26. 5ff.; Cic. Rab, 4. 


14 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


Caesar gave a gladiatorial show besides, but with 
somewhat fewer pairs of combatants than he had 
purposed ; for the huge band which he assembled 
from all quarters so terrified his opponents, that 
a bill was passed limiting the number of gladiators 
which anyone was to be allowed to keep in the 
cit 

XI. Having won the goodwill of the masses, 
Caesar made an attempt through some of the tribunes 
to have the charge of Egypt given him by a decree 
of the commons, seizing the opportunity to ask for 
so irregular an appointment because the citizens 
of Alexandria had deposed their king, who had been 
named by the senate anally and friend of the Roman 
people, and their action was generally condemned. 
He failed however because of the opposition of 
the aristocratic party; wishing therefore to impair 
their prestige in every way he could, he restored the 
trophies commemorating the victories of Gaius 
Marius over Jugurtha and over the Cimbri and 
Teutones, which Sulla. had long since demolished. 
Furthermore in conducting prosecutions for murder, 
he included in the number of murderers even those 
who had received moneys from the public treasury 
during the proscriptions for bringing in the heads 
of Roman citizens, although they were expressly 
exempted by the Cornelian laws. 

XII. He also bribed a man to bring a charge 
of high treason against Gaius Rabirius, who some years 
before had rendered conspicuous service to the 
senate in repressing the seditious designs of the 
tribune Lucius Saturninus; and when he had been 
selected by lot to sentence the accused,’ he did so 
with such eagerness, that when Rabirius appealed to 


15 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


tam cupide condemnavit, ut ad populum provocanti 
nihil aeque ac iudicis acerbitas profuerit. 

XIII. Deposita provinciae spe pontificatum maxi- 
mum petit non sine profusissima largitione; in qua 
reputans magnitudinem aeris alieni, cum mane ad 
comitia descenderet, praedixisse matri osculanti fertur 
domum se nisi pontificem non reversurum. Atque 
ita potentissimos duos competitores multumque et 
aetate et dignitate antecedentes superavit, ut plura 
ipse in eorum tribubus suffragia quam uterque in 
omnibus tulerit. 

XIV. Praetor creatus, detécta coniuratione Cati- 
linae senatuque universo in socios facinoris ultimam 
statuente poenam, solus municipatim dividendos 
custodiendosque publicatis bonis censuit. Quin et 
tantum metum iniecit asperiora suadentibus, identi- 
dem ostentans quanta eos in posterum a plebe 
Romana maneret invidia, ut Decimum Silanum 
consulem designatum non piguerit sententiam suam, 
quia mutare turpe erat, interpretatione lenire, velut 
gravius atque ipse sensisset exceptam. Obtinuisset 
adeo transductis iam ad se pluribus et in his 
Cicerone consulis fratre, nisi labantem ordinem 
confirmasset M. Catonis oratio. Ac ne sic quidem 
impedire rem destitit, quoad manus equitum Roman- 


^ As governor of Egypt ; see chap. xi. 
16 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


-the people, nothing was so much in his favour as the 
bitter hostility of his judge. 

XIII. After giving up hope of the special 
commission, he announced his candidacy for the 
ofice of pontifex maximus, resorting to the most 
lavish bribery, Thinking on the enormous debt 
which he had thus contracted, he is said to have 
declared to his mother on the morning of the 
election, as she kissed him when he was starting for 
the polls, that he would never return except as 
pontifex. And in fact he so decisively defeated 
two very strong competitors (for they were greatly 
his superiors in age and rank), that he polled more 
votes in their tribes than were cast for both of them 
in all the tribes. 

XIV. When the conspiracy of Catiline was 
detected, and all the rest of the senate favoured 
inflicting the extreme penalty on those implicated in 
the plot, Caesar, who was now praetor elect, alone 
proposed that their goods be confiscated and that 
they be imprisoned each in a separate town. Nay, 
more, he inspired such fear in those who favoured 
severer measures, by picturing the hatred which the 
Roman commons would feel for them for all future 
time, that Decimus Silanus, consul elect, was not 
ashamed to give a milder interpretation to his pro- 
posal (since it would have been humiliating to change 
it) alleging that it had been understood in a harsher 
sense than he intended. Caesar would have pre- 
vailed too, for à number had already gone over 
to him, including Cicero, the consul's brother, had 
not the address of Marcus Cato kept the wavering 
senate in line. Yet not even then did he cease 
to delay the proceedings, but only when an armed 

17 

VOL. I. c 


68 B c. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


orum, quae armata praesidii causa circumstabat, 
inmoderatius perseveranti necem comminata est, 
etiam strictos gladios usque eo intentans, ut seden- 
tem una proximi deseruerint, vix pauci complexu 
togaque obiecta protexerint. Tunc plane deterritus 
non modo cessit, sed et in reliquum anni tempus 
curia abstinuit. 

XV. Primo praeturae die Quintum Catulum de 
refectione Capitoli ad disquisitionem populi vocavit 
rogatione promulgata, qua curationem eam in alium 
transferebat; verum impar optimatium conspirationi, 
quos relicto statim novorum consulum officio fre- 
quentes obstinatosque ad resistendum concucurrisse 
cernebat, hanc quidem actionem deposuit. 

XVI. Ceterum Caecilio Metello tribuno plebis 
turbulentissimas leges adversus collegarum inter- 
cessionem ferenti auctorem propugnatoremque se 
pertinacissime praestitit, donec ambo administratione 
rei publicae decreto patrum submoverentur. Ac 
nihilo minus permanere in magistratu et ius dicere 
ausus, ut comperit paratos, qui vi ac per arma pro- 
hiberent, dimissis lictoribus abiectaque praetexta 
domum clam refugit pro condicione temporum 
quieturus. Multitudinem quoque biduo post sponte 
et ultro confluentem operamque sibi in adserenda 


a Namely, Gnaeus Pompeius. 

>’ When the consuls went to the Capitol to offer sacrifice at 
the commencement of their term of office (on January 1), 
their friends escorted them to the temple and back to their 
homes. Caesar took advantage of the absence of the aristo- 
crats for his attack on Catulus. 


I8 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


troop of Roman knights that stood on guard about 
the place threatened him with death as he persisted 
in his headstrong opposition. They even drew their 
swords and made such passes at him that his friends 
who sat next him forsook him, while a few had much 
ado to shield him in their embrace or with their 
robes. Then, in evident fear, he not only yielded the 
point, but for the rest of the year kept aloof from 
the House. 

XV. On the first day of his praetorship he called 
upon Quintus Catulus to render an account to the 
people touching the restoration of the Capitol, 
proposing a bill for turning over the commission to 
another. But he withdrew the measure, since he 
could not cope with the united opposition of the 
aristocrats, seeing that they had at once dropped 
their attendance on the newly elected consuls? and 
hastily gathered in throngs, resolved on an obstinate 
resistance. 

XVI. Nevertheless, when Caecilius Metellus, 
tribune of the commons, brought forward some bills 
of a highly seditious nature in spite of the veto of 
his colleagues, Caesar abetted him and espoused his 
cause in the stubbornest fashion, until at last both 
were suspended from the exercise of their public 
functions by a decree of the senate. Yet in spite of 
this Caesar had the audacity to continue in office and 
to hold court; but when he learned that some were 
ready to stop him by force of arms, he dismissed his 
lictors, laid aside his robe of office, and slipped off 
privily to his house, intending to remain in retire- 
ment because of the state of the times. Indeed, 
when the populace on the following day flocked to 
him quite of their own accord, and with riotous 

19 
c 2 


62 B.C» 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK 1 


dignitate tumultuosius pollicentem conpescuit. Quod 
cum praeter opinionem evenisset, senatus ob eundem 
coetum festinato coactus gratias ei per primores viros 
egit accitumque in curiam et amplissimis verbis 
conlaudatum in integrum restituit inducto priore 
decreto. 

XVII. Recidit rursus in discrimen aliud inter 
socios Catilinae nominatus et apud Novium Nigrum 
quaestorem! a Lucio Vettio indice et in senatu a 
Quinto Curio, cui, quod primus consilia coniuratorum 
detexerat, constituta erant publice praemia. Curius 
e Catilina se cognovisse dicebat, Vettius etiam 
chirographum eius Catilinae datum pollicebatur. Id 
vero Caesar nullo modo tolerandum existimans, cum 
inplorato Ciceronis testimonio quaedam se de coniura- 
tione ultro ad eum detulisse docuisset, ne Curio 
praemia darentur effecit; Vettium pignoribus captis 
et direpta supellectile male mulcatum ac pro rostris 
in contione paene discerptum coniecit in carcerem ; 
eodem Novium quaestorem, quod compellari apud se 
maiorem potestatem passus esset. . 

XVIII. Ex praetura ulteriorem sortitus Hispaniam 
retinentes creditores interventu sponsorum removit 
ac neque more neque iure, ante quam provinciae 


1 quaestorem, 0. 


a Novius seems to have been quaesztor, a special com- 
missioner appointed to conduct the investigation (quaestio) 
of the Catilinarian conspiracy ; perhaps we should read 
quaesitorem, 


20 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


demonstrations offered him their aid in recovering 
his position, he held them in check. Since this 
action of his was wholly unexpected, the senate, 
which had been hurriedly convoked to take action 
about that very gathering, publicly thanked him 
through its leading men ; then summoning him to the 
House and lauding him in the strongest terms, they 
rescinded their former decree and restored him to 
his rank. 

XVII. He again fell into danger by being named 
among the accomplices of Catiline, both before the 
commissioner? Novius Niger by an informer called 
Lucius Vettius and in the senate by Quintus Curius, 
who had been voted a sum of money from the public 
funds as the first to disclose the plans of the con- 
spirators. Curius alleged that his information came 
directly from Catiline, while Vettius actually offered 
to produce a letter to Catiline in Caesar's hand- 
writing. But Caesar, thinking that such an indignity 
could in no wise be endured, showed by appealing to 
Cicero's testimony that he had of his own accord 
reported to the consul certain details of the plot, and 
thus prevented Curius from getting the reward. As 


for Vettius, after his bond was declared forfeit and. 


his goods seized, he was roughly handled by the 
populace assembled before the rostra, and all but 
torn to pieces. Caesar then put him in prison, 
and Novius the commissioner went there too, for 
allowing an official of superior rank to be arraigned 
before his tribunal. 

XVIII. Being allotted the province of Farther 
Spain after his praetorship, Caesar got rid of his 
creditors, who tried to detain him, by means of 
sureties and contrary both to precedent and law was 


2I 


61 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


ornarentur,! profectus est: incertum metune iudicii, 
quod privato parabatur, an quo maturius sociis 
inplorantibus subveniret; pacataque provincia pari 
festinatione, non expectato successore ad triumphum 
simul consulatumque decessit. Sed cum edictis iam 
comitis ratio eius haberi non posset nisi privatus 
introisset urbem, et ambienti ut legibus solveretur 
multi contra dicerent, coactus est triumphum, ne 
consulatu excluderetur, dimittere. 

XIX. E duobus consulatus competitoribus, Lucio 
Lucceio Marcoque Bibulo, Lucceium sibi adiunxit, 
pactus ut is, quoniam inferior gratia esset pecunia- 
que polleret, nummos de suo communi nomine per 
centurias pronuntiaret. Qua cognita re optimates, 
quos metus ceperat nihil non ausurum eum in summo 
magistratu concordi et consentiente collega, auctores 
Bibulo fuerunt tantundein pollicendi, ac plerique 
pecunias contulerunt, ne Catone quidem abnuente 
eam largitionem e re publica fieri. 

Igitur cum Bibulo consul creatur. Eandem ob 
causam opera ab optimatibus data est, ut provinciae 
futuris consulibus minimi negotii, id est silvae calles- 
que,? decernerentur. Qua maxime iniuria instinctus 

1 ornarentur, Lambinus ; ordinarentur, 2. . 


2 id est. . . . callesque, del. Willems, Le Sénat de la ré- 
publique romaine, ii, 576, N. 5. 


a That is, without waiting for the decrees of the senate 
which formally confirmed the appointments of the new 
governors, and provided them with funds and equipment. 

> If silvae callesque should stand in the text, it is used in a 
different sense from calles in Tac. Ann. 4. 27. It seems to 
designate provinces where the duties of the governor would 
be confined to guarding the mountain-pastures and keeping 
the woods free from brigands. The senate would not run the 
risk of letting Caesar secure a province involving the com- 
mand of an army, Cf. note on xxiv. 1. 


22 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


on his way before the provinces were provided for; 
possibly through fear of a private impeachment or 
perhaps to respond more promptly to the entreaties 
of our allies for help. After restoring order in his 
province, he made off with equal haste, and without 
waiting for the arrival of his successor, to sue at the 
same time for a triumph and the consulship. But 
inasmuch as the day for the elections had already 
been announced and no account could be taken of 
Caesar's candidacy unless he entered the city as a 
private citizen, and since. his intrigues to gain 
exemption from the laws met with general protest, 
he was forced to forgo the triumph, to avoid losing 
the consulship. 

XIX. Of the two other candidates for this office, 
Lucius Lucceius and Marcus Bibulus, Caesar joined 
forces with the former, making a bargain with him 
that since Lucceius had less influence but more funds, 
he should in their common name promise largess to 
the electors from his own pocket. When this 
became known, the aristocracy authorized Bibulus to 
promise the same amount, being seized with fear that 
Caesar would stick at nothing when he became chief 
magistrate, if he had a colleague who was heart and 
soul with him. Many of them contributed to the 
fund, and even Cato did not deny that bribery under 
such circumstances was for the good of the common- 
wealth. 

So Caesar was chosen consul with Bibulus. With 
the same motives the aristocracy took care that pro- 
vinces of the smallest importance should be assigned 
to the newly elected consuls ; that is, mere woods and 
pastures.» Thereupon Caesar, especially incensed by 
this slight, by every possible attention courted the 


23 


59 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


omnibus officiis Gnaeum Pompeium adsectatus est 
offensum patribus, quod Mithridate rege victo 
cunctantius confirmarentur acta sua; Pompeioque 
Marcum Crassum reconciliavit veterem inimicum ex 
consulatu, quem summa discordia simul gesserant; 
ac societatem cum utroque iniit, ne quid ageretur in 
re publica, quod displicuisset ulli e tribus. 

XX. Inito honore primus omnium instituit, ut tam 
senatus quam populi diurna acta confierent et publica- 
rentur. Ántiquum etiam rettulit morem, ut quo mense 
fasces non haberet, accensus ante eum iret, lictores 
pone sequerentur. Lege autem agraria promulgata 
obnuntiantem collegam armis Foro expulit ac postero 
die in senatu conquestum nec quoquam reperto, qui 
super tali consternatione referre aut censere aliquid 
auderet, qualia multa saepe in levioribus turbis 
decreta erant, in eam coegit desperationem, ut, 
quoad potestate abiret, domo abditus nihil aliud 
quam per edicta obnuntiaret. 

Unus ex eo tempore omnia in re publica et ad 
arbitrium administravit, ut nonnulli urbanorum, cum 
quid per iocum testandi gratia signarent, non Caesare 
et Bibulo, sed Iulio et Caesare consulibus actum 


a Business could be interrupted or postponed at Rome by 
the announcement of an augur or a magistrate that he had 
seen a flash of lightning or some other adverse sign; some- 
times an opponent merely announced that he would ** watch 
the skies ” for such omens. 

> Torrentius put per :0cum after segnurent, but such jesting 
would not be tolerated in actual legal documents. 


24 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


goodwill of Gnaeus Pompeius, who was at odds with 
the senate because of its tardiness in ratifying his 
acts after his victory over king Mithridates. He also 
patched up a peace between Pompeius and Marcus 
Crassus, who had been enemies since their consulship, 
which had been one of constant wrangling. Then he 
made a compact with both of them, that no step 
should be taken in public affairs which did not suit 
any one of the three. 

XX. Caesar’s very first enactment after becoming 
consul was, that the proceedings both of the senate 
and of the people should day by day be compiled 
and published. He also revived a by-gone custom, 
that during the months when he did not have the 
fasces an orderly should walk before him, while 
the lictors followed him. He brought forward an 
agrarian law too, and when his colleague announced 
adverse omens,* he resorted to arms and drove him 

from the Forum ; and when next day Bibulus made 
~ complaint in the senate and no one could be found 
who ventured to make a motion, or even to express 
an opinion about so high-handed a proceeding 
(although decrees had often been passed touching 
less serious breaches of the peace), Caesar's conduct 
drove him to such a pitch of desperation, that from 
that time until the end of his term he did not 
leave his house, but merely issued proclamations 
announcing adverse omens. 

From that time on Caesar managed all the affairs 
of state alone and after his own pleasure; so that 
sundry witty fellows, pretending by way of jest 
to sign and seal testamentary documents, wrote 
* Done in the consulship of Julius and Caesar," 
instead of “Bibulus and Caesar,” writing down 


25 


60 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


scriberent bis! eundem praeponentes nomine atque 
cognomine, utque vulgo mox ferrentur hi versus : 


Non Bibulo quiddam nuper sed Caesare factum est ; 
Nam Bibulo fieri consule nil memini. 


Campum Stellatem maioribus consecratum agrumque 
Campanum ad subsidia rei publicae vectigalem 
relictum divisit extra sortem ad? viginti milibus 
civium, quibus terni pluresve liberi essent. Pub- 
licanos remissionem petentis tertia mercedum parte 
relevavit ae, ne in locatione novorum vectigalium 
inmoderatius licerentur, propalam monuit. Cetera 
item, quae cuique libuissent, dilargitus est contra 
dicente null ac, si conaretur quis, absterrito. 
Marcum Catonem interpellantem extrahi curia per 
lictorem ducique in carcerem iussit. Lucio Lucullo 
liberius resistenti tantum calumniarum metum iniecit, 
ut ad genua ultro sibi accideret. Cicerone in iudicio . 
quodam deplorante temporum statum Publium Clo- 
dium inimicum eius, frustra iam pridem a patribus 
ad plebem transire nitentem, eodem die horaque 
nona transduxit. Postremo in universos diversae 
factionis indicem induxit? praemiis, ut se de infer- 

1 bis... cognomine, regarded as a gloss by Lipsius and others. 


2 ad, Casaubon; ac, Q. 
3 indicem, omitted in 2; induxit, Stephanus ; inductum, 0. 


a Through a special commission of twenty men. 

è? By making a speech of several hours duration; Gell. 
4. 10. 8. The senate arose in a body and escorted Cato to 
prison, and Caesar was forced to release him. 

* For his conduct during the war with Mithridates. 

' € That is, after the close of the business day, an indication 
of the haste with which the adoption was rushed through. 


26 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


the same man twice, by name and by surname. 
Presently too the following verses were on every- 
one's lips :— 


* [n Caesar's year, not Bibulus', an act took place of 
late ; 
For naught do I remember done in Bibulus 
consulate.” 


The plain called Stellas, which had been devoted 
to the gods by the men of by-gone days, and the 
Campanian territory, which had been reserved to 
pay revenues for the aid of the government, he 
divided without casting lots" among twenty thousand 
citizens who had three or more children each. When 
the publicans asked for relief, he freed them from 
a third part of their obligation, and openly warned 
them in contracting for taxes in the future not to bid 
too recklessly. He freely granted everything else that 
anyone took it into his head to ask, either without 
opposition or by intimidating anyone who attempted 
it. Marcus Cato, who tried to delay proceedings," 
was dragged from the House by a lictor at Caesar's 
command and taken off to prison When Lucius 
Lucullus was somewhat too outspoken in his op- 
position, he filled him with such fear of malicious 
prosecution, that Lucullus actually fell on his knees 
before him. Because Cicero, while pleading in court, 
deplored the state of the times, Caesar transferred the 
orators enemy Publius Clodius that very same day 
from the patricians to the plebeians, a thing for 
which Clodius had for a long time been vainly 
striving ; and that too at the ninth hour.? Finally 
taking action against all the opposition in a body, 
he bribed an informer to declare that he had been 


2] 


60 B.c. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


enda Pompeio nece sollicitatum a quibusdam pro- 
fiteretur productusque pro rostris auctores ex con- 
pacto nominaret; sed uno atque altero frustra nec 
sine suspicione fraudis nominatis desperans tam 
praecipitis - consilii eventum intercepisse veneno 
indicem creditur. 

XXI. Sub idem tempus Calpurniam L. Pisonis 
filiam successuri sibi in consulatu duxit uxorem 
suamque, luliam, Gnaeo Pompeio conlocavit re- 
pudiato priore sponso Servilio Caepione, cuius vel 
praecipua opera paulo ante Bibulum inpugnaverat. 
Ac post novam adfinitatem Pompeium primum rogare 
sententiam coepit, cum Crassum soleret essetque 
consuetudo, ut quem ordinem interrogandi sententias 
consul Kal. Ianuariis instituisset, eum toto anno 
conservaret, m 

XXII. Socero igitur generoque suffragantibus ex 
omni provinciarum copia Gallias potissimum elegit, 
fcuius! emolumento et oportunitate idonea sit materia 
triumphorum. Kt initio quidem Galliam Cisalpinam 
Illyrico adiecto lege Vatinia accepit; mox per 
senatum Comatam quoque, veritis patribus ne, si ipsi 
negassent, populus et banc daret. Quo gaudio 
elatus non temperavit, quin paucos post dies 
frequenti curia iactaret, invitis et gementibus ad- 
versariis adeptum se quae concupisset, proinde ex eo 


1 cuius] quae et, Bentley; quae sibi, Kiessling. Of the 
various emendations of the passage cuius . . . triumphorum 
none 13 convincing. The general sense is, however, clear. 


28 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


egged on by certain men to murder Pompey, and 
to come out upon the rostra and name the guilty 
parties according to a prearranged plot. But when 
the informer had named one or two to no purpose 
and not without suspicion of double-dealing, Caesar, 
hopeless of the success of his over-hasty attempt, 
is supposed to have had him taken off by poison. 

XXI. At about the same time he took to wife 
Calpurnia, daughter of Lucius Piso, who was to 
succeed him in the consulship, and affianced his own 
daughter Julia to Gnaeus Pompeius, breaking a 
previous engagement with Servilius Caepio, although 
the latter had shortly before rendered him con- 
spicuous service in his contest with Bibulus. And 
after this new alliance he began to call upon Pompey 
first to give his opinion in the senate, although it 
had been his habit to begin with Crassus, and it was 
the rule for the consul in calling for opinions to 
continue throughout the yearthe order which he had 
established on the Kalends of January. 

XXII. Backed therefore by his father-in-law and . 
son-in-law, out of all the numerous provinces he 
made the Gauls his choice, as the most likely to 
enrich him and furnish suitable material for 
triumphs. At first, it is true, by the bill of Vatinius 
he received only Cisalpine Gaul with the addition of 
Illyricum; but presently he was assigned Gallia Comata 
as well by the senate, since the members feared 
that even if they should refuse it, the people would 
give him this also. Transported with joy at this 
success, he could not keep from boasting a few days 
later before a crowded house, that having gained 
his heart's desire to the grief and lamentation of his 
opponents, he would therefore from that time mount 


29 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


insultaturum omnium capitibus ; ac negante quodam 
per contumeliam facile hoc ulli feminae fore, res- 
ponderit! quasi adludens: in Suria quoque regnasse 
Sameramin magnamque Asiae partem Amazonas 
tenuisse quondam. 

XXIII, Functus consulatu Gaio Memmio Lucio- 
que Domitio praetoribus de superioris anni actis 
referentibus cognitionem senatui detulit; nec illo 
suscipiente  triduoque per  inritas altercationes 
absumpto in provinciam abiit. Et statim quaestor 
eius in praeiudicium aliquot criminibus arreptus est. 
Mox et ipse a Lucio Antistio tr. pl. postulatus 
appellato demum collegio optinuit, cum rei publicae 
causa abesset, reus ne fieret. Ad securitatem ergo 
posteri temporis in magno negotio habuit obligare 
semper annuos magistratus et e petitoribus non alios 
adiuvare aut ad honorem pati pervenire, quam qui 
sibi recepissent propugnaturos absentiam suam; 
cuius pacti non dubitavit a quibusdam ius iurandum 
atque etiam syngrapham exigere. 

XXIV. Sed cum Lucius Domitius consulatus 
candidatus palam minaretur consulem se effecturum 
quod praetor nequisset adempturumque ei exercitus, 
Crassum Pompeiumque in urbem provinciae suae - 
Lucam extractos conpulit, ut detrudendi Domitii 


1 responderit, all the mss., except p and some other late 
codices, which have respondit ; responderet, c (Torrentius). 


* Used in a double sense, the second unmentionable. 


39 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


on their heads;^ and when someone insultingly 
remarked that that would be no easy matter for any 
woman, he replied in the same vein that Semiramis 
too had been queen in Syria and the Amazons in 
days of old had held sway over a great part of 
Asia. 

XXIII. When at the close of his consulship the 
praetors Gaius Memmius and Lucius Domitius moved 
an inquiry into his conduct during the previous year, 
Caesar laid the matter before the senate; and when 
they failed to take it up, and three days had been 
wasted in fruitless wrangling, went off to his 
province. Whereupon his quaestor was at once 
arraigned on several counts, as a preliminary to his 
own impeachment. Presently he himself too was 
prosecuted by Lucius Antistius, tribune of the 
commons, and it was only by appealing to the 
whole college that he contrived not to be brought 
to trial, on the ground that he was absent on 
public service. Then to secure himself for 
the future, he took great pains always to put the 
magistrates for the year under personal obligation, 
and not to aid any candidates or suffer any to be 
elected, save such as guaranteed to defend him in 
his absence. And he did not hesitate in some cases 
to exact an oath to keep this pledge or even a 
written contract. 

XXIV. When however Lucius Domitius, candi- 
date for the consulship, openly threatened to effect 
as consul what he had been unable to do as praetor, 
and to take his armies from him, Caesar compelled 
Pompeius and Crassus to come to Luca, a city in his 
province, where he prevailed on them to stand for 
a second consulship, to defeat Domitius ; and he also 


31 


55 B c. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


causa consulatum alterum peterent, perfecitque 
per! utrumque, ut in quinquennium sibi im- 
perium prorogaretur. Qua fiducia ad legiones, 
quas a re publica acceperat, alias privato sumptu 
addidit, |^ unam etiam ex  Transalpinis con- 
scriptam, vocabulo quoque Gallico—Alauda enim 
appellabatur—, quam disciplina cultuque Romano 
institutam et ornatam postea universam civitate dona- 
vit. Nec deinde ulla belli occasione, ne ? iniusti qui- 
dem ac periculosi abstinuit, tam foederatis quam 
infestis ac feris gentibus ultro lacessitis, adeo ut 
senatus quondam legatos ad explorandum statum 
Galliarum mittendos decreverit ac nonnulli deden- 
dum eum hostibus censuerint. Sed prospere 
cedentibus? rebus et saepius et plurium quam 
quisquam umquam dierum supplicationes impetravit. 
XXV. Gessit autem novem annis, quibus in im- 
perio fuit, haec fere. Omnem Galliam, quae saltu 
Pyrenaeo Alpibusque et monte Cebenna, fluminibus 
Rheno ac Rhodano continetur patetque circuitu ad 
bis et tricies centum milia passuum, praeter socias ac 
bene meritas civitates, in provinciae formam redegit, 
eique [cccc|* in singulos annos stipendii nomine in- 
posuit. Germanos, qui trans Rhenum incolunt, 
primus Romanorum ponte fabricato adgressus maxi- 
mis adfecit cladibus; adgressus est et Britannos 
1 per added by Roth. 2 ne added by Erasmus. 
2 cedentibus, 7 ; decedentibus, 2. 
* The number is preserved only in V ; Eutropius, 6.17, has 
quadringenties. 


^ A Celtic word meaning a crested lark (Plin. N.H. 11. 37) 
which was the device on the helmets of the legion. 

> Roman measure ; about 3106 English miles, taking the 
Roman foot (296 mm.) as 0:97 English. 

e For this and similar sums see Index, s.v. sestertius. 


32 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


succeeded through their influence in having his term 
as governor of Gaul made five years longer. 
Encouraged by this, he added to the legions which 
he had received from the state others at his own 
cost, one actually composed of men of Transalpine 
Gaul and bearing a Gallic name too (for it was called 
Alauda*), which he trained in the Roman tactics and 
equipped with Roman arms; and later on he gave 
every man of it citizenship. After that he did not 
let slip any pretext for war, however unjust and 
dangerous it might be, picking quarrels as well 
with allied, as with hostile and barbarous nations; 
so that once the senate decreed that a commission 
be sent to inquire into the condition of the Gallic 
provinces, and some even recommended that Caesar 
be handed over to the enemy. But as his enter- 
prises prospered, thanksgivings were appointed in 
his honour oftener and for longer periods than for 
anyone before his time. 

XXV. During the nine years of his command 
this is in substance what he did. All that part of 
Gaul which is bounded by the Pyrenees, the Alps 
and the Cervennes, and by the Rhine and Rhone 
rivers, a circuit of some 3,200 miles, with the 
exception of some allied states which had rendered 
him good service, he reduced to the form of a 
province; and imposed upon it a yearly tribute of 
40,000,000 sesterces.^ He was the first Roman to 
build a bridge and attack the Germans beyond the 
Rhine, inflicting heavy losses upon them. He 
invaded the Britons too, a people unknown before, 


33 
VOL, I. D 


58/49 
BC, 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


ignotos antea superatisque pecunias et obsides 
imperavit; per tot successus ter nec amplius 
adversum casum expertus; in Britannia classe vi 
tempestatis prope absumpta et in Gallia ad 
Gergoviam legione fusa et in Germanorum finibus . 
Titurio et Aurunculeio legatis per insidias caesis. 
XXVI. Eodem temporis spatio matrem primo, 
deinde filiam, nec multo post nepotem amisit. Inter 
quae, consternata Publi Clodi caede re publica, cum 
senatus unum consulem nominatimque Gnaeum 
Pompeium fieri censuisset, egit cum tribunis plebis 
collegam se Pompeio destinantibus, id potius ad 
populum ferrent, ut absenti sibi, quandoque imperii 
tempus expleri coepisset, petitio secundi consulatus 
daretur, ne ea causa maturius et inperfecto adhuc 
bello decederet. Quod ut adeptus est, altiora iam 
meditans et spei plenus nullum largitionis aut offici- 
orum in quemquam genus publice privatimque omisit. 
Forum de manubiis incohavit, cuius area super 
sestertium milies constitit. Munus populo epulumque 
pronuntiavit in filiae memoriam, quod ante eum > 
nemo. Quorum ut quam maxima ! expectatio esset, 


' ea quae ad epulum pertinerent, quamvis macellariis 


1 maxima, G. ; the other mss. have maxime, 


34 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


vanquished them, and exacted moneys and hostages. 
Amid all these successes he met with adverse fortune 
but three times in all: in Britain, where his fleet 
narrowly escaped destruction in a violent storm ; 
in Gaul, when one of his legions was routed at 
Gergovia; and in the land of Germany, when his 
lieutenants Titurius and Aurunculeius were ambushed 
and slain. | 

XXVI. Within this same space of time he lost 
first his mother, then his daugbter, and soon after- 
wards his grandson. Meanwhile, as the community 
was aghast at the murder of Publius Clodius, the 
senate had voted that only one consul should be 
chosen, and expressly named Gnaeus Pompeius. 
When the tribunes planned to make him Pompey's 
colleague, Caesar urged them rather to propose 
to the people that he be permitted to stand for 
a second consulship without coming to Rome, when 
the term of his governorship drew near its end, 
to prevent his being forced for the sake of the 
office to leave his province prematurely and without 
finishing the war. On the granting of this, aiming 
still higher and flushed with hope, he neglected 
nothing in the way of lavish expenditure or of 
favours to anyone, either in his public capacity 
or privately. He began a forum with the proceeds 
of his spoils, the ground for which cost more than 
a hundred million sesterces. He announced a 
combat of gladiators and a feast for the people in 
memory of his daughter, a thing quite without 
precedent. To raise the expectation of these events 
to the highest possible pitch, he had the material 
for the banquet prepared in part by his own 
household, although he had let contracts to the 


35 
D 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


3 ablocata, etiam domesticatim apparabat. Gladiatores 
notos, sicubi infestis spectatoribus dimicarent, vi ra- 
piendos reservandosque mandabat. Tirones neque 
in ludo neque per lanistas, sed in domibus per 
equites Romanos atque etiam per senatores armorum 
peritos erudiebat, precibus enitens, quod epistulis 
eius ostenditur, ut disciplinam singulorum susciperent 
ipsique dictata exercentibus darent. Legionibus 
stipendium in perpetuum duplicavit. Frumentum, 
quotiens copia esset, etiam sine modo mensuraque 
praebuit ac singula interdum mancipia e praeda! 
viritim dedit. 

XXVII, Ad retinendam autem. Pompei neces- 
situdinem ac voluntatem Octaviam sororis suae 
neptem, quae Gaio Marcello nupta erat, condicionem. 
ei detulit sibique, filiam eius in matrimonium petit 
Fausto Sullae destinatam. Omnibus vero circa eum 
atque etiam parte magna senatus gratuito aut levi 
faenore obstrictis, ex reliquo quoque ordinum genere 
vel invitatos vel sponte ad se commeantis uberrimo 
congiario prosequebatur;? libertos insuper servulosque 
cuiusque, prout domino patronove gratus qui? esset. 
Iam‘ reorum aut obaeratorum aut prodigae iuventutis 
subsidium unicum ac promptissimum erat, nisi quos 
gravior criminum vel inopiae luxuriaeve vis urgeret, 
quam ut subveniri posset a se; his plane palam 
bello civili opus esse dicebat. 


1 e praeda, Roth; et nraciis di , 
, prosequebatur, TT; ; persequebatur, 0. 
3 quis, mss. except M! (quivis, G.). 

t Jam, c ; tam, MGX' ; tum, Y. 


- 1 When ordinarily they. would be put to death, __ 
36 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


‘markets as well. He gave orders too that whenever 
famous gladiators fought without winning the favour 
of the people," they should be rescued by force 
and kept for him. He had the novices trained, 
not in a gladiatorial school by professionals, but 
in private houses by Roman knights and even 
by senators who were skilled in arms, earnestly 
beseeching them, as is shown by his own letters, 
to give the recruits individual àttention and person- 
ally direct their exercises. He doubled the pay 
of the legions for all time. Whenever grain was 
plentiful, he distributed it to them without stint 
or measure, and now and then gave each man a 
slave from among the captives. 

XXVII. Moreover, to retain his relationship and 
friendship with Pompey, Caesar offered him his 
sisters granddaughter Octavia in marriage, although 
she was. already the wife of Gaius Marcellus, and 
asked for the hand of Pompey's daughter, who was 
promised to Faustus Sulla. When he had put all 
Pompey's friends under obligation, as well as the 
great part of the senate, through loans made without 
interest or at a low rate, he lavished gifts on men 
of all other classes, both those whom he invited to 
accept his bounty and those who applied to him 
unasked, including even freedmen and slaves who 
were special favourites of their masters or patrons. 
In short, he was the sole and ever ready help of all 
who were in legal difficulties or in debt and of young 
spendthrifts, excepting only those whose burden of 
guilt or of poverty was so heavy, or who were so 
given up to riotous living, that even he could not 
save them; and to these he declared in the plainest . 
terms that what they needed was a civil war. 


— 


37 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


XXVIII, Nec minore studio reges atque provincias 
per terrarum orbem adliciebat, aliis captivorum milia 
_ dono offerens, aliis citra senatus populique auctorita- 
tem, quo vellent et quotiens vellent, auxilia submit- 
tens, superque Italiae Galliarumque et Hispaniarum, 
Asiae quoque et Graeciae potentissimas urbes praeci- 
puis operibus exornans ; donec, attonitis iam omnibus 
et quorsum illa tenderent reputantibus, Marcus Clau- 
dius Marcellus consul, edicto praefatus, de summa se re 
publica acturum, rettulit ad senatum, ut ei succedere- 
tur ante tempus, quoriiam bello confecto pax esset ac 
dimitti deberet victor exercitus ; et ne absentis ratio 
comitiis haberetur, quando nec plebiscito Pompeius 
postea abrogasset.  Acciderat autem, ut is legem de 
iure magistratuum ferens eo capite, quo petitione 
honorum absentis submovebat, ne Caesarem quidem 
exciperet per oblivionem, ac mox lege iam in aes 
incisa et in aerarium condita corrigeret errorem. Nec 
contentus Marcellus provincias Caesari et privilegium 
eripere, rettulit etiam, ut colonis, quos rogatione 
Vatinia Novum Comum deduxisset, civitas adimeretur, . 
quod per ambitionem et ultra praescriptum data 
esset. 


^ That is, in correcting the bill after it had been passed 
and filed, as explained in the following sentence, 


38 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


XXVIII. He took no less pains to win the 
déVotion of princes and provinces all over the world, 
offering prisoners to some by the thousand as a gift, 
and sending auxiliary troops to the aid of others 
whenever they wished, and as often as they wished, 
without the sanction of the senate or people, besides 
adorning the principal cities of Asia and Greece 
with magnificent public works, as well as those 
of Italy and the provinces of Gaul and Spain. 
At last, when all were thunder-struck at his 
actions and wondered what their purpose could 
be, the consul Marcus Claudius Marcellus, after first 
making proclamation that he purposed to bring 
before the senate a matter of the highest public 
moment, proposed that a successor to Caesar be 
appointed before the end of his term, on the ground 
that the war was ended, peace was established, and 
the victorious army ought to be disbanded ; also that 
no account be taken of Caesar at the elections, 
unless he were present, since Pompey's subsequent 
action% had not annulled the decree of the people. 
And it was true that when Pompey proposed a 
bill touching the privileges of officials, in the clause 
where he debarred absentees from candidacy for 
office he forgot to make a special exception in 
Caesar's case, and did not correct the oversight 
until the law had been inscribed on a tablet of 
bronze and deposited in the treasury. Not content 
with depriving Caesar of his provinces and his 
privilege, Marcellus also moved that the colonists 
whom Caesar had settled in Novum Comum by 
the bill of Vatinius should lose their citizenship, 
on the ground that it had been given from political 
motives and was not authorized by the law. — 


39 


51 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


XXIX. Commotus his Caesar ac iudicans, quod 
saepe ex eo auditum ferunt, difficilius se principem 
civitatis a primo ordine in secundum quam ex 
secundo in novissimum detrudi, summa ope restitit, 
partim per intercessores tribunos, partim per Servium 
Sulpicium alterum consulem. Insequenti quoque 
anno Gaio Marcello, qui fratri patrueli suo Marco in 
consulatu successerat, eadem temptante collegam 
eius Aemilium Paulum Gaiumque Curionem vio- 
lentissimum tribunorum ingenti mercede defensores 
paravit. Sed cum obstinatius omnia agi videret et 
designatos etiam consules e parte diversa, senatum 
litteris deprecatus est, ne sibi beneficium populi 
adimeretur, aut ut ceteri quoque imperatores ab 
exercitibus discederent ; confisus, ut putant, facilius 
se, simul atque libuisset, veteranos convocaturum 
quam Pompeium novos milites. Cum adversariis 
autem pepigit, ut dimissis octo legionibus Transalpi- 
naque Gallia duae sibi legiones et Cisalpina provincia 
vel etiam una legio cum Illyrico concederetur, quoad 
consul fieret. 

XXX. Verum neque senatu interveniente et ad- 
versariis negantibus ullam se de re publica facturos 
pactionem, transiit in citeriorem Galliam, conventi 
busque peractis Ravennae substitit, bello vindica- 
turus si quid de tribunis plebis intercedentibus pro 
se gravius a senatu constitutum esset. 

Et praetextum quidem illi civilium armorum hoc . 


a When the senate passed a decreethat Caesarshould disband 
his army before & given date, the tribunes Mark Antony and 
Quintus Cassius exercised their privilege and vetoed it (Caesar, 
B.C. 1.9. 6-7); not only did the senate disregard theveto, but 
the tribunes were obliged to seek safety in flight (id. 1. 5, 1-2). 


40 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


XXIX. Greatly troubled by these measures, and 
thinking, as they say he was often heard to remark, 
that now that he was the leading man of the 
state, it was harder to push him down from the — 
first placé to the second than it would be from 
the second to the lowest, Caesar stoutly resisted 
Marcellus, partly through vetoes of the tribunes 
and partly through the other consul, Servius Sulpicius. 
When next year Gaius Marcellus, who had succeeded 
his cousin Marcus as consul, tried the same thing, 
Caesar by a heavy bribe secured the support of the 
other consul, Aemilius Paulus, and of Gaius Curio, 
the most reckless of the tribunes. But seeing that 
everything was being pushed most persistently, and 
that even the consuls elect were among the opposi- 
tion, he sent a written appeal to the senate, not to 
take from him the privilege which the people had 
granted, or else to compel the others in command 
of armies to resign also ; feeling sure, it was thought, 
that he could more readily muster his veterans 
as soon as he wished, than Pompey his newly 
levied troops. He further proposed a compromise 
to his opponents, that after giving up eight legions 
and Transalpine Gaul, he be allowed to keep two 
legions and Cisalpine Gaul, or at least one legion 
and Illyricum, until he was elected consul. 

XXX. But when the senate declined to interfere, 
and his opponents declared that they would accept 
.no compromise in a matter affecting the public 
welfare, he crossed to Hither Gaul, and after 
holding all the assizes, halted at Ravenna, intending 
to resort to war if the senate took any drastic action 
against the tribunes of the commons who interposed 
vetoes in his behalf.¢ Now this was his excuse 


41 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


fuit; causas autem alias fuisse opinantur. Gnaeus 
Pompeius ita dictitabat, quod neque opera consum- 
mare, quae instituerat, neque populi expectationem, 
quam de adventu sui! fecerat, privatis opibus explere 
posset, turbare omnia ac permiscere voluisse. Alii 
timuisse dicunt, ne eorum, quae primo consulatu 
adversus auspicia legesque et intercessiones gessisset, 
rationem reddere cogeretur ; cum M. Cato identidem 
nec sine iure iurando denuntiaret delaturum se 
nomen eius, simul ac primum exercitum dimisisset ; 
cumque vulgo fore praedicarent, ut si privatus redis- 
set, Milonis exemplo circumpositis armatis causam 
apud iudices diceret. Quod probabilius facit Asinius 
Pollio, Pharsalica acie caesos profligatosque adver- 
sarios prospicientem haec eum ad verbum dixisse 
referens : “ Hoc voluerunt; tantis rebus gestis Gaius 
Caesar condemnatus essem, nisi ab exercitu auxilium 
petissem.” Quidam putant captum imperii con- 
suetudine pensitatisque suis et inimicorum viribus 
usum occasione rapiendae dominationis, quam aetate 
prima concupisset. Quod existimasse videbatur et 
Cicero scribens de Officiis tertio libro semper 
Caesarem in ore habuisse? Euripidis versus, quos sic 
ipse convertit : " 
«Nam si violandum est ius, regnandi? gratia 
violandum est; aliis rebus pietatem colas.” 

1 sui, MGX’; suo, T. 

? after habuisse the mss. have the gloss, est in Phoenissis: 


elxep yàp ábucety. x pf, tuparvidos népi ndAAtotoy àðixnua: Tà b 
&AAa ebreBeiv xpewr. 5 regnandi, supplied by >. 


a 3, 82. > Phoenissae, 524 f. e Way. 
42 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


for the civil war, but it is believed that he had other 
motives. Gnaeus Pompeius used to declare that 
since Caesar’s own means were not sufficient to 
complete the works which he had planned, nor 
to do all that he had led the people to expect 
on his return, he desired a state of general unrest 
and turmoil. Others’ "say that he dreaded the 
necessity of rendering an account for what he had 
done in his first consulship contrary to the auspices 
and the laws, and regardless of vetoes;.for Marcus 
Cato often declared, and took oath too, that he 
would impeach Caesar the moment he had disbanded 
his army. It was openly said too that if he was 
out of office on his return, he would be obliged, 
like Milo, to make his defence in a court hedged 
about by armed men. The latter opinion is the 
more credible one in view of the assertion of 
Asinius Pollio, that when Caesar at the battle of 
Pharsalus saw his enemies slain or in flight, he said, 
word for word: * They would have it so. Even I, 
Gaius Caesar, after so many great deeds, should 
have been found guilty, if I had not turned to 
my army for help." Some think that habit had 
given him a love of power, and that weighing 
the strength of his adversaries against his own, 
he grasped the opportunity of usurping the despotism 
which had been his heart's desire from early youth. 
Cicero too was seemingly of this opinion, when he 
wrote in the third book of his De Officiis * that Caesar 
ever had upon his lips these lines of Euripides,’ of 
which Cicero himself adds a version : 


* [f wrong may e'er be right, for a throne's sake 
Were wrong most right:—be God in all else 
feared," * 


43 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


XXXI. Cum ergo sublatam tribunorum interces- 
sionem ipsosque urbe cessisse nuntiatum esset! 
praemissis confestim clam cohortibus, ne qua suspicio 
moveretur, et spectaculo publico per dissimulationem 
interfuit et formam, qua ludum gladiatorium erat 
aedificaturus, consideravit et ex consuetudine convivio 
se frequenti dedit. Dein post solis occasum mulis e 
proximo pistrino ad vehiculum iunctis occultissimum 
iter modico comitatu ingressus est; et cum lumini- 
bus extinctis decessisset via, diu errabundus tandem 
ad lucem duce reperto per angustissimos tramites 
pedibus evasit. Consecutusque cohortis ad Rubi- 
conem flumen, qui provinciae eius finis erat, paulum 
constitit, ac reputans quantum moliretur, conversus 
ad proximos : “Etiam nunc,” inquit, “ regredi pos- 
sumus ; quod si ponticulum transierimus, omnia 
armis agenda erunt." 

XXXII. Cunctanti ostentum tale factum est. 
Quidam eximia magnitudine et forma in proximo 
sedens repente apparuit harundine canens ; ad quem 
audiendum cum praeter pastores plurimi etiam ex 
stationibus milites concurrissent interque eos et 
aeneatores, rapta ab uno tuba prosilivit ? ad flumen et 
ingenti spiritu classicum exorsus pertendit ad alteram 
ripam. Tune Caesar: “ Eatur," inquit, “quo deorum 
ostenta et inimicorum QBUS vocat. lacta alea: 
est," inquit. 

XXXIII. Atque ita traiecto exercitu, adhibitis 
tribunis plebis, qui pulsi supervenerant, pro contione 


l esset, G. ; est, Y; the other mas. omit the word. 
? prosilivit, MTIT'; the other mss. have prosiluit. 


44 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


XXXI. Accordingly, when word came that the 492. 
veto of the tribunes had been set aside and they 
themselves had left the city, he at once sent on a 
few cohorts with all secrecy, and then, to disarm 
suspicion, concealed his purpose by appearing at a 
public show, inspecting the plans of a gladiatorial 
school which he intended building, and joining as 
usual in a banquet with a large company. It was 
not until after sunset that he set out very privily 
with a small company, taking the mules from a 
bakeshop hard by and harnessing them to a carriage ; 
and when his lights went out and he lost his way, he 
was astray for some time, but at last found a guide at 
dawn and got back to the road on foot by narrow by- 
paths. Then, overtaking his cohorts at the river 
Rubicon, which was the boundary of his province, he 
paused for a while, and realising what a step he was 
taking, he turned to those about him and said: 
* Even yet we may turn back; but once cross yon 
little bridge, and the whole issue is with the sword.” 

XXXII. As he stood in doubt, this sign was given 
him. On a sudden there appeared hard by a being 
of wondrous stature and beauty, who sat and played 
upon a reed; and when not only the shepherds 
flocked to hear him, but many of the soldiers left 
their posts, and among them some of the trumpeters, 
the apparition snatched a trumpet from one of them, 
rushed to the river, and sounding the war-note with 
mighty blast, strode to the opposite bank. Then 
Caesar cried: “Take we the course which the signs 
of the gods and the false dealing of our foes point 
out. The die is cast,” said he. 

XXXIII. Accordingly, crossing with his army, and 
welcoming the tribunes of the commons, who had 


45 s 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


fidem militum flens ac veste a pectore discissa 
invocavit. Existimatur etiam equestres census pol- 
licitus singulis ; quod accidit opinione falsa. Nam 
cum in adloquendo adhortandoque saepius digitum 
laevae manus ostentans adfirmaret se ad satis facien- 
dum omnibus, per quos dignitatem suam defensurus 
esset, anulum quoque aequo animo detracturum sibi, 
extrema contio, cui facilius erat videre contionantem 
quam audire, pro dicto accepit, quod visu suspicabatur; 
promissumque ius anulorum cum milibus quadringenis 
fama distulit. 

XXXIV. Ordo et summa rerum, quas deinceps 
gessit, sic se habent, Picenum Umbriam Etruriam 
occupavit et Lucio Domitio, qui per tumultum 
successor ei nominatus Corfinium praesidio tenebat, 
in dicionem redacto atque dimisso seeundum Superum 
mare Brundisium tetendit, quo consules Pompeiusque 
confugerant quam primum transfretaturi. Hos frustra 
per omnis moras exitu prohibere conatus Romam iter 
convertit appellatisque de re publica patribus validis- 
simas Pompei copias, quae sub tribus legatis M. Pe- 
treio et L. Afranio et M. Varrone in Hispania erant, 
invasit, professus ante inter suos, ire se ad exercitum 
sine duce et inde reversurum ad ducem sine exercitu, 
Et quanquam obsidione Massiliae, quae sibi in itinere 


« Knights (as well as senators) had the privilege of wearing 
a gold ring, and must possess an estate of 400,000 sesterces. 

è Per tumultum is à strong expression for contra legem or 
extra ordinem, since the Lex Sempronia provided that the 
consuls be appointed to their provinces before election ; cf. 
xix. 2. 


46 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


come to him after being driven from Rome, he 
harangued the soldiers with tears, and rending his 
robe from his breast besought their faithful service. 
It is even thought that he promised every man a 
knight’ s estate, but that came of a misunderstanding ; 
for since he often pointed to the finger of his left 
hand as he addressed them and urged them on, 
declaring that to satisfy all those who helped him to 
defend his honour he would gladly tear his very ring 
from his hand, those on the edge of the assembly, 
who could see him better than they could hear his 
words, assumed that he said what his gesture seemed 
to mean; and so the report went about that he had 
promised them the right of the ring and four 
hundred thousand sesterces ^ as well. 

XXXIV. The sum total of his movements after 
that is, in their order, as follows: He overran 
Umbria, Picenum, and Etruria, took prisoner Lucius 
Domitius, who had been irregularly? named his 
successor, and was holding Corfinium with a garrison, 
let him go free, and then proceeded along the 
Adriatic to Brundisium, where Pompey and the 
consuls had taken refuge, intending to cross the sea 
as soon as might be. After vainly trying by every 
kind of hindrance to prevent their sailing, he marched 
off to Rome, and after calling the senate together to 
discuss publie business, went to attack Pompey's 
strongest forces, which were in Spain under com- 
mand of three of his lieutenants— Marcus Petreius, 
Lucius Afranius, and Marcus Varro—saying to his 
friends before he left: “I go to meet an army with- 
out a leader, and I shall return to meet a leader © 
without an army." And in fact, though his advance 
was delayed by the siege of Massilia, which had shut 


47 


THE LIVES OF: THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


portas clauserat, summaque frumentariae rei penuria 
retardante brevi tamen omnia subegit. 

XXXV. Hinc urbe repetita in Macedoniam trans- 
gressus Pompeium, per quattuor paene menses 
maximis obsessum operibus, ad extremum Pharsalico 
proelio fudit et fugientem Alexandriam persecutus, 
ut occisum deprehendit, cum Ptolemaeo rege, a quo 
sibi quoque insidias tendi videbat, bellum sane 
difficillimum gessit, neque loco neque tempore aequo, 
sed hieme anni et intra moenia copiosissimi ac 
sollertissimi hostis, inops ipse omnium rerum atque 
inparatus. Regnum Aegypti victor Cleopatrae fra- 
irique eius minori permisit, veritus provinciam 
facere, ne quandoque violentiorem praesidem nacta 
novarum rerum materia esset. Ab Alexandria in 
Syriam et inde Pontum transiit urgentibus de 
Pharnace nuntiis, quem Mithridatis Magni filium ac 
tunc occasione temporum bellantem! iamque multi- 
plici successu praeferocem, intra quintum quam 
adfuerat diem, quattuor quibus in conspectum venit 
horis, una profligavit acie; crebro commemorans 
Pompei felicitatem, cui praecipua militiae laus de 
tam inbell genere hostium contigisset. Dehinc - 
Scipionem ac Iubam reliquias partium in Africa 
refoventis devicit, Pompei liberos in Hispania. 

XXXVI. Omnibus civilibus bellis nullam cladem 


nisi per legatos suos passus est, quorum C. Curio in 


1 rebellantem, Bentley; cf. Eutr. 6.22.3. 
48. 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


its gates against him, and by extreme scarcity of 
supplies, he nevertheless quickly gained a complete 
victory. 

XXXV. Returning thence to Rome, he crossed into 
Macedonia, and after blockading Pompey for almost 
four months behind mighty ramparts, finally routed 
him in the battle at Pharsalus, followed him in his 
flight to Alexandria, and when he learned that his 
rival had been slain, made war on King Ptolemy, 
whom he perceived to be plotting against his own 
safety as well; a war in truth of great difficulty, con- 
venient neither in time nor place, but carried on 
during the winter season, within the walls of a well- 
provisioned and crafty foeman, while Caesar himself 
was without supplies of any kind and ill-prepared. 
Victor in spite of all, he turned over the rule of 
Egypt to Cleopatra and her younger brother, fearing 
that if he made a province of it, it might one day 
under a headstrong governor be a source of revolu- 
tion. From Alexandria he crossed to Syria, and 
from there went to Pontus, spurred on by the news 
that Pharnaces, son of Mithridates the Great, had 
taken advantage of the situation to make war, and 
was already flushed with numerous successes; but 
Caesar vanquished him in a single battle within five 
days after his arrival and four hours after getting 
sight of him, often remarking on Pompey’s good 
luck in gaining his principal fame as a general by 
victories over such feeble foemen. Then he over- 
came Scipio and Juba, who were patching up the 
remnants of their party in Africa, and the sons of 
Pompey in Spain. | 

XXXVI. In all the civil wars he suffered not a 
single disaster except through his lieutenants, of 


49 
VOL. I. E 


48 B.C. 


47 B.C. 


46 B.C. 


45 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


Africa periit, C. Antonius in Illyrico in adversari- 
orum devenit potestatem, P. Dolabella classem in 
eodem Illyrico, Cn. Domitius Calvinus in Ponto 
exercitum amiserunt. Ipse prosperrime semper ac 
ne ancipiti quidem umquam fortuna praeterquam bis 
dimicavit: semel ad Dyrrachium, ubi pulsus non 
instante Pompeio negavit eum vincere scire, iterum 
in Hispania ultimo proelio, cum desperatis rebus 
etiam de consciscenda nece cogitavit. 

XXXVII. Confectis bellis quinquiens triumphavit, 
post devictum Scipionem quater eodem mense, sed 
interiectis diebus, et rursus semel post superatos 
Pompei liberos. Primum et excellentissimum tri- 
umphum egit Gallicum, sequentem Alexandrinum, 
deinde Ponticum, huic proximum Africanum, novis- 
simum Hispaniensem, diverso quemque apparatu et 
instrumento. Gallici triumphi die Velabrum prae- 
tervehens paene curru excussus est axe diffracto 
 ascenditque Capitolium ad lumina, quadraginta ele- 
phantis dextra sinistraque lychnuchos gestantibus. 
Pontico triumpho inter pompae fercula trium ver- 
borum praetulit titulum vENrviprvicr non acta belli 
significantem sicut ceteris, sed celeriter confecti 
notam. 7 | | | 

XXXVIII. Veteranis legionibus praedae nomine 
in pedites singulos super bina sestertia, quae initio 
civilis tumultus numeraverat, vicena quaterna milia 
nummum dedit.  Adsignavit et agros, sed non 


50 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


whom Gaius Curio perished in Africa, Gaius Antonius 
fell into the hands of the enemy in Illyricum, 
Publius Dolabella lost a fleet also off Illyricum, and 
Gnaeus Domitius Calvinus an army in Pontus. Per- 
sonally he always fought with the utmost success, 
and the issue was never even in doubt save twice : 

once at Dyrrachium, where he was put to flight, and 
said of Pompey, who failed to follow up his success, 
that he did not know how to use a victory ; again in 
Spain, in the final struggle, when, believing the battle 
lost, he actually thought of suicide. 

XXXVII. Having ended the wars, he celebrated 
five triumphs, four in a single month, but at intervals 
of a few days, after vanquishing Scipio ; and another 
on defeating Pompey's sons. The first and most 
splendid was the Gallie triumph, the next the 
Alexandrian, then the Pontic, after that the African, 
and finally the Spanish, each differing from the rest 
in its equipment and display of spoils, As he rode 
through the Velabrum on the day of his Gallic 
triumph, the axle of his chariot broke, and he was all 
but thrown out; and he mounted the Capitol by 
torchlight, with forty elephants bearing lamps on 
his right and his left. In his Pontic triumph he 
displayed among the show-pieces of the procession an 
inscription of but three words, “I came, I saw, I 
conquered," not indicating the events of the war, as 
the others did, but the speed with which it was 
finished. 

XXXVIII. To each and every foot-soldier of his 
veteran legions he gave twenty-four thousand sesterces 
by way of booty, over and above the two thousand 
apiece which he had paid them at the beginning of 
the civil strife. He also assigned them lands, but 


51 
E 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


continuos, ne quis possessorum expelleretur. Populo 
praeter frumenti denos modios ac totidem olei libras 
trecenos quoque nummos, quos pollicitus olim erat, 
viritim divisit et hoc amplius centenos pro mora. 
Annuam etiam habitationem Romae usque ad bina 
milia nummum, in Italia non ultra quingenos ses- 
tertios remisit, Adiecit epulum ac viscerationem et 
post Hispaniensem victoriam duo prandia ; nam cum 
prius parce neque pro liberalitate sua praebitum 
iudicaret, quinto post die aliud largissimum prae- 
buit. | 
XXXIX. Edidit spectacula varii generis: munus 
gladiatorium, ludos etiam regionatim urbe tota et 
quidem per omnium linguarum histriones, item 
circenses athletas naumachiam. ^ Munere in Foro 
depugnavit Furius Leptinus stirpe praetoria et 
Q. Calpenus senator quondam actorque causarum. 
Pyrricham saltaverunt Asiae Bithyniaeque principum 
liberi. Ludis Decimus Laberius eques Romanus 
mimum suum egit donatusque quingentis sestertiis et 
anulo aureo sessum in quattuordecim e scaena per 
orchestram transiit. Circensibus spatio Circi ab 
utraque parte producto et in gyrum euripo addito 
quadrigas bigasque et equos desultorios agitaverunt 
nobilissimi iuvenes. Troiam lusit turma duplex 


a The prandium was the first substantial meal of the day, 
taken about noon; the translation ** dinner" is used advisedly. 

ò In token of his restoration to the rank of knight, 
which he forfeited by appearing on the stage; see chap. 
xxxiii. i | 

* The first fourteen rows above the orchestra, reserved for 
the knights by the law of L. Roscius Otho, tribuné of the 
commons, 67 B.C. 

a Huripus, the strait between Euboea and Boeotia, was 
used also as a common noun, meaning ‘‘a ditch” or ** canal." 


52 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


not side by side, to avoid dispossessing any of the 
former owners. To every man of the people, besides 
ten pecks of grain and the same number of pounds 
of oil, he distributed the three hundred sesterces 
which he had promised at first, and one hundred 
apiece to boot because of the delay. He also 
remitted a year’s rent in Rome to tenants who paid 
two thousand sesterces or less, and in Italy up to five 
hundred sesterces. He added a banquet and a dole 
of meat, and after his Spanish victory two dinners ;% 
for deeming that the former of these had not been 
served with a liberality creditable to his generosity, 
he gave another five days later on a most lavish 
scale. 

XXXIX. He gave entertainments of divers kinds : 
acombat of gladiators and also stage-plays in every 
ward all over the city, performed too by actors of 
all languages, as well as races in the circus, athletic 
contests, and a sham sea-fight. In the gladiatorial 
contest in the Forum Furius Leptinus, a man of 
praetorian stock, and Quintus Calpenus, a former 
senator and pleader at the bar, fought to a finish. A 
Pyrrhic dance was performed by the sons of the 
princes of Asia and Bithynia. During the plays 
Decimus Laberius, a Roman knight, acted a farce of 
. his own composition, and having been presented with 
" five hundred thousand sesterces and a gold ring, 
passed from the stage through the orchestra and took 
his place in the fourteen rows. For the races the 
circus was lengthened at either end and a broad canal4 
was dug all about it; then young men of the highest 
rank drove four-horse and two-horse chariots and 
rode pairs of horses, vaulting from one to the other. 
The game called Troy was performed by two troops, of 


53 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


3 maiorum minorumque puerorum. Venationes editae 
per dies quinque ac novissime pugna divisa in duas 
acies, quingenis peditibus, elephantis vicenis, tricenis 
equitibus hinc et inde commissis. Nam quo laxius 
dimicaretur, sublatae metae inque earum locum bina 
castra exadversum constituta erant. Athletae stadio 
ad tempus exstructo regione Marti campi certaverunt 

4 per triduum. Navali proelio in minore Codeta 
defosso lacu biremes ac triremes quadriremesque 
Tyriae et Aegyptiae classis magno pugnatorum 
numero conflxerunt. Ad quae omnia spectacula 
tantum undique confluxit hominum, ut plerique 
advenae aut inter vicos aut inter vias tabernaculis 
positis manerent, ac saepe prae turba elisi exanimati- 
que sint plurimi et in his duo senatores. 

XL. Conversus hinc ad ordinandum rei publicae 
statum fastos correxit iam pridem vitio pontificum 
per intercalandi licentiam adeo turbatos, ut neque 
messium feriae aestate neque vindemiarum autumno 
conpeterent; annumque ad cursum solis accom- 
modavit, ut trecentorum sexaginta quinque dierum 
esset et intercalario mense sublato unus dies quarto 

o quoque anno intercalaretur. Quo autem magis in 
posterum ex Kalendis Ianuariis novis! temporum ratio 
congrueret, inter Novembrem ac Decembrem men- 
sem interiecit duos alios; fuitque is annus, quo 
haec constituebantur, quindecim mensium cum 


1 novis, Ursinus; nobis, Q. 


a The year had previously consisted of 355 days, and the 
deficiency of about eleven dis was made up by inserting an 
intercalary month of twenty-two or twenty-three days after 
February. | 


54 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


younger and of older boys. Combats with wild beasts 
were presented on five successive days, and last of all 
there was a battle between two opposing armies, in 
which five hundred foot-soldiers, twenty elephants, 
and thirty horsemen engaged on each side. To make 
room for this, the goals were taken down and in their 
place two camps were pitched over against each 
other. The athletic competitions lasted for five days 
in a temporary stadium built for the purpose in the 
region of the Campus Martius. For the naval battle 
. a pool was dug in the lesser Codeta and there was a 
contest of ships of two, three, and four banks of oars, 
belonging to the Tyrian and Egyptian fleets, manned 
by a large force of fighting men. Such a throng 
flocked to all these shows from every quarter, that 
many strangers had to lodge in tents pitched in the 
streets or along the roads, and the press was often 
such that many were crushed to death, including 
two senators. 

XL. Then turning his attention to the reorgani- 
sation of the state, he reformed the calendar, which 
the negligence of the pontiffs had long since so 
disordered, through their privilege of adding months 
or days at pleasure, that the harvest festivals did not 
eome in summer nor those of the vintage in the 
autumn ; and he adjusted the year to the sun's 
course by making it consist of three hundred and 
sixty-five days, abolishing the intercalary month," 
and adding one day every fourth year. Further- 
more, that the correct reckoning of time might 
begin with the next Kalends of January, he inserted 
two other months between those of November and 
December ; hence the year in which these arrange- 
ments were made was one of fifteen months, 


55 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


intercalario, qui ex consuetudine in eum annum 
inciderat. 

XLI. Senatum supplevit, patricios adlegit, prae- 
torum aedilium quaestorum, minorum etiam magi- 
stratuum numerum ampliavit; nudatos opere censorio 
aut sententia iudicum de ambitu condemnatos re- 
stituit. Comitia cum populo partitus est, ut exceptis 
consulatus conpetitoribus de cetero numero candida- 
torum pro parte dimidia quos populus vellet pro- 
nuntiarentur, pro parte altera quos ipse dedisset. Et 
edebat per libellos circum! tribum missos scriptura 
brevi: “Caesar dictator illi tribui. Commendo vobis 
illum et illum, ut vestro suffragio suam dignitatem 
teneant." Admisit ad honores et proscriptorum 
liberos. Iudicia ad duo genera iudicum redegit, 
equestris ordinis ac senatorii ; tribunos aerarios, quod 
erat tertium, sustulit. 

Recensum populi nec more nec loco solito, sed 
vicatim per dominos insularum egit atque ex viginti 
trecentisque milibus accipientium frumentum e 
publico ad centum quinquaginta retraxit; ac ne qui 
novi coetus recensionis causa moveri quandoque 
possent, instituit, quotannis in demortuorum locum 
ex iis, qui recensi non essent, subsortitio a praetore 
fieret. 

XLII. Octoginta autem civium milibus in trans- 
marinas colonias distributis, ut exhaustae quoque 


! circum tribum] circum tribus, Venetian ed. of 1510, 
Casaubon ; tributim circummissos, Bentley ; the early Roman 
editions have cuique tribui. 


a Plebeians, connected in some way with the treasury. 
b I.e., of the commons, with reference to the distribution 
of grain. 


96 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


including the intercalary month, which belonged to 
that year according to the former custom. 

XLI. He filled the vacancies in the senate, en- 
rolled additional patricians, and increased the number 
of praetors, aediles, and quaestors, as well as of the 
minor officials ; he reinstated those who had been 
degraded by official action of the censors or found 
guilty of bribery by verdict of the jurors. He 
shared the elections with the people on this basis: 
that except in the case of the consulship, half of the 
magistrates should be appointed by the people's 
choice, while the rest should be those whom he had 
personally nominated. And these he announced in 
brief notes like the following, circulated in each 
- tribe: “Caesar the Dictator to this or that tribe. I 
commend to you so and so, to hold their positions by 
your votes." He admitted to office even the sons of 
those who had been proscribed. He limited the 
rght of serving as jurors to two classes, the 
equestrian and senatorial orders, disqualifying the 
third class, the tribunes of the treasury.? 

He made the enumeration of the people ® neither 
in the usual manner nor place, but from street to 
street aided by the owners of blocks of houses, and 
reduced the number of those who received grain at 
publie expense from three hundred and twenty 
thousand to one hundred and fifty thousand. And 
to prevent the calling of additional meetings at any 
future time for purposes of enrolment, he provided 
that the places of such as died should be filled each 
year by the praetors from those who were not on 
the list. 

XLII. Moreover, to keep up the population of 
the city, depleted as it was by the assignment of 


57 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK 1 


urbis frequentia suppeteret, sanxit, ne quis civis maior 
annis viginti minorve t quadraginta,! qui sacramento 
non teneretur, plus triennio continuo Italia abesset, 
neu qui senatoris filius nisi contubernalis aüt comes 
magistratus peregre proficisceretur; neve ii, qui 
pecuariam facerent, minus tertia parte puberum 
ingenuorum inter pastores haberent. Omnisque 
medicinam Romae professos et liberalium artium 
doctores, quo libentius et ipsi urbem incolerent et 
ceteri adpeterent, civitate donavit. 

De pecuniis mutuis disiecta novarum tabularum 
expectatione, quae crebro movebatur, decrevit tan- 
dem, ut debitores creditoribus satis facerent per 
aestimationem possessionum, quanti quasque ante 
civile bellum comparassent, deducto summae aeris 
alieni, si quid usurae nomine numeratum aut per- 
scriptum fuisset; qua condicione quarta pars fere 
crediti deperibat. Cuncta collegia praeter antiquitus 
constituta distraxit. Poenas facinorum auxit; et 
cum locupletes eo facilius scelere se obligarent, 
quod integris patrimoniis exsulabant, parricidas, ut 
Cicero scribit, bonis omnibus, reliquos dimidia parte 
multavit. 

XLIII. Ius laboriosissime ac severissime dixit. 
Repetundarum convictos etiam ordine senatorio 
movit. Diremit nuptias praetorii viri, qui digressam 
a marito post biduum statim duxerat, quamvis sine 

! quadraginta, Basle ed. of 1533; LX, Casaubon; L, 
Oudendorp; decem, 2 d 


^ The derivation of parricida is uncertain, but it cannot 
come from pater and caedo. In early times it meant wilful 
murder of a freeman ; XII. Tab. ap. Fest. s.v., ai qui hominem 
liberum dolo sciens morti duit, paricidas esto ; later, it was 
associated by popular etymology with pater and caedo, and 
used also in the modern sense of the word, 


58 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


eighty thousand citizens to colonies across the sea, 
he made a law that no citizen older than twenty or 
younger than forty, who was not detained by service 
in the army, should be absent from Italy for more 
than three successive years ; that no senator's son 
should go abroad except as the companion of a 
magistrate or on his staff; and that those who made 
a business of grazing should have among their 
herdsmen at least one-third who were men of free 
birth. He conferred citizenship on all who practised 
medicine at Rome, and on all teachers of the liberal 
arts, to make them more desirous of living in 
the city and to induce others to resort to it. 

As to debts, he disappointed those who looked for 
their cancellation, which was often agitated, but 
finally decreed that the debtors should satisfy their 
creditors according to a valuation of their possessions 
at the price which they had paid for them before the 
civil war, deducting from the principal whatever 
interest had been paid in cash or pledged through 
bankers; an arrangement which wiped out about a 
fourth part of their indebtedness. He dissolved all 
guilds, except those of ancient foundation. He 
increased the penalties for crimes; and inasmuch as 
the rich involved themselves in guilt with less 
hesitation because they merely suffered exile, 
without any loss of property, he punished murderers 
of freemen ^ by the confiscation of all their goods, as 
Cicero writes, and others by the loss of one-half. 

XLII. He administered justice with the utmost 
conscientiousness and strictness. Those convicted of 
extortion he even dismissed from the senatorial 
order. He annulled the marriage of an ex-praetor, 
who had married a woman thé very day after her 


59 


e? 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


probri suspicione. Peregrinarum mercium portoria 
instituit. Lecticarum usum, item conchyliatae vestis 
et margaritarum nisi certis personis et aetatibus 
perque certos dies ademit. ^ Legem praecipue 
sumptuariam exercuit dispositis cirea macellum custo- 
dibus, qui obsonia contra vetitum proposita! retinerent 
deportarentque ad se, submissis nonnumquam lictori- 
bus atque militibus, qui, si qua custodes fefellissent, 
iam adposita e triclinio auferrent. 

XLIV. Nam de ornanda instruendaque urbe, item 
de tuendo ampliandoque imperio plura ac maiora in 
dies destinabat: in primis Martis templum, quantum 
nusquam esset, exstruere repleto et conplanato lacu, 
in quo naumachiae spectaculum ediderat, theatrumque 
summae magnitudinis Tarpeio monti accubans; ius 
civile ad certum modum redigere atque ex immensa 
diffusaque legum copia optima quaeque et necessaria 
in paucissimos conferre libros; bibliothecas Graecas , 
Latinasque quas maximas posset publicare data 
Marco Varroni cura comparandarum ac digerendarum; 
siccare Pomptinas paludes; emittere Fucinum lacum ; 
viam munire a mari Supero per Appennini dorsum ad 
Tiberim usque; perfodere Isthmum ; Dacos, qui se 
in Pontum et Thraciam effuderant, coercere; mox 
Parthis inferre bellum per Armeniam minorem nec 
nisi ante expertos adgredi proelio. 


! proposita, an addition to the text suggested by Ihm. 
60 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


divorce, although there was no suspicion of adultery. 
He imposed duties on foreign wares. He denied 
the use of litters and the wearing of scarlet robes or 
pearls to all except to those of a designated position 
and age, and on set days. In particular he enforced 
the law against extravagance, setting watchmen in 
various parts of the market, to seize and bring to 
him dainties which were exposed for sale in violation 
of the law; and sometimes he sent his lictors and 
soldiers to take from a dining-room any articles which 
had escaped the vigilance of his watchmen, even 
after they had been served. 

XLIV.. In particular, for the adornment and con- 
venience of the city, also for the protection and 
extension of the Empire, he formed more projects 
and more extensive ones every day: first of all, to 
rear a temple to Mars, greater than any in existence, 
filling up and levelling the pool in which he had 
exhibited the sea-fight, and to build a theatre of vast 
size, sloping down from the Tarpeian rock ; to reduce 
the civil code to fixed limits, and of the vast and 
prolix mass of statutes to include only the best and 
most essential in a limited number of volumes; to 
open to the public the greatest possible libraries of 
Greek and Latin books, assigning to Marcus Varro 
the charge of procuring and classifying them; to 
drain the Pomptine marshes; to let out the water 
from Lake Fucinus; to make a highway from the 
Adriatic across the summit of the Apennines as far 
as the Tiber; to cut a canal through the Isthmus ; 
to check the Dacians, who had poured into Pontus 
and Thrace; then to make war on the Parthians by 
way of Lesser Armenia, but not to risk a battle with 
them until he had first tested their mettle. 


61 


4 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


Talia agentem atque meditantem mors praevenit. 
De qua prius quam dicam, ea quae ad formam et. 
habitum et cultum et mores, nec minus quae ad 
civilia et bellica eius studia pertineant, non alienum 
erit summatim exponere. 

XLV. Fuisse traditur excelsa statura, colore 
candido, teretibus membris, ore paulo pleniore, nigris 
vegetisque oculis, valitudine prospera, nisi quod 
tempore extremo repente animo linqui atque etiam 
per somnum exterreri solebat. Comitiali quoque 
morbo bis inter res agendas correptus est. Circa 
eorporis curam morosior, ut non solum tonderetur 
diligenter ac raderetur, sed velleretur etiam, ut 
quidam exprobraverunt, calvitii vero deformitatem — 
iniquissime ferret, saepe obtrectatorum iocis obnoxiam 
expertus. Ideoque et deficientem capillum revocare 
a vertice adsueverat et ex omnibus decretis sibi a 
senatu populoque honoribus non aliud aut recepit aut 
usurpavit libentius quam ius laureae coronae perpetuo 
gestandae. | 

Etiam cultu notabilem ferunt; usum enim lato 
clavo ad manus fimbriato nec umquam aliter quam ut! 
super eum cingeretur, et quidem fluxiore cinctura ; 
unde emanasse Sullae dictum optimates saepius ad- 
monentis, ut male praecinctum puerum caverent. 


1 ut, supplied by Bentley, IQs insert after nec. 


* Epilepsy, called morbus comitialis, because an attack was 
regarded as sufficient cause for the postponement of elections, 
or other public business. Sometimes a seizure was feigned 
for political reasons. 

* Latus clavus, the broad purple stripe, is also applied to 
a tunic with the broad stripe. All senators had the right to 


62 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


All these enterprises and plans were cut short by 
his death. But before I speak of that, it will not be 
amiss to describe briefly his personal appearance, his 
dress, his mode of life, and his character, as well as 
his conduct in civil and military life. 

XLV. He is said to have been tall of stature, with 
a fair complexion, shapely limbs, a somewhat full 
face, and keen black eyes; sound of health, except 
that towards the end he was subject to sudden 
fainting fits and to nightmare as well. He was 
twice attacked by the ‘falling sickness during his 
campaigns. He was somewhat overnice in the care 
of his person, being not only carefully trimmed and 
shaved, but even having superfluous hair plucked out, 
as some have charged; while his baldness was a 
disfigurement which troubled him greatly, since he 
found that it was often the subject of the gibes of 
his detractors. Because of it he used to comb 
forward his scanty locks from the crown of his head, 
and of all the honours voted him by the senate and 
people there was none which he received or made 
use of more gladly than the privilege of wearing a 
laurel wreath at all times. They say, too, that he 
was fantastic in his dress; that he wore a senator’s 
tunic ® with fringed sleeves reaching to the wrist, 
and always had a girdle? over it, though rather a 
loose one; and this, they say, was the occasion of 
Sulla’s mot, when he often warned the nobles to 
keep an eye on the ill-girt boy. 
wear this ; the peculiarity in Caesar's case consisted in the 
long fringed sleeves. 

* While a girdle was commonly worn with the ordinary 
tunic, it was not usual to wear one with the latus clavus ; 
Quint. 2. 3. 138. The looseness of the girdle was an addi- 
tional peculiarity. 


63 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


XLVI. Habitavit primo in Subura modicis aedibus, 
post autem pontificatum maximum in Sacra via domo 
publica. Munditiarum lautitiarumque studiossimum 
multi prodiderunt; villam in Nemorensi a funda- 
mentis incohatam magnoque sumptu absolutam, quia 
non tota ad animum ei responderat, totam diruisse, 
quanquam tenuem adhuc et obaeratum ; in expedi- 
tionibus tessellata et sectilia pavimenta circum- 
tulisse. 

XLVII. Britanniam petisse spe  margaritarum, 
quarum amplitudinem conferentem interdum sua 
manu exegisse pondus ; gemmas, toreumata, signa, 
tabulas operis antiqui semper animosissime com- 
parasse ; servitia rectiora politioraque inmenso pretio, 
et cuius ipsum etiam puderet, sic ut rationibus 
vetaret inferri. 

XLVIII. Convivatum assidue per provincias duo- 
bus tricliniis, uno quo sagati palliative, altero quo 
togati cum inlustrioribus provinciarum discumberent. 
Domesticam disciplinam in parvis ac maioribus rebus 
diligenter adeo severeque rexit, ut pistorem alium 
quam sibi panem convivis subicientem compedibus 
vinxerit, libertum gratissimum ob adulteratam equitis 
Romani uxorem, quamvis nullo querente, capitali 
poena adfecerit. 

XLIX. Pudicitiae eius famam nihil quidem 


64 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


XLVI. He lived at first in the Subura in a modest 
house, but after he became pontifex maximus, in the 
official residence on the Sacred Way. Many have 
written that he was very fond of elegance and 
luxury ; that having laid the foundations of a country- 
house on his estate at Nemi and finished it at great 
cost, he tore it all down because it did not suit him 
in every particular, although at the time he was still 
poor and heavily in debt; and that he carried 
tesselated and mosaic floors about with him on his 
campaigns. 

XLVII. They say that he was led to invade 
Britain by the hope of getting pearls, and that 
in comparing their size he sometimes weighed them 
with his own hand; that he was always a most 
enthusiastic collector of gems, carvings, statues, and 
pictures by early artists ; also of slaves of exceptional 
figure and training at enormous prices, of which he 
himself was so ashamed that he forbade their entry 
in his accounts. 

XLVIII. It is further reported that in the pro- 
vinces he gave banquets constantly in two dining- 
halls, in one of which his officers or Greek com- 
panions, in the other Roman civilians and the more 
distinguished of the provincials reclined at table. 
He was so punctilious and strict in the management 
of his household, in small matters as well as in those 
of greater importance, that he put his baker in irons 
for serving him with one kind of bread and his 
guests with another ; and he ir^icted capital punish- 
ment on a favourite freedman for adultery with the 
wife of a Roman knight, although no complaint was 
made against him. 

XLIX. There was no stain on his reputation for 

65 

VOL. I. F 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


praeter Nicomedis contubernium laesit, gravi tamen 
et perenni obprobrio et ad omnium convicia exposito. 
Omitto Calvi Licini notissimos versus : 


* Bithynia quicquid 
et pedicator! Caesaris umquam habuit." 


Praetereo actiones Dolabellae et Curionis patris, in 
quibus eum Dolabella * paelicem reginae, spondam 
interiorem regiae lecticae," at Curio “ stabulum Nico- 
medis et Bithynicum fornicem " dicunt. Missa etiam 
facio edicta Bibuli, quibus proscripsit: collegam 
suum Bithynicam reginam, eique antea regem 
fuisse cordi, nune esse regnum. Quo tempore, ut 
Marcus Brutus refert, Octavius etiam quidam 
valitudine mentis liberius dicax conventu maximo, 
eum Pompeium regem appellasset, ipsum reginam 
salutavit. Sed C. Memmius etiam ad cyathum et 
vinum ? Nicomedi stetisse obicit, cum reliquis exoletis, 
pleno convivio, accubantibus nonnullis urbicis nego- 
tiatoribus, quorum refert nomina. Cicero vero non 
contentus in quibusdam epistulis scripsisse a satelliti- 
bus eum in cubiculum regium eductum in aureo lecto 
veste purpurea decubuisse floremque aetatis a Venere 
orti in Bithynia contaminatum, quondam etiam in 
senatu defendenti ei Nysae causam, filiae Nicomedis, 
beneficiaque regis in se commemoranti : * Remove," 
inquit, * istaec, oro te, quando notum est, et quid 
ille tibi et quid illi tute dederis.” Gallico denique 
triumpho milites eius inter cetera carmina, qualia 
1 pedicator] predicator, f. 
2 et vinum, Y; et vina, G ; et vi, MV L?6. 


66 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


chastity except his intimacy with King Nicomedes, 
but that was a deep and lasting reproach, which laid 
him open to insults from every quarter. I say 
nothing of the notorious lines of Licinius Calvus: 


* Whate'er Bithynia had, and Caesar's paramour.” 


I pass over, too, the invectives of Dolabella and the 
elder Curio, in which Dolabella calls him * the 
queen's rival, the inner partner of the royal couch," 
and Curio, *the brothel of Nicomedes and the stew 
of Bithynia," I take no account of the edicts of 
Bibulus, in which he posted his colleague as “the 
queen of Bithynia," saying that * of yore he was 
enamoured of a king, but now of a king's estate." 
At this same time, so Marcus Brutus declares, one 
Octavius, a man whose disordered mind made him 
somewhat free with his tongue, after saluting Pompey 
as “ king ” in a crowded assembly, greeted Caesar as 
*queen." But Gaius Memmius makes the direct 
charge that he acted as cup-bearer to Nicomedes 
with the rest of his wantons at a large dinner-party, 
and that among the guests were some merchants 
from Rome, whose names Memmius gives. Cicero, 
indeed, is not content with having written in sundry 
letters that Caesar was led by the king's attendants 
to the royal apartments, that helay on a golden 
couch arrayed in purple, and that the virginity of 
this son of Venus was lost in Bithynia; but when 
Caesar was once addressing the senate in defence of 
Nysa, daughter of Nicomedes, and was enumerating 
his obligations to the king, Cicero cried : “ No more 
of that, pray, for it is well known what he gave you, 
and what you gave him in turn." Finally, in his 
Gallic triumph his soldiers, among the bantering 

! 67 

F 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


currum prosequentes ioculariter canunt, etiam illud 
vulgatissimum pronuntiaverunt : 


* Gallias Caesar subegit, Nicomedes Caesarem : 
Ecce Caesar nunc triumphat qui subegit Gallias,! 
Nicomedes non triumphat qui subegit Caesarem." 


L. Pronum et sumptuosum in libidines fuisse 
constans opinio est, plurimasque et illustres feminas 
corrupisse, in quibus Postumiam Servi Sulpici, 
Lolliam Auli Gabini, Tertullam Marci Crassi, etiam 
Cn. Pompei Muciam. Nam certe Pompeio et a 
Curionibus patre et filio et a multis exprobratum 
est, quod cuius causa post tres liberos exegisset 
uxorem et quem gemens Aegisthum appellare 
consuesset, eius postea filiam potentiae cupiditate 
in matrimonium recepisset. Sed ante alias dilexit 
Marci Bruti matrem Serviliam, cui et primo? suo 
consulatu sexagiens sestertium margaritam mercatus 
est et bello civili super alias donationes amplissima 
praedia ex auctionibus hastae minimo addixit ; cum 
quidem plerisque vilitatem mirantibus facetissime 
Cicero: “ Quo melius," inquit, * emptum sciatis, tertia 
deducta;" existimabatur enim Servilia etiam filiam 
suam Tertiam Caesari conciliare. 


1 The second line is omitted by MHGV.PO'5, while Q (and e 
in the margin) add 
Et quare triumphat Caesar qui subegit Gallias ? 
Nicomedes non triumphat qui subegit Caesarem. 
2 primo, Torrentius; proximo, mss. 


* The word play on tertia (pars) and Tertio, daughter of 
Servilia, as well as on the two senses of deducta, is quite 
untranslatable. The first meaning is given in the translation, 
and the second is implied in the following sentence. Cf. 
Macrobius, Saturnalia, 2. 2. 5. 


68 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


songs which are usually sung by those. who follow 
the chariot, shouted these lines, which became a 
by-word : 


* All the Gauls did Caesar vanquish, Nicomedes 
vanquished him; _ 
Lo! now Caesar rides in triumph, victor over all 
the Gauls, 
Nicomedes does not triumph, who subdued the 
conqueror.” 


L. That he was unbridled and extravagant in his 
intrigues is the general opinion, and that he seduced 
many illustrious women, among them Postumia, wife 
of Servius Sulpicius, Lollia, wife of Aulus Gabinius, 
Tertulla, wife of Marcus Crassus, and even Gnaeus 
Pompey’s wife Mucia. At all events there is no 
doubt that Pompey was taken to task by the elder 
and the younger Curio, as well as by many others, 
because through a desire for power he had afterwards 
married the daughter of a man on whose account he 
divorced a wife who had borne him three children, 
and whom he had often referred to with a groan as 
an Aegisthus. But beyond all others Caesar loved 
Servilia, the mother of Marcus Brutus, for whom 
in his first consulship he bought a pearl costing 
six million sesterces. During the civil war, too, 
besides other presents, he knocked down some fine 
estates to her in a public auction at a nominal 
price, and when some expressed their surprise at 
the low figure, Cicero wittily remarked: “It’s 
a better bargain than you think, for there is a 
third off.” And in fact it was thought that 
Servilia was prostituting her own daughter Tertia 
to Caesar, 


69 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


LI. Ne provincialibus quidem matrimoniis ab- 
stinuisse vel hoc disticho apparet iactato aeque a 
militibus per Gallicum triumphum : 


* Urbani, servate uxores: moechum calvom. addu- 
cimus. 
Aurum in Gallia effutuisti, hic sumpsisti mutuum." 


LII. Dilexit et reginas, inter quas  Eunoen 
Mauram Bogudis uxorem, cui maritoque eius plurima 
et immensa tribuit, ut Naso! scripsit; sed maxime 
Cleopatram, cum qua et convivia in primam lucem 
saepe protraxit et eadem nave thalamego paene 
Aethiopia tenus Aegyptum penetravit, nisi exercitus 
sequi recusasset, quam denique accitam in urbem 
non nisi maximis honoribus praemiisque auctam 
remisit filiumque natum appellare nomine suo passus 
est. Quem quidem nonnulli Graecorum similem 
quoque Caesari et forma et incessu tradiderunt. 
M. Antonius adgnitum etiam ab eo senatui adfirm- 
avit, idque? scire C. Matium et C. Oppium 
reliquosque Caesaris amicos; quorum Gaius Oppius, 
quasi plane defensione ac patrocinio res egeret, 
librum edidit, non esse Caesaris filium, quem 
Cleopatra dicat. Helvius Cinna tr. pl plerisque 
confessus est habuisse se scriptam paratamque legem, 
quam Caesar ferre iussisset cum ipse abesset, uti 
uxores liberorum quaerendorum causa quas et quot 


1 Naso, c (Mancinellus); vasa, n (apparently corrected 
from vasu in M ; vasas, G). 

? idque, Modderman ; the greater number of the mss. have 
que (= quae). 


^ M. Actorius Naso; see chap. ix, 3, 


72 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


LI. That he did not refrain from intrigues in the 
provinces is shown in particular by this couplet, 
which was also shouted by the soldiers in his Gallic 
triumph : 


* Men of Rome, keep close your consorts, here's a 
bald adulterer. 
Gold in Gaul you spent in dalliance, which you 
borrowed here in Rome." 


LII. He had love affairs with queens too, including 
Eunoe the Moor, wife of Bogudes, on whom, as well as 
on her husband, he bestowed many splendid presents, 
as Naso writes ;* but above all with Cleopatra, with 
whom he often feasted until daybreak, and he would 
have gone through Egypt with her in her state-barge 
almost to Aethiopia, had not his soldiers refused to 
follow him. Finally he called her to Rome and did 
not let her leave until he had ladened her with high 
honours and rich gifts, and he allowed her to give his 
name to the child which she bore. In fact, accord- 
ding to certain Greek writers, this child was very 
like Caesar in looks and carriage. Mark Antony 
declared to the senate that Caesar had really 
acknowledged the boy, and that Gaius Matius, Gaius 
Oppius, and other friends of Caesar knew this. Of 
these Gaius Oppius, as if admitting that the situation 
required apology and defence, published a book, to 
prove that the child whom Cleopatra fathered on 
Caesar was not his. Helvius Cinna, tribune of the 
commons, admitted to several that he had a bill 
drawn up in due form, which Caesar had ordered him 
to propose to the people in.his absence, making it 
lawful for Caesar to marry what wives he wished, 
and as many as he wished, *for the purpose of be- 


74 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


vellet ducere liceret. At ne cui dubium omnino 
sit et impudicitiae et adulteriorum flagrasse infamia, 
Curio pater quadam eum oratione omnium mulierum 
virum et omnium virorum mulierem appellat. 

LIII Vini parcisimum ne inimici quidem ne- 
gaverunt. Marci Catonis est: unum ex omnibus 
Caesarem ad evertendam rem publicam sobrium 
accessisse. Nam circa victum Gaius Oppius adeo 
indifferentem docet, ut quondam ab hospite conditum 
oleum pro viridi adpositum aspernantjbus ceteris 
solum etiam largius appetisse scribat, ne hospitem 
aut neglegentiae aut rusticitatis videretur arguere. 

LIV. Abstinentiam neque in imperiis neque in 
magistratibus praestiti. Ut enim quidam monu- 
mentis suis testati sunt, in Hispania pro consule et 
a sociis pecunias accepit emendicatas in auxilium 
aeris alieni et Lusitanorum quaedam oppida, quan- 
quam nec imperata detrectarent et advenienti portas 
patefacerent, diripuit hostiliter. In Gallia fana 
templaque deum donis referta expilavit, urbes diruit 
saepius ob praedam quam ob delictum; unde factum, 
ut auro abundaret ternisque milibus nummum in 
libras promercale per Italiam provinciasque diven- 
deret. In primo consulatu tria milia pondo auri 
furatus e Capitolio tantundem inaurati aeris reposuit. 
Societates ac regna pretio dedit, ut qui uni Ptolemaeo 
prope sex milia talentorum suo Pompeique nomine 


a The words liberorum quaerendorum causa are a legal 
formula indicating that the purpose of marriage is to beget 
legal heirs. 

^ Caesar was in reality propraetor, but proconsul (pro 
consule) is sometimes used of the governor of a province, 
regardless of his rank. 

¢ Apparently about half the usual price: see Index, s.v. 
Sestertius. l l 


72 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


getting children.”* But to remove all doubt that he 
had an evil reputation both for shameless vice and 
for adultery, I have only to add that the elder Curio 
in one of his speeches calls him “every woman’s man 
.and every man's woman." 

LIII. That he drank very little wine not even his 
enemies denied. There is a saying of Marcus Cato 
that Caesar was the only man who undertook to 
overthrow the state when sober. Even in the 
matter of food Gaius Oppius tells us that he was so 
indifferent, that once when his host served stale oil 
instead of fresh, and the other guests would have 
none of it, Caesar partook even more plentifully than 
usual, not to seem to charge his host with careless- 
ness or lack of manners. 

LIV. Neither when in command of armies nor as a 
magistrate at Rome did he show a scrupulous in- 
tegrity ; for as certain men have declared in their 
memoirs, when he was proconsul in Spain, he not 
only begged money from the allies, to help pay his 
debts, but also attacked and sacked some towns of 
the Lusitanians although they did not refuse his 
terms and opened their gates to him on his arrival. 
In Gaul he pillaged shrines and temples of the gods 
filled with offerings, and oftener sacked towns for the 
sake of plunder than for any fault. In consequence 
he had more gold than he knew what to do with, 
and offered it for sale throughout Italy and the pro- 
vinces at the rate of three thousand sesterces the 
pound. In his first consulship he stole three 
thousand pounds of gold from the Capitol, replacing 
it with the same weight of gilded bronze. He 
made alliances and thrones a matter of barter, for 
he extorted from Ptolemy alone in his own name 


73 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


abstulerit. Postea vero evidentissimis rapinis ac 
sacrilegis et onera bellorum civilium et triumphorum 
ac munerum sustinuit impendia, 

LV. Eloquentia militarique! re aut aequavit 
praestantissimorum gloriam aut excessit. Post ac- 
cusationem Dolabellae haud dubie principibus patronis 
adnumeratus est. Certe Cicero ad Brutum oratores 
enumerans negat se videre, cui debeat Caesar cedere, 
aitque eum elegantem, splendidam quoque atque 
etiam magnificam et generosam quodam modo 
rationem dicendi tenere ; et ad Cornelium Nepotem 
de eodem ita scripsit: * Quid ? oratorem quem huic 
antepones eorum, qui nihil aliud egerunt? Quis 
sententiis autacutior aut crebrior? Quis verbis aut 
ornatior aut elegantior?" Genus eloquentiae dum- 
taxat adulescens adhuc Strabonis Caesaris secutus 
videtur, cuius eliam ex oratione, quae inscribitur 
** pro Sardis," ad verbum nonnulla transtulit in divina- 
tionem suam. Pronuntiasse autem dicitur voce acuta, 
ardenti motu gestuque, non sine venustate. Orationes 
aliquas reliquit, inter quas temere quaedam feruntur. 
* Pro Quinto Metello" non immerito Augustus existi- 
mat magis ab actuariis exceptam male subsequentibus 
verba dicentis, quam ab ipso editam; nam in 
quibusdam exemplaribus invenio ne inscriptam quidem 
* pro Metello," sed “ quam scripsit Metello," cum ex 
persona Caesaris sermo sit Metellum seque adversus 


1 militarique re, Lipsius, militari quare, n (G omits 
quare). 


a Cic. Brut. 261. 
5 That is, a speech in which he competed with other advo: 
cates for the right to conduct a prosecution, 


74 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


and that of Pompey nearly six thousand talents, 
while later on he met the heavy expenses of the 
civil wars and of his triumphs and entertainments by 
the most bare-faced pillage and sacrilege. 

LV. In eloquence and.in the art of war he either 
equalled or surpassed the fame of their most eminent 
representatives. After his accusation of Dolabella, 
he was without question numbered with the leading 
advocates. At all events wlien Cicero reviews the 
orators in his Brutus, he says that he does not see 
to whom Caesar ought to yield the palm, declaring 
that his style is elegant as well as brilliant, even 
grand and ina sense noble. Again in a letter to 
Cornelius Nepos he writes thus of Caesar: “Come 
now, what orator would you rank above him of those 
who have devoted themselves to nothing else? Who 
has cleverer or more frequent epigrams? Who is 
either more picturesque or more choice in diction?” 
He appears, at least in his youth, to have imitated the 
manner of Caesar Strabo, from whose speech entitled 
“For the Sardinians” he actually transferred some 
passages word for word to a trial address ® of his own. 
He is said to have delivered himself in a high-pitched 
voice with impassioned action and gestures, which 
were not without grace. He left several speeches, 
including some which are attributed to him on 
insufficient evidence. Augustus had good reason to 
think that the speech “ For Quintus Metellus" was 
rather taken down by shorthand writers who could 
not keep pace with his delivery, than published by 
Caesar himself; for in some copies I find that even 
the title is not “For Metellus," but, * Which he wrote 
for Metellus," although the discourse purports to be 
from Caesar's lips, defending Metellus and himself 


75 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


communium obtrectatorum criminationes purgantis. 
* Apud milites" quoque **in Hispania" idem Augustus 
vix ipsius putat, quae tamen duplex fertur: una 
quasi priore habita proelio, altera posteriore, quo 
Asinius Pollio ne tempus quidem contionandi habuisse 
eum dicit subita hostium incursione. 

LVI. Reliquit et rerum suarum commentarios 
Gallici civilisque belli Pompeiani. Nam Alexandrini 
Africique et Hispaniensis incertus auctor est; alii 
Oppium putant, alii Hirtium, qui etiam Gallici belli 
novissimum imperfectumque librum suppleverit. De 
commentariis Caesaris Cicero in eodem Bruto sic 
refert: “ Commentarios scripsit valde quidem pro- 
bandos; nudi sunt, recti et venusti, omni ornatu 
orationis tamquam veste detracta; sed dum voluit 
alios habere parata, unde sumerent qui vellent 
scribere historiam, ineptis gratum fortasse fecit, qui 
illa volent calamistris inurere, sanos quidem homines 
a scribendo deterruit." De isdem commentariis Hir- 
tius ita praedicat : *Adeo probantur omnium iudicio, ut 
praerepta, non praebita facultas scriptoribus videatur. 
Cuius! tamen rei maior nostra quam reliquorum est 
admiratio; ceteri enim, quam bene atque emendate, 
nos etiam, quam facile atque celeriter eos perscrip- 
serit, scimus." Pollio Asinius parum diligenter 
parumque integra veritate compositos putat, cum 


1 Cuius. .. emendate, found only in ç; cf. praef. ad 
B.G. viii. 
a Cic. Brut, 262, ò De Bell, Gall, viii, preface, 5-6, 
76 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


against the charges of their common detractors. 
Augustus also questions the‘ authenticity of the 
address * To his Soldiers in Spain," although there 
are two versions of it: one purporting to have been - 
spoken at the first battle, the other at the second, 
when Asinius Pollio writes that because of the 
sudden onslaught of the enemy he actually did not 
have time to make an harangue. 

LVI. He left memoirs too of his deeds in the 
Gallic war and in the civil strife with Pompey; for the 
author of the Alexandrian, African, and Spanish Wars 
is unknown; some think it was Oppius, others Hirtius, 
who also supplied the final book of the Gallic War, 
which Caesar left unwritten. With regard to Caesar's 
memoirs Cicero, also in the Brutus% speaks in the fol- 
lowing terms: * He wrote memoirs which deserve the 
highest praise; they are naked in their simplicity, 
straightforward yet graceful, stripped of all rhetorical 
adornment, as of a garment; but while his purpose 
was to supply material to others, on which those who 
wished to write history might draw, he haply 
gratified silly folk, who will try to use the curling- 
irons on his narrative, but he has kept men of any 
sense from touching the subject." Of these same 
memoirs Hirtius uses this emphatic language^: “They 
are so highly rated in the judgment of all men, that 
he seems to have deprived writers of an opportunity, 
rather than given them one; yet our admiration for 
this feat is greater than that of others; for they 
know how well and faultlessly he wrote, while we 
know besides how easily and rapidly he finished his 
task." Asinius Pollio thinks that they were put 
together somewhat carelessly and without strict 
regard for truth ; since in many cases Caesar was too 


71 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


Caesar pleraque et quae per alios erant gesta temere 
crediderit et quae per se, vel consulto vel etiam 
memoria lapsus perperam ediderit; existimatque 
rescripturum et correcturum fuisse. Reliquit et “de 
Analogia" duos libros et ** Anticatones ” totidem ac 
praeterea poema quod inscribitur * Iter." Quorum 
librorum primos in transitu Alpium, cum ex citeriore 
Gallia conventibus peractis ad exercitum rediret, 
sequentes sub tempus Mundensis proelii fecit; 
novissimum, dum ab urbe in Hispaniam ulteriorem 
quarto et vicensimo die pervenit. Epistulae quoque 
eius ad senatum extant, quas primum videtur ad 
paginas et formam memorialis libelli convertisse, cum 
antea consules et duces non nisi transversa charta 
scriptas mitterent. Exstant et ad Ciceronem, item 
ad familiares domesticis de rebus, in quibus, si qua 
occultius perferenda erant, per notas scripsit, id est 
sic structo litterarum ordine, ut nullum verbum effici 
posset; quae si qui investigare et persequi velit,! 
quartam elementorum litteram, id est D pro A et 
perinde reliquas commutet. Feruntur a puero et ab? 
adulescentulo quaedam scripta, ut ** Laudes Herculis," 
tragoedia “Oedipus,” item “Dicta collectanea": quos 
omnis libellos vetuit Augustus publicari in epistula, 
quam brevem admodum ac simplicem ad Pompeium 
Macrum, cuiordinandas bibliothecas delegaverat, misit. 


1 velit, ç; vellet, 2; volet, Stephanus. 
2 et a puero et ab, I1Q; et a puero ab, R; et aituero ab, MV. 


a That is, Caesar reduced his reports to book form. If the 
book was a roll, the writing was arranged in columns, parallel 
with the edges (or long sides) of the roll. If it was a codex, 
several sheets were foldedand fastened togetherandthe writing 
was arranged on each page in one or two columns. His pre- 
decessors merely took a sheet, or sheets, and wrote from side 
to side and from top to bottom, without columns or margins. 


78 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


ready to believe the accounts which others gave of 
their actions, and gave a perverted account of his own, 
either designedly or perhaps from forgetfulness; and 
he thinks that he intended to rewrite and revise them. 
He left besides a work in two volumes “On Analogy,” 
the same number of “ Speeches in reply to Cato," 
in addition to a poem, entitled * The Journey." 
He wrote the first of these works while crossing 
the Alps and returning to his army from Hither 
Spain, where he had held the assizes; the second 
about the time of the battle of Munda, and the third in 
the course of a twenty-four days' journey from Rome 
to Farther Spain. Some letters of his to the senate 
are also preserved, and he seems to have been the 
first to reduce such documents to pages and the form 
of a memorial volume,* whereas previously consuls 
and generals sent their reports written right across 
the sheet. There are also letters of his to Cicero, as 
well as to his intimates on private affairs, and in the 
latter, if he had anything confidential to say, he 
wrote it in cipher, that is, by so changing the order of 
the letters of the alphabet, that not a word could be 
made out. If anyone wishes to decipher these, and 
get at their meaning, he must substitute the fourth 
letter of the alphabet, namely D, for A, and so with 
the others. We also have mention of certain 
writings of his boyhood and early youth, such as the 
“Praises of Hercules," a tragedy “Oedipus, and 
a “Collection of Apophthegms" ; but Augustus for- 
bade the publication of all these minor works in 
a very brief and frank letter sent to Pompeius 
Macer, whom he had selected to set aie libraries 
in order. 


79 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


LVII. Armorum et equitandi peritissimus, laboris 
ultra fidem patiens erat. In agmine nonnumquam 
equo, saepius pedibus anteibat, capite detecto, seu 
sol seu imber esset; longissimas vias incredibili 
celeritate confecit, expeditus, meritoria raeda, centena 
passuum milia in singulos dies; siflumina morarentur, 
nando traiciens vel innixus inflatis utribus, ut persaepe 
nuntios de se praevenerit. 

LVIII. In obeundis expeditionibus dubium cautior 
an audentior, exercitum neque per insidiosa itinera 
duxit umquam nisi perspeculatus locorum situs, neque 
in Britanniam transvexit, nisi ante per se portus et 
navigationem et accessum ad insulam explorasset.. 
At idem obsessione castrorum in Germania nuntiata: 
per stationes hostium Gallico habitu penetravit ad 
suos. A Brundisio Dyrrachium inter oppositas classes 
hieme transmisit cessantibusque copiis, quas subsequi 
iusserat, cum ad accersendas frustra saepe misisset, 
novissime ipse clam noctu parvulum navigium solus 
obvoluto capite conscendit, neque aut quis esset 
ante detexit aut gubernatorem cedere adversae 
tempestati passus est quam paene obrutus fluctibus. 

LIX. Ne religione quidem ulla a quoquam incepto 
absterritus umquam vel retardatus est. Cum im- 
molanti aufugisset hostia, profectionem adversus 
Scipionem et Iubam non distulit. Prolapsus etiam 


a Through Gaius Volusenus (Caes. B.G. 4. 21. 1). Suetonius's 
words per se do not necessarily imply that Caesar went to 
Britain himself for this purpose. 


8o 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 
LVII. He was highly skilled in arms and horse- 


manship, and of incredible powers of endurance. On 

the march he headed his army, sometimes on horse- 
back, but oftener on foot, bareheaded both in the heat 
of the sun and in rain. . He covered great distances 
with incredible speed, making a hundred miles a 
day in a hired carriage and with little baggage, 
swimming the rivers which barred his path or cross- 
ing them on inflated skins, and very often arriving 
before the messengers sent to announce his coming. 

LVIII. In the conduct of his campaigns it is a 
question whether he was more cautious or more 
daring, for he never led his army where ambuscades 
were possible without carefully reconnoitring the 
country, and he did not cross to Britain without, 
making personal inquiries ^ about the harbours, the 
course, and the approach to the island. But on the 
other hand, when news came that his camp in 
Germany was beleaguered, he made his way to his 
men through the enemies' pickets, disguised as a 
Gaul. He crossed from Brundisium to Dyrrachium 
in winter time, running the blockade of the enemy's 
fleets ; and when the troops which he had ordered to 
follow him delayed to do so, and he had sent to fetch 
them many times in vain, at last in secret and alone 
he boarded a small boat at night with his head 
muffled up; and he did not reveal who he was, or 
suffer the helmsman to give way to the gale blowing 
in their teeth, until he was all but overwhelmed by 
the waves. 

LIX. No regard for religion ever turned him from 
any undertaking, or even delayed him. "Though the 
victim escaped as he was offering sacrifice, he did not 
put off his expedition against Scipio and Juba. Even 

81 

VOL. I. G 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


in egressu navis verso ad melius omine : * Teneo te," 
inquit, * Africa." Ad eludendas autem vaticinationes, 
quibus felix et invictum in ea provincia fataliter 
Scipionum nomen ferebatur, despectissimum quendam 
ex Corneliorum genere, cui ad opprobrium vitae 
Salvitoni ! cognomen erat, in castris secum habuit. 

LX. Proelia non tantum destinato, sed ex occasione 
sumebat ac saepe ab itinere statim, interdum spurcissi- 
mis tempestatibus, cum minime quis moturum putaret ; 
nec nisi tempore extremo ad dimicandum cunctatior 
factus est, quo saepius vicisset, hoc minus experien- 
dos casus opinans nihilque se tantum adquisiturum 
victoria, quantum auferre? calamitas posset. Nullum 
umquam hostera fudit, quin castris quoque exueret ; 
ita nullum spatium perterritis dabat. Ancipiti proelio 
equos dimittebat et in primis suum, quo maior 
permanendi necessitas imponeretur auxilio fugae 
erepto. T" 

LXI. Utebatur autem equo insigni, pedibus prope 
humanis et in modum digitorum ungulis fissis, quem 
natum apud se, cum haruspices imperium orbis terrae 
significare domino pronuntiassent, magna cura aluit 
nec patientem sessoris alterius primus ascendit; cuius 
etiam instar pro aede Veneris Genetricis postea 
dedicavit. 


1 Salvitem, L’; Salutioni,g. ?auferre... umquam, only ins. 


.* The significance of this name can only be conjectured. 
Salutio was an actor of mimes, mentioned by Pliny, N.H. 
7. 10 and 35. 2. 


82 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


when he had a fall as he disembarked, he gave the 
omen a favourable turn by crying: “I hold thee 
fast, Africa." Furthermore, to make the prophecies 
ridiculous which declared that the stock of the 
Scipios was fated to be fortunate and invincible 
in that province, he kept with him in camp a 
contemptible fellow belonging to the Cornelian 
family, to whom the nickname Salvito® had been 
given as a reproach for his manner of life. 

LX. He joined battle, not only after planning his 
movements in advance but on a sudden opportunity, 
often immediately at the end of a march, and some- 
times in the foulest weather, when one would least 
expect him to makea move. It was not until his later 
years that he became slower to engage, through a 
conviction that the oftener he had been victor, the 
less he ought to tempt fate, and that he could not 
possibly gain as much by success as he might lose by 
a defeat. He never put his enemy to flight without 
also driving him from his camp, thus giving him no 
respite in his panic. When the issue was doubtful, 
he used to send away the horses, and his own among 
the first, to impose upon his troops the greater 
necessity of standing their ground by taking away 
that aid to flight. 

LXI. He rode a remarkable horse, too, with feet 
that were almost human; for its hoofs were cloven 
in such a way as to look like toes. This horse was 
foaled on his own place, and since the soothsayers 
had declared that it foretold the rule of the world 
for its master, he reared it with the greatest care, 
and was the first to mount it, for it would endure no 
other rider. Afterwards, too, he dedicated a statue 
of it before the temple of Venus Genetrix. 

83 
G 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


LXII. Inclinatam aciem solus saepe restituit ob- 
sistens fugientibus retinensque singulos et contortis 
faucibus convertens in hostem et quidem adeo ple- 
rumque trepidos, ut aquilifer! moranti se cuspide 
sit comminatus, alius in manu detinentis reliquerit 
signum. 

LXIII. Non minor illa constantia eius, maiora? 
etiam indicia fuerint. Post aciem Pharsalicam cum 
praemissis in Asiam copiis per angustias Hellesponti 
vectoria navicula traiceret, L. Cassium partis adversae 
cum decem rostratis navibus obvium sibi neque 
refugit et comminus tendens, ultro ad deditionem 
hortatus, supplicem ad se recepit. 

LXIV. Alexandriae circa oppugnationem pontis 
eruptione hostium subita conpulsus in scapham pluri- - 
bus eodem, praecipitantibus, cum desiluisset? in mare, 
nando per ducentos passus evasit ad proximam navem, 
elata laeva, ne libelli quos tenebat madefierent, pa- 
ludamentum mordicus trahens, ne spolio poteretur 
hostis. 

LXV. Militem neque a moribus neque a fortuna‘ 
probabat, sed tantum a viribus, tractabatque pari 
severitate atque indulgentia. Non enim ubique ac 
semper, sed cum hostis in proximo esset, coercebat ; 

1 aquilifer, Zgnattus; aquilifero, Q. 

2 minora, Y; constantiae, IIQSTC ; immo maiora etiam, t". 

* dedisset, P'O; the other mss. have desilisset. 


4 fortuna, M; the other mss. have fortuna; forma, 
Torrentius. 


a The standard of the legion was a silver eagle with 
outstretched wings, mounted on a pole which had a sharp 
point at the other end, so that it could be set firmly in the 
ground. 

> Rostratae naves, ships of war provided with brazen beaks 
(rostra) or rams. 


84 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


LXII. When his army gave way, he often rallied 
it single-handed, planting himself in the way of the 
fleeing men, laying hold of them one by one, and 
even catching them by the throat and forcing them 
to face the enemy; that, too, when they were in 
such a panic that an eagle-bearer made a pass at him 
with the point? as he tried to stop him, while another 
left the standard in Caesar's hand when he would 
hold him back. 

LXIII. His presence of mind was no less re- 
nowned, and the instances of it will appear even 
more striking. After the battle of Pharsalus, when 
he had sent on his troops and was crossing the strait 
of the Hellespont in a small passenger boat, being 
met by Lucius Cassius, of the hostile party, with ten 
armoured ships,’ he made no attempt to escape, but 
went to meet Cassius and actually urged him to 
surrender ; and Cassius sued for mercy and was taken 
on board. 

LXIV. At Alexandria, while assaulting a bridge, 
he was forced by a sudden sally of the enemy to take 
to a small skiff; when many others threw themselves 
into the same boat, he plunged into the sea, and 
after swimming for two hundred paces, got away to 
the nearest ship, holding up his left hand all the 
way, so as not to wet some papers which he was 
carrying, and dragging his cloak after him with his 
teeth, to keep the enemy from getting it as a 
trophy. 

LXY. He valued his soldiers neither for their 
personal character nor their fortune, but solely for 
their prowess, and he treated them with equal strict- 
ness and indulgence; for he did not curb them 
everywhere and at all times, but only in the presence 


85 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


tum maxime exactor gravissimus disciplinae, ut 
neque itineris neque proelii tempus denuntiaret, sed 
paratum et intentum momentis omnibus quo vellet 
subito educeret. Quod etiam sine causa plerumque 
faciebat, praecipue pluviis et festis diebus. Ac 
subinde observandum se admonens repente interdiu 
vel nocte subtrahebat, augebatque iter, ut serius 
subsequentis defetigaret. 

LXVI. Fama vero hostilium copiarum perterritos 
non negando minuendove, sed insuper amplificando 
ementiendoque confirmabat. Itaque cum expectatio 
adventus Iubae terribilis esset, convocatis ad con- 
tionem militibus : “ Scitote," inquit, “ paucissimis his 
diebus regem adfuturum cum decem legionibus, 
equitum triginta, levis armaturae centum milibus, 
elephantis trecentis. Proinde desinant quidam 
quaerere ultra aut opinari mihique, qui compertum 
habeo, credant; aut quidem vetustissima nave im- 
positos quocumque vento in quascumque terras 
iubebo avehi." 

LXVII. Delicta neque observabat omnia neque pro 
modo exsequebatur, sed desertorum ac seditiosorum 
et inquisitor et punitor acerrimus conivebat in ceteris. 
Ac nonnumquam post magnam pugnam atque 
victoriam remisso . officiorum munere licentiam 
omnem passim  lasciviendi permittebat, iactare 
solitus milites suos etiam unguentatos bene pug- 
86 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


of the enemy. Then he required the strictest dis- 
cipline, not announcing the time of a march or a 
battle, but keeping them ready and alert to be led 
on a sudden at any moment wheresoever he might 
wish. He often called them out even when there 
was no occasion for it, especially on rainy days and 
holidays. And warning them every now and then 
that they must keep close watch on him, he would 
steal away suddenly by day or night and make a 
longer march than usual, to tire out those who were 
tardy in following. 

LXVI. When they were in a panic through reports 
about the enemy's numbers, he used to rouse their 
courage not by denying or discounting the rumours, 
but by falsely exaggerating the true danger. For 
instance, when the anticipation of Juba's coming 
fled them with terror, he called the soldiers to- 
gether and said: * Let me tell you that within the 
next few days the king will be here with ten legions, 
thirty thousand horsemen, a hundred tbousand light- 
armed troops, and three hundred elephants. There- 
fore some of you may as well cease to ask further 
questions or make surmises and may rather believe me, 
since I know all about it. Otherwise, I shall surely 
have them shipped on some worn out craft and carried 
off to whatever lands the wind may blow them.” 

LXVII. He did not take notice of all their 
offences or punish them by rule, but he kept a sharp 
look out for deserters and mutineers, and chastised 
them most severely, shutting his eyes to other faults. 
Sometimes, too, after a great victory he relieved 
them of all duties and gave them full licence to 
revel, being in the habit of boasting that his 
soldiers could fight well even when reeking of per- 


87 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


2 nare posse. Nec milites eos pro contione, sed 
blandiore nomine commilitones appellabat habebat- 
que tam cultos, ut argento et auro politis armis 
ornaret, simul et ad speciem et quo tenaciores eorum 
in proelio essent metu damni. Diligebat quoque 
usque adeo, ut audita clade Tituriana barbam capil- 
lumque summiserit nec ante dempserit quam vindi- 
casset. 

LXVIII. Quibus rebus et devotissimos sibi et 
fortissimos reddidit. Ingresso civile bellum cen- 
turiones cuiusque legionis singulos equites e viatico 
suo optulerunt, universi milites gratuitam et sine 
frumento stipendioque operam, cum  tenuiorum 
tutelam locupletiores in se contulissent. Neque in 
tam diuturno spatio quisquam omnino descivit, 
plerique capti concessam sibi sub condicione vitam, 

2 si militare adversus eum vellent, recusarunt. Famem 
et ceteras necessitates, non cum obsiderentur modo 
sed et si ipsi alios obsiderent, tanto opere tolerabant, 
ut Dvrrachina munitione Pompeius viso genere panis 
ex herba, quo sustinebantur, cum feris sibi rem 
esse dixerit amoverique ocius nec cuiquam ostendi 
iusserit, ne patientia et pertinacia hostis animi 
suorum frangerentur. | 

3 Quanta fortitudine dimicarint, testimonio est 
quod adverso semel apud Dyrrachium proelio poenam 
in se ultro depoposcerunt, ut consolandos eos magis 
imperator quam puniendos habuerit. Ceteris proeliis 
88 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


fumes. In the assembly he addressed them not as 
* soldiers," but by the more flattering term “ com- 
rades," and he kept them in fine trim, furnishing 
them with arms inlaid with silver and gold, both for 
show and to make them hold the faster to them in 
battle, through fear of the greatness of the loss. 
Such was his love for them that when he heard of 
the disaster to Titurius, he let his hair and beard 
grow long, and would not cut them until he had 
taken vengeance. 

LXVIII. In this way he made them most devoted 
to his interests as well as most valiant. When he 
began the civil war, every centurion of each legion 
proposed to supply a horseman from his own allow- 
ance, and the soldiers one and all offered their service 
without pay and without rations, the richer assuming 
the care of the poorer. Throughout the long struggle 
not one deserted and many of them, on being taken 
prisoner, refused to accept their lives, when offered 
them on the condition of consenting to serve against 
Caesar. They bore hunger and other hardships, both 
when in a state of siege and when besieging others, 
with such fortitude, that when Pompey saw in the 
works at Dyrrachium a kind of bread made of herbs, 
on which they were living, he said that he was 
fighting wild beasts; and he gave orders that it be 
put out of sight quickly and shown to none of his 
men, for fear that the endurance and resolution of 
the foe would break their spirit. 

How valiantly they fought is shown by the fact 
that when they suffered their sole defeat before 
Dyrrachium, they insisted on being punished, and 
their commander felt called upon rather to console 
than to chastise them. In the other battles they 


89 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK 1 


innumeras adversariorum copias multis partibus ipsi 
pauciores facile superarunt. Denique una sextae 
legionis cohors praeposita castello quattuor Pompei 
legiones per aliquot horas sustinuit paene omnis 
confixa multitudine hostilium sagittarum, quarum 
centum ac triginta milia! intra vallum reperta sunt. 
Nec mirum, si quis singulorum facta respiciat, vel 
Cassi Scaevae centurionis vel Gai Acili militis, ne de 
pluribus referam. Scaeva excusso oculo, transfixus 
femore et umero, centum et viginti ictibus scuto 
perforato, custodiam portae commissi castelli retinuit. 
Acilius navali ad Massiliam proelio iniecta in puppem 
hostium dextera et abscisa memorabile illud apud 
Graecos Cynegiri exemplum imitatus transiluit in 
navem umbone obvios agens. 

LXIX. Seditionem per decem annos Gallicis bellis 
nulam omnino moverunt, civilibus aliquas, sed ut 
celeriter ad officium redierint, nec tam indulgentia 
ducis quam auctoritate. Non enim cessit umquam 
tumultuantibus atque etiam obviam semper iit; et 
nonam quidem legionem apud Placentiam, quanquam 
in armis adhuc Pompeius esset, totam cum ignominia 
missam fecit aegreque post multas et supplicis 
preces, nec nisi exacta de sontibus poena, restituit. 

LXX. Decimanos autem Romae cum ingentibus 
minis summoque etiam urbis periculo missionem et 
praemia flagitantes, ardente tunc in Africa bello, 


1 Since Caesar (B.C. 3.53) gives the number as milia .. . 
circiter xxx, Ernesti proposed to omit centum and read ad 
for ac. | 


9o 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


overcame with ease countless forces of the enemy, 
though decidedly fewer in number themselves. 
Indeed one cohort of the sixth legion, when set to 
defend a redoubt, kept four legions of Pompey at bay 
for several hours, though almost all were wounded by 
the enemy’s showers of arrows, of which a hundred 
and thirty thousand were picked up within the 
ramparts. And no wonder, when one thinks of the 
deeds of individual soldiers, either of Cassius Scaeva 
the centurion, or of Gaius Acilius of the rank and file, 
not to mention others. Scaeva, with one eye gone, 
his thigh and shoulder wounded, and his shield bored 
through in a hundred and twenty places, continued 
to guard the gate of a fortress put in his charge. 
Acilius in the sea-fight at Massilia grasped the stern 
of one of the enemy’s ships, and when his right hand 
was lopped off, rivalling the famous exploit of the 
Greek hero Cynegirus, boarded the ship and drove 
the enemy before him with the boss of his shield. 

LXIX. They did not mutiny once during the 
ten years of the Gallic war; in the civil wars they 
did so now and then, but quickly resumed their 
duty, not so much owing to any indulgence of their 
general as to his authority. For he never gave way 
to them when they were insubordinate, but always 
boldly faced them, discharging the entire ninth 
legion in disgrace before Placentia, though Pompey 
was still in the field, reinstating them unwillingly 
and only after many abject entreaties, and insisting 
on punishing the ringleaders. 

LXX. Again at Home, when the men of the 
Tenth clamoured for their discharge and rewards 
with terrible threats and no little peril to the city, 
though the war in Africa was then raging, he did 


9t 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


neque adire cunctatus est, quanquam deterrentibus 
amicis, neque dimittere; sed una voce, qua 
* Quirites" eos pro militibus appellarat, tam facile 
circumegit et flexit, ut ei milites esse confestim 
responderint et quamvis recusantem ultro in Africam 
sint secuti ; ac sic quoque seditiosissimum quemque 
et praedae et agri destinati tertia parte multavit. 

LXXI. Studium et fides erga clientis ne iuveni 
quidem defuerunt. Masintham nobilem iuvenem, 
cum adversus Hiempsalem regem tam enixe de- 
fendisset, ut Iubae regis filio in altercatione barbam 
invaserit, stipendiarium quoque pronuntiatum et 
abstrahentibus statim eripuit occultavitque apud se — 
diu et mox ex praetura proficiscens in Hispaniam 
inter officia prosequentium fascesque lictorum lectica 
sua avexit. 

LXXII. Amicos tanta semper facilitate indul- 
gentiaque tractavit, ut Gaio Oppio comitanti se per 
silvestre iter correptoque subita valitudine dever- 
soriolo eo,! quod unum erat, cesserit et ipse humi ac 
sub divo eubuerit. lam autem rerum potens quos- 
dam etiam infimi generis ad amplissimos honores 
provexit, cum ob id culparetur, professus palam, si 
grassatorum et sicariorum ope in tuenda sua digni- 
tate usus esset, talibus quoque se parem gratiam. 
relaturum. | | 


1 deversoriolo eo, Politianus; deversoriolo, Casaubon; 
deversorio loco, 0. 


a Probably some woodeutters hut; deversoriwm means 
* inn, lodging.' 


92 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


not hesitate to appear before them, against the 
advice of his friends, and to disband them. But with 
a single word, calling them “ citizens,’ instead of 
“ soldiers,” he easily brought them round and bent 
them to his will; for they at once replied that they 
were his “soldiers” and insisted on following him to 
Africa, although he refused their service. Even then 
he punished the most insubordinate by the loss of a 
third part of the booty and of the land intended for 
them. 

LXXI. Even when a young man he showed no 
lack of devotion and fidelity to his dependents. He 
defended Masintha, a youth of high birth, against 
king Hiempsal with such spirit, that in the dispute 
he caught the king’s son Juba by the beard. On 
Masintha’s being declared tributary to the king, he at 
once rescued him from those who would carry him off 
and kept him hidden for some time in his own 
house ; and when presently he left for Spain after his 
praetorship, he carried the young man off in his own 
litter, unnoticed amid the crowd that came to see 
him off and the lictors with their fasces. 

LXXII. His friends he treated with invariable 
kindness and consideration. When Gaius Oppius 
was his ‘companion on a journey through a wild, 
woody country and was suddenly taken ill, Caesar 
gave up to him the only shelter* there was, while 
he himself slept on the ground out-of-doors. More- 
over, when he came to power, he advanced some of 
his friends to the highest positions, even though they 
were of the humblest origin, and when taken to task 
for it, flatly declared that if he had been helped in 
defending his honour by brigands and cut-throats, he 
would have requited even such men in the same way. 


93 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


LXXIII. Simultates contra nullas tam graves 
excepit umquam, ut non occasione oblata libens 
deponeret. Gai Memmi, cuius asperrimis orationibus 
non minore acerbitate rescripserat, etiam suffragator 
mox in petitione consulatus fuit. Gaio Calvo post 
famosa epigrammata de reconciliatione per amicos 
agenti ultro ac prior scripsit. Valerium Catullum, a 
quo sibi versiculis de Mamurra perpetua stigmata 
imposita non dissimulaverat, satis facientem eadem 
die adhibuit cenae hospitioque patris eius, sicut con- 
suerat, uti perseveravit. 

LXXIV. Sed et in ulciscendo natura lenissimus 
piratas, a quibis captus est, cum in dicionem 
redegisset, quoniam suffixurum se cruci ante iura- 
verat, iugulari prius iussit, deinde suffigi ; Cornelio 
Phagitae, cuius quondam nocturnas insidias aeger ac 
latens, ne perduceretur ad Sullam, vix praemio dato 
evaserat, numquam nocere sustinuit; Philemonem a 
manu servum, qui necem suam per venenum inimicis 
promiserat, non gravius quam simplici morte puniit ; 
in Publium Clodium Pompeiae uxoris suae adulterum 
atque eadem de causa pollutarum caerimoniarum 
reum testis citatus negavit se quicquam comperisse, 
quamvis et mater Aurelia et soror Iulia apud eosdem 
iudices omnia ex fide rettulissent ; interrogatusque, 


* Catull. 29 and 57. b See chap. i. 2. 
94 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


LXXIII. On the other hand he never formed 
such bitter enmities that he was not glad to lay them 
aside when opportunity offered. Although Gaius 
Memmius had made highly caustic speeches against 
him, to which he had replied with equal bitterness, 
he went so far as to support Memmius afterwards in 
his suit for the consulship. When Gaius Calvus, 
after some scurrilous epigrams, took steps through 
his friends towards a reconciliation, Caesar wrote to 
him first and of his own free will. Valerius Catullus, 
as Caesar himself did not hesitate to say, inflicted a 
lasting stain on his name by the verses about 
Mamurra®; yet when he apologised, Caesar invited 
the poet to dinner that very same day, and continued 
his usual friendly relations with Catullus's father. 

LXXIV. Even in avenging wrongs he was by 
nature most merciful, and when he got hold of the 
pirates who had captured him, he had them crucified, 
since he had sworn beforehand that he would do so, 
but ordered that their throats be cut first. He could 
never make up his mind to harm Cornelius Phagites, 
although when he was sick and in hiding,? the man 
bad waylaid him night after night, and even a bribe 
had barely saved him from being handed over to 
Sulla. The slave Philemon, his amanuensis, who had 
promised Caesar's enemies that he would poison him, 
he merely punished by death, without torture. 
When summoned as a witness against Publius 
Clodius, the paramour of his wife Pompeia, charged 
on the same count with sacrilege, Caesar declared 
that he had no evidence, although both his mother 
Aurelia and his sister Julia had given the same jurors 
a faithful account of the whole affair; and on being 
asked why it was then that he had put away his 


95 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


cur igitur repudiasset uxorem : * Quoniam," inquit, 
* meos tam suspicione quam crimine iudico carere 
oportere." 

LXXV. Moderationem vero clementiamque cum 
in administratione tum in victoria belli civilis 
admirabilem exhibuit. Denuntiante Pompeio pro 
hostibus se habiturum qui rei publicae defuissent, 
ipse medios et neutrius partis suorum sibi numero 
futuros pronuntiavit. Quibus autem ex commenda- 
tione Pompei ordines dederat, potestatem transeundi 
ad eum omnibus fecit. Motis apud llerdam de- 
ditionis condicionibus, cum, assiduo inter utrasque 
partes usu atque commercio, Afranius et Petreius 
deprehensos intra castra Iulianos subita paenitentia 
interfecissent, admissam in se perfidiam non sustinuit 
imitari. Acie Pharsalica proclamavit, ut civibus 
parceretur, deincepsque nemini non suorum quem 
vellet unum partis adversae servare concessit. Nec 
ulli perisse nisi in proelio reperientur, exceptis dum 
taxat Afranio et Fausto et Lucio Caesare iuvene ; ac 
ne hos quidem voluntate ipsius interemptos putant, 
quorum tamen et priores post impetratam veniam 
rebellaverant! et Caesar libertis servisque eius ferro 
et igni crudelem in modum enectis bestias quoque 
ad munus populi comparatas contrucidaverat. Deni- 
que tempore extremo etiam quibus nondum igno-: 
verat, cunctis in Italiam redire permisit? magi- 
stratusque et imperia capere; sed et statuas Luci 


1 rebellaverant, Stephanus (s); rebellaverunt, 0. 
? permisit, Nç ; permiserat, Q. 


96 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


wife, he replied; “Because I maintain that the 
members of my family should be free from suspicion, 
as well as from guilt.” 

LXXV. He certainly showed admirable self- 
restraint and mercy, both in his conduct of the 
civil war and in the hour of victory. While Pompey 
threatened to treat as enemies those who did not 
take up arms for the government, Caesar gave out 
that those who were neutral and of neither party 
should be numbered with his friends. He freely 
allowed all those whom he had made centurions on 
Pompey's recommendation to go over to his rival. 
When conditions of surrender were under discussion 
at Ilerda, and friendly intercourse between the two 
parties was constant, Afranius and Petreius, with a 
sudden change of purpose, put to death all of 
Caesar's soldiers whom they found in their camp; 
but Caesar could not bring himself to retaliate in 
kind. At the battle of Pharsalus he cried out, 
* Spare your fellow citizens," and afterwards allowed 
each of his men to save any one man he pleased of 
the opposite party. And it will be found that no 
Pompeian lost his life except in battle, save only 
Afranius and Faustus, and the young Lucius Caesar ; 
and it is believed that not even these men were slain 
by his wish, even though the two former had taken 
up arms again after being pardoned, while Caesar 
had not only cruelly put to death the dictator's 
slaves and freedmen with fire and sword, but had 
even butchered the wild beasts which he had pro- 
cured for the entertainment of the people. At last, 
in his later years, he went so far as to allow all those 
whom he had not yet pardoned to return to Italy, 
and to hold magistracies and the command of armies : 


97 
VOL. I. H 


Ct 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


Sullae atque Pompei a plebe disiectas reposuit; ac 
si qua posthac aut cogitarentur gravius adversus se 
aut dicerentur, inhibere maluit quam vindicare. 
Itaque et detectas coniurationes conventusque noc- 
turnos non ultra arguit, quam ut edicto ostenderet 
esse Sibi notas, et acerbe loquentibus satis habuit 
pro contione denuntiare ne perseverarent, Aulique 
Caecinae criminosissimo libro et Pitholai carminibus 
maledicentissimis laceratam existimationem suam 
civili animo tulit. 

LXXVI. Praegravant tamen cetera facta dictaque 
eius, ut et abusus dominatione et iure caesus existi- 
metur. Non enim honores modo nimios recepit : 
continuum consulatum, perpetuam dictaturam prae- 
fecturamque morum, insuper praenomen Imperatoris, 
cognomen Patris patriae, statuam inter reges, 
suggestum in orchestra; sed et ampliora etiam 
humano fastigio decerni sibi passus est : sedem auream 
in curia et pro tribunali, tensam et ferculum circensi 
pompa, templa, aras, simulacra iuxta deos, pulvinar, 
flaminem, lupercos, appellationem mensis e suo 
nomine ; ac nullos non honores ad libidinem cepit et 
dedit. Tertium et quartum consulatum titulo tenus 
gessit contentus dictaturae potestate decretae cum 


* At the theatre. 
> For carrying his statue among those of the gods. 


98 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


and he actually set up the statues of Lucius Sulla 
and Pompey, which had been broken to pieces by 
the populace. After this, if any dangerous plots 
were formed against him, or slanders uttered, he 
preferred to quash rather than to punish them. 
Accordingly, he took no further notice of the con- 
spiracies which were detected, and of meetings by 
night, than to make known by proclamation that he 
was aware of them; and he thought it enough to 
give public warning to those who spoke ill of him, 
not to persist in their conduct, bearing with good 
nature the attacks on his reputation made by the 
scurrilous volume of Aulus Caecina and the abusive 
lampoons of Pitholaus. 

LXXVI. Yet after all, his other actions and words 
so turn the scale, that it is thought that he abused 
his power and was justly slain. For not only did he 
accept excessive honours, such as an uninterrupted 
consulship, the dictatorship for life, and the censor- 
ship of public morals, as well as the forename 
Imperator, the surname of Father of his Country, 
a statue among those of the kings, and a raised 
couch in the orchestra“; but he also allowed honours 
to be bestowed on him which were too great for 
mortal man: a golden throne in the House and 
on the judgment seat; a chariot and litter® in the 
procession at the circus ; temples, altars, and statues 
beside those of the gods; a special priest, an 
additional college of the Luperci, and the calling of 
‘one of the months by his name. In fact, there were 
no honours which he did not receive or confer at 
pleasure. 

He held his third and fourth consulships in name 
only, content with the power of the dictatorship 


99 


H 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


consulatibus simul atque utroque anno binos consules 
substituit sibi in ternos novissimos menses, ita ut 
medio tempore comitia nulla habuerit praeter tribu- 
norum et aedilium plebis praefectosque pro praetori- 
bus constituerit, qui apsente se res urbanas adminis- 
trarent. Pridie autem Kalendas lanuarias repentina 
consulis morte cessantem honorem in paucas horas 
petenti dedit. Eadem licentia spreto patrio more 
magistratus in pluris annos ordinavit,decem praetoriis! 
viris consularia ornamenta tribuit, civitate donatos et 
quosdam e semibarbaris Gallorum recepit in curiam. 
Praeterea monetae publicisque vectigalibus peculiares 
servos praeposuit. Trium legionum, quas Alexandreae 
relinquebat, curam et imperium Rufioni liberti sui 
. filio exoleto suo demandavit. 

LXXVII. Nec minoris inpotentiae voces propalam 
edebat, ut Titus Ampius? scribit: nihil esse rem 
publicam, appellationem modo sine corpore ac specie. 
Sullam nescisse litteras, qui dictaturam deposuerit. 
Debere homines consideratius iam loqui secum ac 
pro legibus habere quae dieat. Eoque arrogantiae 
progressus est, ut haruspice tristia et sine corde exta 
quondam nuntiante, futura diceret laetiora, cum 
vellet; nec pro ostento ducendum, si pecudi cor 
defuisset. 

LXXVIII. Verum praecipuam et exitiabilem sibi 
invidiam hinc maxime movit. Adeuntis se cum pluri- 
mis honorificentissimisque decretis universos patres 


! pretoris, M V (S erased in M); the other mss. have -iis. 
? Ampius, Pulmann, Torrentius; Amprius, © (Amplius, 


QT) 


a Playing on the double meaning of cor, also regarded as 
the seat of intelligence. 


100 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


conferred on him at the. same time as the consulships. 
Moreover, in both years he substituted. two consuls 
for himself for the last three months. in the mean- 
time holding no elections except for tribunes and 
plebeian aediles, and appointing praefects instead of 
the praetors, to manage the affairs of the «itv during 
his absence. When one of the consuls suddenly 
died the day before the Kalends of January, ne gave 
the vacant office for a few hours to a man who asked 
forit. With the same disregard of law and prece- 
dent he named magistrates for several years to come; 
bestowed the emblems of consular rank on ten ca~ 
praetors, and admitted to the House men who had" 
been given citizenship, and in some cases half- 
civilised Gauls. He assigned the charge of the 
mint and of the public revenues to his own slaves, 
and gave the oversight and command of the three 
legions which he had left at Alexandria toa favourite 
of his called Rufio, son of one of his freedmen. 
LXXVII. No less arrogant were his public utter- 
ances, which Titus Ampius records: that the state 
was nothing, a mere name without body or form ; 
that Sulla did not know his A. B. C. when he laid 
down his dictatorship ; that men ought now to be 
more circumspect in addressing him, and to regard 
his word as law. So far did he go in his presump- 
tion, that when a soothsayer once reported direful 
inwards without a heart, he said: “ They will be 
more favourable when I wish it; it should not be 
regarded as a portent, if a beast has no heart." 2 
LXXVIII. But it was the following action in 
particular that roused deadly hatred against him. 
When the Senate approached him in a body with 
many highly honorary decrees, he received them 


101I 


r2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


conscriptos sedeus pro aede Veneris Genetricis 
excepit. Quidam putant retentum a Cornelio Balbo, 
cum conaretur assurgere; alii, ne conatum quidem 
omnino, sed etiam admonentem Gaium Trebatium ut 
assurgere minus familiari vultu respexisse. Idque 
factum eius tanto intolerabilius est visum, quod ipse 
triumpkanti et subsellia tribunicia praetervehenti sibi 
unum e collegio Pontium Aquilam non assurrexisse 
adeo indignatus sit, ut proclamaverit : * Repete ergo 
a. me Aquila rem publicam tribunus!" Et nec 
destiterit per continuos dies quicquam cuiquam nisi 
sub exceptione polliceri: “Si tamen per Pontium 
Aquilam licuerit." 

LXXIX. Adiecit ad tam insignem despecti senatus 
contumeliam multo arrogantius factum. Nam cum 
in sacrificio Latinarum revertente eo inter inmodicas 
ac novas populi acclamationes quidam e turba statuae 
eius coronam lauream candida fascia praeligata! in- 
posuisset et tribuni plebis Epidius Marullus Caesetius- 
que Flavus coronae fasciam detrahi hominemque duci 
in vincula iussissent, dolens seu parum prospere 
motam regni mentionem sive, ut ferebat, ereptam 
sibi gloriam recusandi, tribunos graviter increpitos 
potestate privavit. Neque ex eo infamiam affectati 
etiam regii nominis discutere valuit? quanquam et 
plebei regem se salutanti Caesarem se, non regem 
esse responderit et Lupercalibus pro rostris a consule 


1 praeligata, M ; the other mss. have praeligatam. 
2 valuit, -; voluit, 0. 


^ That is, make me restore the republic.” 
> The white fillet was emblematic of royalty. 
¢ With a pun on Rex as a Roman name ; cf. Horace, Serm. 


‘1. 7, ete. 


102 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


before the temple of Venus Genetrix without rising. 
Some think that when he attempted to get up, he 
was held back by Cornelius Balbus; others, that he 
made no such move at all, but on the contrary 
frowned angrily on Gaius Trebatius when he sug- 
gested that he should rise. And this action of his 
seemed the more intolerable, because when he him- 
self in one of his triumphal processions rode past the 
benches of the tribunes, he was so incensed because 
a member of the college, Pontius Aquila by name, 
did not rise, that he cried: * Come then, Aquila, 
take back the republic from me,“ you mighty 
tribune" ; and for several days he would not make 
a promise to any one without adding, “ That is, if 
Pontius Aquila will allow me.” 

LXXIX. To an insult which so plainly showed his 
contempt for the Senate he added an act of even 
greater insolence; for at the Latin Festival, as 
he was returning to the city, amid the extravagant 
and unprecedented demonstrations of the populace, 
someone in the press placed on his statue a laurel 
wreath with a white fillet tied to it^; and when 
Epidius Marullus and Caesetius Flavus, tribunes of 
the commons, gave orders that the ribbon be re- 
moved from the crown and the^man taken off to 
prison, Caesar sharply rebuked and deposed them, 
either offended that the hint at regal power had 
been received with so little favour, or, as he 
asserted, that he had been robbed of the glory 
of refusing it. But from that time on he could 
not rid himself of the odium of having aspired to 
the title of monarch, although he replied to the 
commons, when they hailed him as king, “I am 
Caesar and no king,’ ° and at the Lupercalia, when 


103 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


Antonio admotum saepius capiti suo diadema rep- 
pulerit atque in Capitolium Iovi Optimo Maximo 
miserit. Quin etiam varia fama percrebruit migratu- 
rum Alexandream vel Ilium, translatis simul opibus 
imperii exhaustaque Italia dilectibus et procuratione 
urbis amicis permissa, proximo autem senatu Lucium 
Cottam quindecimvirum sententiam dicturum, ut, 
quoniam fatalibus libris contineretur, Parthos nisi 
a rege non posse vinci, Caesar rex appellaretur. 
LXXX. Quae causa coniuratis maturandi fuit de- 
stinata negotia, ne assentiri necesse esset. 

Consilia igitur dispersim antea habita et quae 
saepe bini ternive ceperant, in unum omnes con- 
tulerunt, ne populo quidem iam praesenti statu 
laeto, sed clam palamque detrectante dominationem 
atque assertores flagitante. Peregrinis in senatum 
allectis libellus propositus est: ** Bonum factum : ne 
quis senatori novo curiam monstrare velit!" Et 
illa vulgo canebantur : 


* Gallos Caesar in triumphum ducit, idem in 
curiam ; T 
Galli bracas deposuerunt, latum clavum sum- 

pserunt" — 


Quinto Maximo suffecto trimenstrique consule thea- 
trum introeunte, cum lictor animadverti ex .more 


1 detineretur, MV; continetur GT. 


^ The college of fifteen priests (quindecimviri sacris 
Jactundis) in charge of the Sybilline books. 

^ Bonum factum (sit) was a formula prefixed to edicts, here 
used in jest; cf. the similar formulas in proposals to the 
senate, Aug. lviii. 3, Calig. xv. 3. * See note on xlv. 3. 


104 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


the consul Antony several times attempted to place 
a crown upon his head as he spoke from the rostra, 
be put it aside and at last sent it to the Capitol, to 
be offered to Jupiter Optimus Maximus. Nay, more, 
the report had spread in various quarters that he 
intended to move to Ilium or Alexandria, taking with 
him the resources of the state, draining Italy by 
levies, and leaving it and the charge of the city to 
his friends; also that at the next meeting of the 
Senate Lucius Cotta would announce as the decision 
of the Fifteen," that inasmuch as it was written in 
the books of fate that the Parthians could be 
conquered only by a king, Caesar should be given 
that title. LXXX. It was this that led the con- 
spirators to hasten in carrying out their designs, in 
order to avoid giving their assent to this proposal. 
Therefore the plots which had previously been 
formed separately, often by groups of two or three, 
were united in a general conspiracy, since even the 
populace no longer were pleased with present condi- 


tions, but both secretly and openly rebelled at his 


tyranny and cried out for defenders of their liberty. 
On the admission of foreigners to the Senate, a 
placard was posted: * God bless the Common- 
wealth !? let no one consent to point out the House 
to a newly made senator." The following verses too 
were sung everwhere :— 


* Caesar led the Gauls in triumph, led them to the 
senate house ; 
Then the Gauls put off their breeches, and put on 
the laticlave.”¢ 


When Quintus Maximus, whom he had appointed 
consul in his place for three months, was entering 


IOS 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


iussisset, ab universis conclamatum est non esse eum 
consulem. Post remotos Caesetium et Marullum 
tribunos reperta sunt proximis comitiis complura 
suffragia consules eos declarantium. Subscripsere 
quidam Luci Bruti statuae : “Utinam viveres!” item 
ipsius Caesaris : 
* Brutus, quia reges eiecit, consul primus factus 
est ; 
Hic, quia consules eiecit, rex postremo factus 
est." 

Conspiratum est in eum a sexaginta amplius, Gaio 
Cassio Marcoque et Decimo Bruto principibus con- 
spirationis. Qui primum cunctati utrumne in Campo 
per comitia tribus ad suffragia vocantem partibus di- 
visis e ponte deicerent atque exceptum trucidarent, 
an in Sacra Via vel in aditu theatri adorirentur, post- 
quam senatus Idibus Martiis in Pompei curiam 
edictus est, facile tempus et locum praetulerunt. 

LXXXI. Sed Caesari futura caedes evidentibus 
prodigiis denuntiata est. Paucos ante menses, cum 
in colonia Capua deducti lege Iulia coloni ad 
exstruendas villas vetustissima sepulcra disicerent 
idque eo studiosius facerent, quod aliquantum vascu- 
lorum operis antiqui scrutantes reperiebant, tabula 
aenea in monimento, in quo dicebatur Capys conditor: 
Capuae sepultus, inventa est conscripta litteris 


^ The pons suffragiorum, a temporary bridge of planks 
over which the voters passed one by one, to cast their 
ballots; Cic. Ad Att. i. 14 ; Ovid, Fasti, v. 034. 


106 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


the theatre, and his lictor called attention to his 
arrival in the usual manner, a general shout was 
raised : * He's no consul!" At the first election 
after the deposing of Caesetius and Marullus, the 
tribunes, several votes were found for their appoint- 
ment as consuls Some wrote on the base of 
Lucius Brutus’ statue, “Oh, that you were still 
alive” ; and on that of Caesar himself: 


“ First of all was Brutus consul, since he drove the 
kings from Rome ; 
Since this man drove out the consuls, he at last is 
made our king." 


More than sixty joined the conspiracy against him, 
led by Gaius Cassius and Marcus and Decimus Brutus. 
At first they hesitated whether to form two divisions 
at the elections in the Campus Martius, so that while 
some hurled him from the bridge * as he summoned 
the tribes to vote, the rest might wait below and 
slay him ; or to set upon him in the Sacred Way or 
at the entrance to the theatre. When, however, a 
meeting of the Senate was called for the Ides of 
March in the Hall of Pompey, they readily gave 
that time and place the preference. 

LXXXI. Now Caesars approaching murder was 
foretold to him by unmistakable signs. A few 
months before, when the settlers assigned to the 
colony at Capua by the Julian Law were demolishing 
some tombs of great antiquity, to build country 
houses, and plied their work with the greater vigour 
because as they rummaged about they found a 
quantity of vases of ancient workmanship, there was 
discovered in a tomb, which was said to be that of 
Capys, the founder of Capua, a bronze tablet, 


107 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


verbisque Graecis hac sententia: quandoque ossa 
Capyis detecta essent, fore ut illo! prognatus manu 
consanguineorum necaretur magnisque mox Italiae 
cladibus vindicaretur. Cuius rei, ne quis fabulosam 
aut commenticiam putet, auctor est Cornelius Balbus, 
familiarissimus Caesaris. Proximis diebus equorum 
greges, quos in traiciendo Rubiconi flumini con- 
secrarat ac vagos et sine custode dimiserat, comperit 
pertinacissime pabulo abstinere ubertimque flere. 
Et immolantem haruspex Spurinna monuit, caveret 
periculum, quod non ultra Martias Idus profer- 
retur. Pridie autem easdem Idus avem regaliolum 
cum laureo ramulo Pompeianae curiae se inferentem 
volucres varii generis ex proximo nemore persecutae 
ibidem discerpserunt. Ea vero nocte, cui inluxit 
dies caedis, et ipse sibi visus est per quietem inter- 
dum supra nubes volitare, alias cum Iove dextram 
iungere; et Calpurnia uxor imaginata est conlabi 
fastigium domus maritumque in gremio suo confodi ; 
ac subito cubiculi fores sponte patuerunt. 

$.Ob haec simul et ob infirmam valitudinem diu 
cunctatus an se contineret et quae apud senatum 
proposuerat agere differret, tandem Decimo Bruto 
adhortante, ne frequentis ac iam dudum opperientis 
destitueret, quinta fere hora progressus est libel. 
lumque insidiarum indicem ab obvio quodam por- 


1 ilo, Turnebus, Bentley; ilio, MHGY; the other mss. 
have iulo or iulio. 


* Properly said of a temple ; according to Florus, 4. 2. 91; 
one of the honours bestowed on Caesar was fastigium in domo; 
cf. Plutarch, Caesar, Ixiii, 


108 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


inscribed with Greek words and characters to this 
purport : * Whenever the bones of Capys shall be 
moved, it will come to pass that a descendant of his 
shall be slain at the hands of his kindred, and 
presently avenged at heavy cost to Italy." And let 
no one think this tale à myth or a lie, for it is 
vouched for by Cornelius Balbus, an intimate friend 
of Caesar. Shortly before his death, as he was told, 
the herds of horses which he had dedicated to the 
river Rubicon when he crossed it, and had let 
loose without a keeper, stubbornly refused to graze 
and wept copiously. Again, when he was offering 
sacrifice, the soothsayer Spurinna warned him to 
beware of danger, which would come not later than 
the Ides of March; and on the day before the 
Ides of that month a little bird called the king-bird 
flew into the Hall of Pompey with a sprig of laurel, 
pursued by others of various kinds from the grove 
hard by, which tore it to pieces in the hall. In fact 


the very night before his murder he dreamt now that 


he was flying above the clouds, and now that he was 
clasping the hand of Jupiter; and his wife Calpurnia 
thought that the pediment® of their house fell, and 
that her husband was stabbed in her arms; and on a 
sudden the door of the room flew open of its own 
accord. 

Both for these reasons and because of poor health 
he hesitated for a long time whether to stay at home 
and put off what he had planned to do in the senate ; 
but at last, urged by Decimus Brutus ‘not to dis- 
appoint the full meeting which had for some time 
been waiting for him, he went forth almost at the 
end of the fifth hour ; and when a note revealing 
the plot was handed him by someone on the way, he 


109 


March 15 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


rectum libellis ceteris, quos sinistra manu tenebat, 
quasi mox lecturus commiscuit. Dein pluribus 
hostiis caesis, cum litare non posset, introiit curiam 
spreta religione Spurinnamque irridens et ut falsum 
arguens, quod sine ulla sua noxa Idus Martiae 
adessent; quanquam is venisse quidem eas diceret, 
sed non praeterisse. 
 LXXXII. Assidentem conspirati specie officii cir- 
cumsteterunt, ilicoque Cimber Tillius, qui primas 
partes susceperat, quasi aliquid rogaturus propius 
accessit renuentique et gestu in aliud tempus differ- 
enti ab utroque umero togam adprehendit; deinde 
clamantem: * Ista quidem vis est!" alter e Cascis 
aversum! vulnerat paulum infra iugulum. Caesar 
Cascae brachium arreptum graphio traiecit conatus- 
que prosilire alio vulnere tardatus est; utque animad- 
vertit undique se strictis pugionibus peti, toga caput 
obvolvit, simul sinistra manu sinum ad ima crura 
deduxit, quo honestius caderet etiam inferiore 
corporis parte velata. Atque ita tribus et viginti 
plagis confossus est uno modo ad primum ictum 
gemitu sine voce edito, etsi tradiderunt quidam 
Marco Bruto irruenti dixisse: xai od réxvov; Exanimis 
diffugientibus cunctis aliquamdiu iacuit, donec 
lecticae impositum, dependente brachio, tres servoli 
domum rettulerunt. Nec in tot vulneribus, ut 
1 adversum, GVO'NR. 


a Possibly *'from behind,” though it is hard to see how a 
wound paulo infra iugulum could have been dealt from that 
position. Aversum has better mss. authority than adversum, 
is @ priori more probable, and is supported by Plutarch’s 
version ; but it may mean ‘‘ turned away.” 

* À pointed instrument of bone or metal, for writing on 
waxen tablets. 


IIO 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


put it with others which he held in his left hand, 
intending to read them presently. Then, after 
several victims had been slain, and he could not get 
favourable omens, he entered the House in defiance 
of portents, laughing at Spurinna and calling him a 
false prophet, because the Ides of March were come 
without bringing him harm; though Spurinna replied 
that they had of a truth come, but they had not 
gone. 

LXXXII. As he took his seat, the conspirators 
gathered about him as if to pay their respects, and 
straightway Tillius Cimber, who had assumed the 
lead, came nearer as though to ask something; and 
when Caesar with a gesture put him off to another 
time, Cimber caught his toga by both shoulders; 
then as Caesar cried, “Why, this is violence!" one of 
the Cascas stabbed him from one side just below the 
throat.” Caesar caught Casca's arm and ran it through 
with his stylus, but as he tried to leap to his feet, 
he was stopped by another wound. When he saw 
that he was beset on every side by drawn daggers, he 
muffled his head in his robe, and at the same time 
drew down its lap to his feet with his left hand, in 
order to fall more decently, with the lower part of 
his body also covered. And in this wise he was 
stabbed with three and twenty wounds, uttering not 
a word, but merely a groan at the first stroke, though 
some have written that when Marcus Brutus rushed 
at him, he said in Greek, “ You too, my child?” 
All the conspirators made off, and he lay there life- 
less for some time, until finally three common slaves 
put him on a litter and carried him home, with one 
arm hanging down. And of so many wounds none 
turned out to be mortal, in the opinion of the 


III 


44 B.c. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


Antistius medicus existimabat, letale ullum repertum 
est, nisi quod secundo loco in pectore acceperat. 

Fuerat animus coniuratis corpus occisi in Tiberim 
trahere, bona publicare, acta rescindere, sed metu 
Marci Antoni consulis et magistri equitum Lepidi de- 
stiterunt. 


—""LXXXIIILI. Postulante ergo Lucio Pisone socero 


testamentum eius aperitur recitaturque in Antoni 
domo, quod Idibus Septembribus proximis in Lavicano 
suo fecerat demandaveratque virgini Vestali maximae. 
Quintus Tubero tradit heredem ab eo scribi solitum 
ex consulatu ipsius primo usque ad initium civilis 
belli Cn. Pompeium, idque militibus pro contione 
recitatum. Sed novissimo testamento tres instituit 
heredes sororum nepotes, Gaium Octavium ex 
dodrante, et Lucium Pinarium et Quintum Pedium 
ex quadrante reliquo!; in ima cera Gaium Octavium 
etiam in familiam nomenque adoptavit; plerosque 
percussorum in tutoribus fili, si qui sibi nasceretur, 
nominavit, Decimum Brutum etiam in secundis 
heredibus. Populo hortos circa Tiberim publice et 
viritim trecenos sestertios legavit. 


."SLXXXIV. Funere indicto rogus extructus est in 


Martio campo iuxta Iuliae tumulum et pro rostris : 
aurata aedes ad simulacrum templi Veneris Genetricis 
collocata ; intraque lectus eburneus auro ac purpura 
stratus et ad caput tropaeum cum veste, in qua 
fuerat occisus. Praeferentibus munera, quia suffec- 


! reliquo, T (Lipsius); the other mss. have reliquos. 


a To inherit a share of his estate in the event of thé death 
of the heirs in the first degree or their refusal to accept the 
inheritance; it was often a mere compliment. 


II2 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


physician Antistius, except the second one in the 
breast. 

The conspirators had intended after slaying him 
to drag his body to the Tiber, confiscate his property, 
and revoke his decrees ; but they forebore through 
fear of Marcus Antonius the consul, and Lepidus, the 
master of horse. 

LXXXIII. Then at the request of his father-in- 
law, Lucius Piso, the will was unsealed and read in 
Antony's house, which Caesar had made on the pre- 
ceding Ides of September at his place near Lavicum, 
and put in the care of the chief ofthe Vestals. Quintus 
Tubero states that from his first consulship until the 
beginning of the civil war it was his wont to write 
down Gnaeus Pompeius as his heir, and to read this 
to the assembled soldiers. In his last will, however, 
he named three heirs, his sisters' grandsons, Gaius 
Octavius, to three-fourths of his estate, and Lucius 
Pinarius and Quintus Pedius to share the remainder. 
At the end of the will, too, he adopted Gaius Octavius 
into his family and gave him his name. He named 
several of his assassins among the guardians of his 
son, in case one should be born to him, and Decimus 
Brutus even among his heirs in the second degree. 
To the people he left his gardens near the Tiber for 
their common use and three hundred sesterces to 
each man. 

LXXXIV. When the funeral was announced, a 
pyre was erected in the Campus Martius near the 
tomb of Julia, and on the rostra a gilded shrine was 
placed, made after the model of the temple of Venus 
Genetrix; within was a couch of ivory with coverlets 
of purple and gold, and at its head a pillar hung with 
the robe in which he was slain. Since it was clear 


| 113 
VOL. I. ` i I 


Sept. 13, 
45 B.C. — 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


turus dies non videbatur, praeceptum, ut omisso 
ordine, quibus quisque vellet itineribus urbis, portaret 
in Campum. Inter ludos cantata sunt quaedam ad 
miserationem et invidiam caedis eius accommodata, 
ex Pacuvi Armorum iudicio : 


* Men servasse, ut essent qui me perderent " ? 


et ex Electra Atili! ad similem sententiam. Lauda- 
tionis loco consul Antonius per praeconem pronun- 
tiavit senatus consultum, quo omnia simul ei divina 
atque humana decreverat, item ius iurandum, quo se 
cuncti pro salute unius astrinxerant ; quibus perpauca 
a se verba addidit. Lectum pro rostris in Forum 
magistratus et honoribus functi detulerunt. Quem 
cum pars in Capitolini Iovis cella cremare pars in 
curia Pompei destinaret, repente duo quidam gladiis 
succincti ac bina iacula gestantes ardentibus cereis 
succenderunt confestimque circumstantium turba 
virgulta arida et cum subselliis tribunalia, quicquid 
praeterea ad donum aderat, congessit. Deinde 
tibicines et scaenici artifices vestem, quam ex 
triumphorum instrumento ad praesentem usum 
induerant, detractam sibi atque discissam iniecere 
flammae et veteranorum militum legionarii arma sua, 
quibus exculti funus celebrabant; matronae etiam 
pleraeque ornamenta sua, quae gerebant, et liberorum 
bullas atque praetextas. 


1 Atilii, ¢; Acilii, Q. 
a Cf. the apparition at the Rubicon ; chap. xxxii. 
II4 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


that the day would not be long’ enough for those 
who offered gifts, they were directed to bring them 
to the Campus by whatsoever streets of the city they 
wished, regardless of any order of precedence. At 
the funeral games, to rouse pity and indignation at 
his death, these words from the “Contest for the 
Arms" of Pacuvius were sung :— 


“Saved I these men that they might murder me?" 


and words of a like purport from the “ Electra” of 
Atilius. Instead of a eulogy the consul Antonius caused 
a herald to recite the decree of the Senate in which 
it had voted Caesar all divine and human honours at 
once, and likewise the oath with which they had 
all pledged themselves to watch over his personal 
safety ; to which he added a very few words of his 
own. The bier on the rostra was carried to the 
Forum by magistrates and ex-magistrates ; and while 
some were urging that it be burned in the temple 
of Jupiter of the Capitol, and others in the Hall of 
Pompey, on a sudden two beings“ with swords by 
their sides and brandishing a pair of darts set fire to 
it with blazing torches, and at once the throng of 
bystanders heaped upon it dry branches, the judg- 
ment seats with the benches, and whatever else could 
serve as an offering. Then the musicians and actors 
tore off their robes, which they had taken from the 
equipment of his triumphs and put on for the 
occasion, rent them to bits and threw them into the 
flames, and the veterans of the legions the arms with 
which they had adorned themselves for the funeral ; 
many of the women too, offered up the jewels which 
they wore and the amulets and robes of their 
children. 


II5 


5 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


In summo publico luctu exterarum gentium mul- 
titudo circulatim suo quaeque more lamentata est 
praecipueque ludaei, qui etiam noctibus continuis 
bustum frequentarunt. 

LXXXV. Plebs statim a funere ad domum Bruti 
et Cassi cum facibus tetendit atque aegre repulsa 
obvium sibi Helvium Cinnam per errorem nominis, 
quasi Cornelius is esset, quem graviter pridie contio- 
natum de Caesare requirebat, occidit caputque eius 
praefixum hastae circumtulit. Postea solidam colum- 
nam prope viginti pedum lapidis Numidici in Foro 
statuit inscripsitque * PARENTI PATRIAE. Apud eam 
longo tempore sacrificare, vota suscipere, controversias 
quasdam interposito per Caesarem iure iurando dis- 


trahere perseveravit. ,=~ 


LXXXVI. Suspicionem Caesar quibusdam suorum 
reliquit neque voluisse se diutius vivere neque curasse 
quod valitudine minus prospera uteretur, ideoque et 
quae religiones monerent et quae renuntiarent amici 
neglexisse. Suntqui putent, confisum eum novissimo 
illo senatus consulto ac iure iurando etiam custodias 
Hispanorum cum gladiis Tadsectantium? se removisse. 
Alii e diverso opinantur insidias undique imminentis 
subire semel quam cavere semper sollicitum maluisse. 
Quidam dicere etiam? solitum ferunt: non tam sua 


1 inscripsitque, Bentley ; scripsitque, Q. 

2 adsectantium, conjecture of Ihm; inspectantium, X’; 
sectantium, Casaubon ; adinspectantium, MGT. 

3 sollicitum . .. etiam, supplied by Roth, except semper, 
which was added by Ihm. 


* Caesar was beloved by the Jews, not only because he had 
overthrown Pompey, who had violated their Holy of Holies, 
but because of many acts of kindness besides. 


116 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


At the height of the public grief a throng of 
foreigners went about lamenting each after the 
fashion of his country, above all the Jews, who even 
flocked to the place for several successive nights. 

LXXXV. Immediately after the funeral the com- 
mons ran to the houses of Brutus and Cassius with 
firebrands, and after being repelled with difficulty, 
they slew Helvius Cinna when they met him, 
through a mistake in the name, supposing that 
he was Cornelius Cinna, who had the day before 
made a bitter indictment of Caesar and for whom 
they were looking; and they set his head upon a 
spear and paraded it about the streets. Afterwards 
they set up in the Forum a solid column of Numidian 
marble almost twenty feet high, and inscribed upon 
it, “To the Father of his Country.” At the foot 
of this they continued for a long time to sacrifice, 
make vows, and settle some of their disputes by an 
oath in the name of Caesar. 

LXXXVI. Caesar left in the minds of some of his 
friends the suspicion that he did not wish to live 
longer and had taken no precautions, because of his 
failing health; and that therefore he neglected 
the warnings which came to him from portents and 
from the reports of his friends.. Some think that 
it was because he had full trust in that last decree 
of the senators and their oath that he dismissed 
even the armed bodyguard of Spanish soldiers 
that formerly attended him. Others, on the con- 
irary, believe that he elected to expose himself 
once for all to the plots that threatened him on 
every hand, rather than to be always anxious and on 
his guard. Some, too, say that he was wont to 
declare that it was not so much to his own interest 


I17 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I 


quam rei publicae interesse, uti salvus esset; se iam 
pridem potentiae gloriaeque abunde adeptum ; rem 
publicam, si quid sibi eveniret, neque quietam fore 
et aliquanto deteriore condicione civilia bella subi- 
turam. 

LXXXVII. Illud plane inter omnes fere constitit, 
talem ei mortem paene ex sententia obtigisse. Nam 
et quondam, cum apud Xenophontem legisset Cyrum 
ultima valitudine mandasse quaedam de funere suo, 
aspernatus tam lentum mortis genus subitam sibi 
celeremque optaverat; et pridie quam occideretur, 
in sermone nato super cenam apud Marcum Lepidum, 
quisnam esset finis vitae commodissimus, repentinum 
inopinatumque praetulerat. 

LXXXVIII. Periit sexto et quinquagensimo aetatis 
anno atque in deorum numerum relatus est, non ore 
modo decernentium sed et persuasione volgi. Siqui- 
dem ludis, quos primos consecrato! ei heres Augustus 
edebat, stella crinita per septem continuos dies fulsit 
exoriens circa undecimam horam, creditumque est 
animam esse Caesaris in caelum recepti; et hac 
de causa simulacro eius in vertice additur stella. 

Curiam, in qua occisus est, obstrui placuit Idusque 
Martias Parricidium nominari, ac ne umquam eo die 
senatus ageretur. 

LXXXIX. Percussorum autem fere neque triennio 
quisquam amplius supervixit neque sua morte 
defunctus est. Damnati omnes alius alio casu 
periit, pars naufragio, pars proelio; nonnulli semet 
eodem illo pugione, quo Caesarem violaverant, in- 
teremerunt. 


1 primos consecrato, Basle ed. of 1546; primo conse- 
cratos, 2. 


EP Cyropedeia, 8. 7. * About an hour before sunset. 
118 


THE DEIFIED JULIUS 


as to that of his country that he remain alive; he 
bad long since had his fill of power and glory; but 
if aught befell him, the commonwealth would have 
no peace, but would be plunged in civil strife under 
much worse conditions. 

LXXXVII. About one thing almost all are fully 
agreed, that he all but desired such a death as he met; 
for once when he read in Xenophon? how Cyrus in his 
last illness gave directions for his funeral, he expressed 
his horror of such alingering kind of end and his wish 
for onewhich was swift and sudden. And theday before 
his murder, in a conversation which arose at a dinner 
at the house of Marcus Lepidus, as to what manner 
of death was most to be desired, he had given his 
preference to one which was sudden and unexpected. 

LXXXVIII. He died in the fifty-sixth year of 44 5c. 
his age, and was numbered among the gods, not 
only by a formal decree, but also in the conviction 
of the vulgar. For at the first of the games which 
his heir Augustus gave in honour of his apotheosis, 
a comet shone for seven successive nights, rising about 
the eleventh hour,? and was believed to be the soul of 
Caesar, who had been taken to heaven; and this is why 
a star is set upon the crown of his head in his statue. 

It was voted that the hall in which he was slain 
be walled up, that the Ides of March be called the 
Day of Parricide, and that a meeting of the senate 
should never be called on that day. 

LXXXIX. Hardly any of his assassins survived 
him for more than three years, or died a natural 
death. They were all condemned, and they perished 
in various ways—some by shipwreck, some in battle ; 
some took their own lives with the self-same dagger 
with which they had impiously slain Caesar. 


TIQ 


Hosted by Google 


BOOK II 
THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


LIBER I 


DIVUS AUGUSTUS 


* 


I. Gentem Octaviam Velitris praecipuam olim 
fuisse multa declarant. Nam et vicus celeberrima 
parte oppidi iam pridem Octavius vocabatur et 
ostendebatur ara Octavio consecrata, qui bello dux 
finitimo, cum forte Marti rem divinam faceret, 
nuntiata repente hostis incursione semicruda exta 
rapta foco prosecuit atque ita proelium ingressus 
victor redit. Decretum etiam publicum exstabat, quo 
cavebatur, ut in posterum quoque simili modo exta 
Marti redderentur reliquiaeque ad Octavios refer- 
rentur. 

II. Ea gens a Tarquinio Prisco rege inter minores 
gentis adlecta in senatum, mox a Servio! Tullio in 
patricias traducta, procedente tempore ad plebem se 
contulit ac rursus magno? intervalo per Divum 
Iulium in patriciatum redit. Primus ex hac magis- 
tratum populi suffragio cepit C. Rufus. Is quaestorius 

1 Servio] servilio, mss. | | 


2 magno intervallo per, > (also V in a correction by a late 
hand). 


a A term applied to the plebeian families in the senate 
enrolled in addition to the patricians. 


122 


BOOK II 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


I. Tuere are many indications that the Octavian 
family was in days of old a distinguished one at 
Velitrae; for not only was a street in the most 
frequented part of the town long ago called Octavian, 
but an altar was shown there besides, consecrated by 
an Octavius. This man was leader in a war with a 
neighbouring town, and when news of a sudden 
onset of the enemy was brought to him just as he 
chanced to be sacrificing to Mars, he snatched the 
inwards of the victim from the fire and offered them 
up half raw; and thus he went forth to battle, and 
returned victorious. There was, besides, a decree 
of the people on record, providing that for the future 
too the inwards should be offered to Mars in the 
same way, and the rest of the victims be handed 
over to the Octavii. 

II. The family was admitted to the senate by 
king Tarquinius Priscus among the lesser clans ;* was 
later enrolled by Servius Tullius among the patricians; 
in course of time returned to the ranks of the ple- 
beians; and after a long interval was restored to 
patrician rank by the Deified Julius. The first of the 
house to be elected by the people to a magistracy 
was Gaius Rufus, who became quaestor. He begot 


123 


3 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


Cn. et C. procreavit, a quibus duplex Octaviorum 
familia defluxit condicione diversa, siquidem Gnaeus 
et deinceps ab eo reliqui omnes functi sunt honoribus 
summis; at C. eiusque posteri, seu fortuna seu 
voluntate, in equestri ordine constiterunt usque ad 
Augusti patrem. Proavus Augusti secundo Punico 
bello stipendia in Sicilia tribunus militum fecit 
Aemilio Papo imperatore. Avus municipalibus magi- 
steriis contentus abundante patrimonio tranquil- 
lissime senuit. Sed haec alii; ipse Augustus nihil 
amplius quam equestri familia ortum se scribit vetere 
ac locuplete, et in qua primus senator pater suus 
fuerit. M. Antonius libertinum ei proavum expro- 
brat, restionem e pago Thurino, avum argentarium. 
Nec quicquam ultra de paternis Augusti maioribus 
repperi. 

III. C. Octavius pater a principio aetatis et re et 
existimatione magna fuit, ut equidem mirer hunc 
quoque a nonnullis argentarium atque etiam inter 
divisores operasque campestres proditum; amplis 
enim innutritus opibus honores et adeptus est facile 
et egregie administravit. Ex praetura Macedoniam 
sortitus fugitivos, residuam Spartaci et Catilinae 
manum, Thurinum agrum tenentis in itinere delevit, 
negotio sibi in senatu! extra ordinem dato. Pro- 


1 in senatu] a senatu, Mommsen (P. Thomas). 


a In his Memoirs ; see chap. lxxxv. 1. 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


Gnaeus and Gaius, from whom two branches of the 
Octavian family were derived, of very different 
standing ; for Gnaeus and all his scions in turn held 
the highest offices, but Gaius and his progeny, 
whether from chance or choice, remained in the 
equestrian order down to the father of Augustus. 
Augustus’s great grandfather served in Sicily in the 
second Punic war as tribune of the soldiers under the 
command of Aemilius Papus. His grandfather, 
content with the offices of a municipal town and 
possessing an abundant income, lived toa peaceful old 
age. This is the account given by others; Augustus 
himself merely writes that he came of an old and 
wealthy equestrian family, in which his own father 
was the first to become a senator. Marcus Antonius 
taunts him with his great-grandfather, saying that 
he was a freedman and a rope-maker from the 
country about Thurii, while his grandfather was a 
money-changer. This is all that I have been able to 
learn about the paternal ancestors of Augustus. 

III. His father Gaius Octavius was from the 
beginning of his life a man of wealth and repute, 
and I cannot but wonder that some have said that he 
too was a money-changer, and was even employed to 
distribute bribes at the elections and perform other 
services in the Campus; for as a matter of fact, 
being brought up in affluence, he readily attained 
to high positions and filled them with distinction. 
Macedonia fell to his lot at the end of his praetor- 
ship; on his way to the province, executing a 
special commission from the senate, he wiped out a 
band of runaway slaves, refugees from the armies of 
Spartacus and Catiline, who held possession of the 
country about Thurii In governing his province he 


125 


205 B.C. 


4 


ta 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


vinciae praefuit non minore iustitia quam fortitudine ; 
namque Bessis ac Thracibus magno proelio fusis ita 
socios tractavit, ut epistulae M. Ciceronis exstent, 
quibus Quintum fratrem eodem tempore parum 
secunda fama proconsulatum Asiae administrantem 
hortatur et monet, imitetur in promerendis sociis 
vicinum suum Octavium. 

IV. Decedens Macedonia, prius quam profiteri! 
se candidatum consulatus posset, mortem obiit 
repentinam, superstitibus liberis Octavia maiore, 
quam ex Ancharia, et Octavia minore item Augusto, 
quos ex Atia tulerat. Atia M. Atio Balbo et Iulia, 
sorore C. Caesaris, genita est. Balbus, paterna stirpe 
Aricinus, multis in familia senatoriis imaginibus, a 
matre Magnum Pompeium artissimo contingebat 
gradu, functusque honore praeturae inter vigintiviros 
agrum Campanum plebi Iulia lege divisit. "Verum 
idem Antonius, despiciens etiam maternam Augusti 
originem, proavum eius Afri generis fuisse et modo 
unguentariam tabernam modo pistrinum  Ariciae 
exercuisse obicit. Cassius quidem Parmensis quadam 
epistula non tantum ut pistoris, sed etiam ut num- 
mulari nepotem sic taxat Augustum : ** Materna tibi 
farina est ex crudissimo Ariciae pistrino ; hanc finxit 
manibus collybo decoloratis Nerulonensis mensarius." 

1 profiteri, ç ; confiteri, Q. 

a Ad Quint. Frat. 1. 1. 21. 

è Q. Cicero was really propraetor ; see note on Jul. liv. 1. 

* Imagines were waxen masks of ancestors of noble (?.e., 
senatorial) rank, kept in the hall (atrium) of their des- 


cendants. 4 See Jul. xx. 3, note, 
e According to the Thes, Ling. Lat. s.v. collybus, Suetonius 


126 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


showed equal justice and courage ; for besides rout- 
ing the Bessi and the other Thracians in a great 
battle, his treatment of our allies was such, that 
Marcus Cicero, in letters which are still in existence,* 
urges and admonishes his brother Quintus, who at 
the time was serving as proconsular governor^ of 
Asia with no great credit to himself, to imitate his 
neighbour Octavius in winning the favour of our 
allies. 

IV. While returning from Macedonia, before he 
could declare himself a candidate for the consulship, 
he died suddenly, survived by three children, an 
elder Octavia by Ancharia, and by Atia a younger 
Octavia and Augustus. Atia was the daughter of 
Marcus Atius Balba and Julia, sister of Gaius Caesar. 
Balbus, a native of Aricia on his father’s side, and of 
a family displaying many senatorial portraits, was 
closely connected on his mother’s side with Pompey 
the Great. After holding the office of praetor, he 
was one of the commission of twenty 4 appointed by 
the Julian law to distribute lands in Campania to the 
commons. But Antonius again, trying to disparage 
the maternal ancestors of Augustus as well, twits 
him with having a great-grandfather of African 
birth, who kept first a perfumery shop and then a 
bakery at Aricia. Cassius of Parma also taunts 
Augustus with being the grandson both of a baker 
and of a money-changer, saying in one of his letters: 
* Your mother’s meal came from a vulgar bakeshop 
of Aricia; this a money-changer from Nerulum 
kneaded into shape with hands stained with ur 
lucre.” e 


misunderstood the meaning of Cassius, who used collybus in 
the sense of a kind of cake. 


127 


61/58 
B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


V. Natus est Augustus M. Tullio Cicerone 
C. Antonio conss. VIIII. Kal. Octob. paulo ante solis 
exortum, regione Palati ad Capita Bubula, ubi nunc 
sacrarium habet, aliquanto post quam excessit 
constitutum. Nam ut senatus actis continetur, cum 
C. Laetorius, adulescens patricii generis, in depre- 
canda graviore adulterii poena praeter aetatem atque 
natales hoc quoque patribus conscriptis allegaret, esse 
possessorem ac velut aedituum soli, quod primum 
Divus Augustus nascens attigisset, peteretque donari 
quasi proprio suo ac peculiari deo, decretum est ut ea 
pars domus consecraretur. 

VI. Nutrimentorum eius ostenditur adhuc locus in 
avito suburbano iuxta Velitras permodicus et cellae 
penuariae instar, tenetque vicinitatem opinio tam- 
quam et natus ibi sit. Huc introire nisi necessario 
et caste religio est, concepta opinione veteri, quasi 
temere adeuntibus horror quidam et metus obiciatur, 
sed et mox confirmata. Nam cum possessor villae 
novus seu forte seu temptandi causa cubitum se eo 
contulisset, evenit ut post paucissimas noctis horas 
exturbatus inde subita vi et incerta paene semianimis | 
cum strato simul ante fores inveniretur. 

: VII. Infanti cognomen Thurino inditum est, in 
memoriam maiorum originis, vel quod regione Thurina 
128 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


V. Augustus was born just before sunrise on the sept 28, 
ninth day before the Kalends of October in the "95€ 
consulship of Marcus Tullius Cicero and Gaius 
Antonius, at the Ox-Heads in the Palatine quarter, 
where he now has a shrine, built shortly after his 
death. For it is recorded in the proceedings of the 
senate, that when Gaius Laetorius, a young man of 
patrician family, was pleading for a milder punish- 
ment for adultery because of his youth and position, 
he further urged upon the senators that he was the 
possessor and as it were the warden of the spot 
which the deified Augustus first touched at his birth, 
and begged that he be pardoned for the sake of what 
might be called his own special god. Whereupon it 
was decreed that that part of his house should be 
consecrated. 

VI. A small room like a pantry is shown to this 
day as the emperor’s nursery in his grandfather’s 
country-house near Velitrae, and the opinion pre- 
vails in the neighbourhood that he was also born 
there. No one ventures to enter this room except 
of necessity and after purification, since there is a 
conviction of long-standing that those who approach 
it without ceremony are seized with shuddering and 
terror; and what is more, this has recently been 
shown to be true. For when a new owner, either by 
chance or to test the matter, went to bed in that 
room, it came to pass that, after a very few hours of 
the night, he was thrown out by a sudden mysterious 
force, and was found bedclothes and all half-dead 
before the door. 

VII. In his infancy he was given the surname 
. Thurinus in memory of the home of his ancestors, or 
else because it was near Thurii that his father 


129 
VOL. I. K 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


recens eo nato pater Octavius adversus fugitivos rem 
prospere gesserat. Thurinum cognominatum satis 
certa probatione tradiderim nactus puerilem imagun- 
culam eius aeream veterem ferreis et paene iam 
exolescentibus litteris hoc nomine inscriptam, quae 
dono a me principi data inter cubiculi ! Lares colitur. 
Sed et a M. Antonio in epistulis per contumeliam 
saepe Thurinus appellatur et ipse nihil amplius quam 
mirari se rescribit pro obprobrio sibi prius nomen obici. 
Postea Gai Caesaris et deinde Augusti cognomen 
assumpsit, alterum testamento maioris avunculi, 
alterum Munati Planci sententia, cum quibusdam 
censentibus Romulum appellari oportere quasi et 
ipsum conditorem urbis, praevaluisset, ut Augustus 
potius vocaretur, non tantum? novo sed etiam 
ampliore cognomine, quod loca quoque religiosa et 
in quibus augurato quid consecratur augusta dicantur, 
ab auctu vel ab avium gestu gustuve, sicut etiam 
Ennius docet scribens : 


* Augusto augurio postquam incluta condita Roma 
est." 


VIII. Quadrimus patrem amisit. Duodecimum 
annum agens aviam luliam defunctam pro contione 
laudavit. Quadriennio post virili toga sumpta militari- 
bus donis triumpho Caesaris Africano donatus est, 

1 cubiculi Lares, Lipsius; cubiculares, Q. 

2 tantum, c (Erasmus); eum, MQ; cum, GIA; enim, V ; 
autem, X; solum, c (omitted by 5). 

^ i.e, Hadrian. b Annales, 502, Vahlen.? 
I30 ? 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


Octavius, shortly before the birth of his son, had 
gained his victory over the runaway slaves. That 
he was surnamed Thurinus I may assert on very 
trustworthy evidence, since I once owned a little 
bronze bust, representing him as a boy and inscribed 
with that name in letters of iron almost illegible 
from age. This I presented to the emperor,* who 
cherishes it among the Lares of his bed-chamber. 
Furthermore, he is often called Thurinus in Mark 
Antony’s letters by way of insult; to which Augustus 
merely replied that he was surprised that his former 
name was thrown in his face as a reproach. Later 
he took the name of Gaius Caesar and then the 
surname Augustus, the former by the will of his 
great-uncle, the latter on the motion of Munatius 
Plancus. For when some expressed the opinion that 
he ought to be called Romulus as a second founder 
of the city, Plancus carried the proposal that he 
should rather be named Augustus, on the ground 
that this was not merely a new title but a more 
honourable one, inasmuch as sacred places too, and 
those in which anything is consecrated by augural 
rites are called “august” (augusta), from the in- 
crease (auctus) in dignity, or from the movements 
or feeding of the birds (avium gestus gustusve), as 
Ennius? also shows when he writes: 


* After by augury august illustrious Rome had been 
founded." 


VIII. At the age of four he lost his father. In 
his twelfth year he delivered a funeral oration to the 
assembled people in honour of his grandmother 
Julia. Four years later, after assuming the gown of 
manhood, he received military prizes at Caesar's 


131 
K 2 


27 B.C 


59 B.C, 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


quanquam expers belli propter aetatem. Profectum 
mox avunculum in Hispanias adversus Cn. Pompei 
liberog vixdum firmus a gravi valitudine per infestas 
hostibus vias paucissimis comitibus naufragio etiam 
facto subsecutus, magno opere demeruit, approbata 
cito etiam morum indole super itineris industriam. 

Caesare post receptas Hispanias expeditionem in 
Dacos et inde Parthos ! destinante praemissus Apol- 
loniam studiis vacavit. Utque primum occisum eum 
heredemque se comperit, diu cunctatus an proximas 
legiones imploraret, id quidem consilium ut praeceps 
inmaturumque omisit. Ceterum urbe repetita here- 
ditatem adiit, dubitante matre, vitrico vero Marcio 
Philippo consulari multum dissuadente. Atque ab eo 
tempore exercitibus comparatis primum cum M. 
Antonio M. que Lepido, deinde? tantum cum Antonio 
per duodecim fere annos, novissime per P et 
quadraginta solus rem p. tenuit. 

IX. Proposita vitae eius velut summa partes? 
singillatim neque per tempora sed per species 
exsequar, quo distinctius demonstrari cognoscique 
possint. | 

Bella civilia quinque gessit: Mutinense, Philip- 
pense, Perusinum, Siculum, Actiacum; e quibus pri- 
mum ac novissimum adversus M. Antonium, secundum 

1 Parthos, M ; the other mss. have in Parthos. 


? deinde, M ; the other mss. have dein. 
3 parte, Q. Corrected 1n 15th century. 


. 132 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


African triumph, although he had taken no part in 
the war on account of his youth. When his uncle 
presently went to Spain to engage the sons of Pompey, 
although Augustus had hardly yet recovered his 
strength after a severe illness, he followed over roads 
beset by the enemy with only avery few companions, 
and that too after suffering shipwreck, and thereby 
greatly endeared himself to Caesar, who soon formed 
a high opinion of his character over and above the 
energy with which he had made the journey. 

When Caesar, after recovering the Spanish pro- 
vinces, planned an expedition against the Dacians 
and then against the Parthians, Augustus, who 
had been sent on in advance to Apollonia, de- 
voted his leisure to study.[ As soon as he learned 
that his uncle had been slain and that he was his 
heir, he was in doubt for some time whether to 
appeal to the nearest legions, but gave up the 
idea as hasty and premature. ( He did, however, 
return to the city and enter uporf his inheritance, in 
spite of the doubts of his mother and the strong 
opposition of his stepfather, the ex-consul Marcius 
Philippus. ‘Then he levied armies and henceforth 
ruled the State, at first with Marcus Antonius and 
Marcus Lepidus, then with Antony alone for nearly 
twelve years, and finally by himself for forty-four. 

IX. Having given as it were a summary of his life, 
I shall now take up its various phases one by one, 
not in chronological order, but by classes, to make 
the account clearer and more intelligible. 

The civil wars which he waged were five, called by 
the names of Mutina, Philippi, Perusia, Sicily, and 
Actium ; the first and last of these were against 
Marcus Antonius, the second against Brutus and 


I33 


46 B.C. 


44 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


adversus Brutum et Cassium, tertium adversus L. 
Antonium triumviri fratrem, quartum adversus Sex- 
tum Pompeium Cn. filium. 

X. Omnium bellorum initium et causam hinc 
sumpsit: nihil convenientius ducens quam necem 
avunculi vindicare tuerique acta, confestim ut Apol- 
lonia rediit, Brutum Cassiumque et vi necopinantis 
et, quia provisum periculum subterfugerant, legibus 
adgredi reosque caedis absentis deferre statuit. Ludos 
autem victoriae Caesaris non audentibus facere quibus 
optigerat id munus, ipse edidit. Et quo constantius 
cetera quoque exsequeretur, in locum tr. pl. forte 
demortui candidatum se ostendit, quanquam patricius 
necdum senator. Sed adversante conatibus suis M. 
Antonio consule, quem vel praecipuum adiutorem 
speraverat, ac ne publieum quidem et translativum 
ius ulla in re sibi sine pactione gravissimae mercedis 
impertiente, ad optimates se contulit, quibus eum 
invisum sentiebat, maxime quod D. Brutum obsessum 
Mutinae provincia a Caesare data et per senatum 
confirmata expellere armis niteretur.. Flortantibus 
itaque nonnullis percussores ei subornavit, ac fraude 
deprehensa periculum in vicem metuens veteranos 
simul in suum ac rei p. auxilium quanta potuit 
largitione contraxit; iussusque comparato exercitui 


* Since the time of Sulla only senators were eligible for 
the position of tribune, 


134 


"Y. 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


Cassius, the third against Lucius Ántonius, brother of 
the triumvir, and the fourth against Sextus Pompeius, 
son of Gnaeus. 

X. The initial reason for all these wars was this : 
since he considered nothing more incumbent on him . 
than to avenge his uncle’s death and maintain 
the validity of his enactments, immediately on re- 
turning from Apollonia he resolved to surprise 
Brutus and Cassius by taking up arms against 
them; and when they foresaw the danger and fled, 
to resort to law and prosecute them for murder 
in their absence. Furthermore, since those who 
had been appointed to celebrate Caesar's victory 
by games did not dare to do so, he gave them him- 
self. To be able to carry out his other plans with 
more authority, he announced his candidature for the 
position of one of the tribunes of the people, who 


. happened to die; though he was a patrician, and not 


yet a senator.^ But when his designs were opposed 
by Marcus Antonius, who was then consul, and on 
whose help he had especially counted, and Antony 
would not allow him even common and ordinary 
justice without the promise of a heavy bribe, he 
went over to the aristocrats, who he knew detested 
Antony, especially because he was besieging Decimus 
Brutus at Mutina, and trying to drive him by force 
of arms from the province given him by Caesar and 
ratified by the senate.( Accordingly at the advice of 
certain men he hired assassins to kill Antony, and 
when the plot was discovered, fearing retaliation he 
mustered veterans, by the use of all the money he 
could command, both for his own protection and that 
of the State. Put in command of the army which he 
had raised, with the rank of propraetor, and bidden 


135 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


pro praetore praeesse et cum Hirtio ac Pansa, qui 
consulatum susceperant, D. Bruto opem ferre, deman- 
datum bellum tertio mense confecit duobus proeliis. 
, Priore Antonius fugisse eum scribit ac sine paluda- 
mento equoque post biduum demum apparuisse, 
sequenti satis constat non modo ducis, sed etiam 
militis functum munere atque in media dimicatione, 
aquilifero legionis suae graviter saucio, aquilam 
umeris subisse diuque portasse. 

XI. Hoc bello cum Hirtius in acie, Pansa paulo 
post ex vulnere perissent, rumor increbruit ambos 
opera eius occisos, ut Antonio fugato, re p. consulibus 
orbata solus victores exercitus occuparet. Pansae 
quidem adeo suspecta mors fuit, ut Glyco medicus 
custoditus sit, quasi venenum vulneri indidisset. 
Adicit his Aquilius Niger alterum e consulibus 
Hirtium in pugnae tumultu ab ipso interemptum. 


XII. Sed ut cognovit Antonium post fugam a M. | 


Lepido receptum ceterosque duces et exercitus 
consentire pro partibus, causam optimatium sine 
cunctatione deseruit, ad praetextum mutatae volun- 
tatis dicta factaque quorundam calumniatus, quasi alii 
se puerum, alii ornandum tollendumque iactassent, 
ne aut sibi aut veteranis par gratia referretur. Et 


9 Cic. Epist. 11. 20. 1; according to Vell. Paterc. 2. 62, 
Cicero punned on the double meaning of tollo, ‘‘raise” and 
**put out of the way.” 


136 


———— — ——M——— - 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


to join with Hirtius and Pansa, who had become 
consuls, in lending aid to Decimus Brutus, he finished 
the war which had been entrusted to him within 
three months in two battles. ]In the former of these, 
so Antony writes, he took to flight and was not seen 
again until the next day, when he returned without 
his cloak and his horse ; but in that which followed 
all agree that he played the part not only of a- 
leader, but of a soldier as well, and that, in the 
thick of the fight, when the eagle-bearer of his 
legion was sorely wounded, he shouldered the eagle 
and carried it for some time. 

XI. As Hirtius lost his life in battle during this 
war, and Pansa shortly afterwards from a wound, the 
rumour spread that he had caused the death of both, 
in order that after Antony had been put to flight and — 
the state bereft of its consuls, he might gain sole 
control of the victorious armies. The circumstances 
of Pansa's death in particular were so suspicious, that 
the physician Glyco was imprisoned on the charge of 
having applied poison to his wound. Aquilius Niger 
adds to this that Augustus himself slew the other 
consul Hirtius amid the confusion of the battle. 

XII. But when he learned that Antony after his 
flight had found a protector in Marcus Lepidus, and 
that the rest of the leaders and armies were coming 
to terms with them, he abandoned the cause of 
the nobles without hesitation, alleging as a pretext 
for his change of allegiance the words and acts of 
certain of their number, asserting that some had 
called him a boy, while others had openly said that 
he ought to be honoured and got rid of,* to escape 
the necessity of making suitable recompense to him 
or to his veterans. To show more plainly that he 


137 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


quo magis paenitentiam prioris sectae approbaret, 
Nursinos grandi pecunia et quam pendere nequirent 
multatos extorres oppido egit, quod Mutinensi acie 
interemptorum civium tumulo publice exstructo 
ascripserant pro libertate eos occubuisse. 

XIII. Inita cum Antonio et Lepido societate 
Philippense quoque bellum, quamquam  invalidus 
atque aeger, duplici proelio transegit, quorum priore 
castris exutus vix ad Antoni cornu fuga evaserat. 
Nec successum victoriae moderatus est, sed capite 
Bruti Romam misso, ut statuae Caesaris subiceretur, 
in splendidissimum quemque captivum non sine 
verborum contumelia saeviit; ut quidem uni sup- 
pliciter sepulturam precanti respondisse dicitur! iam 
istam volucrum fore potestatem; alios, patrem et 
filium, pro vita rogantis sortiri vel micare iussisse, ut 
alterutri concederetur, ac spectasse utrumque mori- 
entem, cum patre, quia se optulerat, occiso filius 
quoque voluntariam  occubuisset necem. Quare 
ceteri, in his M. Favonius ille Catonis aemulus, cum 
catenati producerentur, imperatore Ántonio honori- 
fice salutato, hune foedissimo convicio coram 
prosciderunt. 

Partitis post victoriam officiis cum Antonius Orien- 
tem ordinandum, ipse veteranos in Italiam 
reducendos et municipalibus agris collocandos 


l dicitur, MV; dicatur G.X't and the editors, except Ihm. 


a A game still common in Italy, in which the contestants 
thrust out their fingers (micare digitis), the one naming 
correctly the number thrust out by his opponent being the 
winner. ` 

» The term applied to a victorious general by his soldiers, 


138 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


regretted his connection with the former party, he 
imposed a heavy fine on the people of Nursia and 
banished them from their city when they were 
unable to pay it, because they had at public expense 
erected a monument to their citizens who were slain 
in the battles at Mutina and inscribed upon it: 
they fell for liberty.” 

XIII. Then, forming a league with Antony and 
Lepidus, he finished the war of Philippi also in two 
battles, although weakened by illness, being driven 
from his camp in the first battle and barely making 
his escape by fleeing to Antony’s division. He did 
not use his victory with moderation, but after sending 
Brutus’s head to Rome, to be cast at the feet of 
Caesar’s statue, he vented his spleen upon the most 
distinguished of his captives, not even sparing them 
insulting language. For instance, to one man who 
begged humbly for burial, he is said to have replied : 
“The birds will soon settle that question.’ IL When two 
others, father and son, begged for their lives, he is 
said to have bidden them cast lots or play mora," to 
decide which should be spared, and then to have 
looked on while both died, since the father was 
executed because he offered to die for his son, and 
the latter thereupon took his own life. Because of 
this the rest, including Marcus Favonius, the well- 
known imitator of Cato, saluted Antony respectfully 
as Imperator, when they were led out in chains, byt 
lashed Augustus to his face with the foulest abuse ( 
(When the duties of administration were divided 
after the victory, Antony undertaking to restore 
order in the East, and Augustus to lead the veterans 
back to Italy and assign them lands in the munici- 
palities, he could neither satisfy the veterans nor the 


139 


42 5.0. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


recepisset, neque veteranorum neque possessorum 
gratiam tenuit, alteris pelli se, alteris non pro spe 
meritorum tractari querentibus. 

XIV. Quo tempore L. Antonium fiducia consulatus, 
quem gerebat, ac fraternae potentiae res novas 
molientem confugere Perusiam coegit et ad dedi- 
tionem fame conpulit, non tamen sine magnis suis 
et ante bellum et in bello discriminibus. Nam cum 
spectaculo ludorum gregarium militem in quattuor- 
decim ordinibus sedentem excitari per apparitorem 
iussisset, rumore ab obtrectatoribus dilato quasi 
eundem mox et discruciatum necasset, minimum 
afuit quin periret concursu et indignatione turbae 
militaris. Saluti fuit, quod qui desiderabatur repente 
comparuit incolumis ac sine iniuria. Circa Peru- 
sinum autem murum sacrificans paene interceptus est 
a manu gladiatorum, quae oppido eruperat. 

XV. Perusia capta in plurimos animadvertit, orare 
veniam vel excusare se conantibus una voce oc- 
currens * moriendum esse." Scribunt quidam tre- 
centos ex dediticiis electos utriusque ordinis ad aram 
Divo Iulio exstructam Idibus Martiis hostiarum more 
mactatos. Exstiterunt qui traderent conpecto ! eum 
ad arma isse, ut occulti adversarii et quos metus 
magis quam voluntas contineret, facultate L. Antoni 
ducis praebita, detegerentur devictisque iis et con- 
fiscatis promissa veteranis praemia solverentur. 


1 conpecto, Lipsius ; conspecto 0 (conspectu, Q). 


a See note on Jul. xxxix. 9. 


I40 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


landowners, since the latter complained that they 
were driven from their homes, and the former that 
they were not being treated as their services had led 
them to hope. 

XIV. When Lucius Antonius at this juncture 
attempted a revolution, relying on his position as 
consul and his brothers power, he forced him to 
take refuge in Perusia, and starved him into sur- 
render, not, however, without great personal danger 
both before and during the war. For at an exhi- 
‘bition of games, having given orders that a common 
soldier who was sitting in the fourteen rows * be put 
out by an attendant, the report was spread by his 
detractors that he had had the man killed later and 
tortured as well; whereupon he all but lost his life 
in a furious mob of soldiers, owing his escape to the 
sudden appearance of the missing man safe and 
sound. Again, when he was sacrificing near the 
walls of Perusia, he was well nigh cut off by a band 
of gladiators, who had made a sally from the town. 

XV. After the capture of Perusia he took ven- 
geance on many, meeting all attempts to beg for 
pardon or to make excuses with the one reply, * You 
must die." Some write that three hundred men of 
both orders were selected from the prisoners of war 
and sacrificed on the Ides of March like so many 
victims at the altar raised to the Deified Julius. 
Some have written that he took up arms of a set 
purpose, to unmask his secret opponents and those 
whom fear rather than good-will kept faithful to 
him, by giving them the chance to follow the lead of 
Lucius Antonius; and then by vanquishing them and 
confiscating their estates to pay the ewer promised 
to his veterans, 


141 


41 B.c. 


40 B,C, 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


XVI. Siculum bellum incohavit in primis, sed diu 
traxit intermissum saepius, modo reparandarum 
classium causa, quas tempestatibus duplici naufragio 
et quidem per aestatem amiserat, modo pace facta, 
flagitante populo ob interclusos commeatus famem- 
que ingravescentem; donec navibus ex integro 
fabricatis ac viginti servorum milibus manumissis et 
ad remum datis portum lulium apud. Baias inmisso in 
Lucrinum et Avernum lacum ‘mari effecit. In quo 
cum hieme tota copias exercuisset, Pompeium inter 
Mylas et Naulochum superavit, sub horam pugnae 
tam arto repente somno devinctus, ut ad dandum 
signum ab amicis excitaretur. Unde praebitam 
Antonio materiam putem exprobrandi: ne rectis 
quidem oculis eum aspicere potuisse instructam 
aciem, verum supinum, caelum intuentem, stupidum 
cubuisse nec prius surrexisse ac militibus in con- 
spectum venisse quam a M. Agrippa fugatae sint 
hostium naves. Alii dictum factumque eius crimi- 
nantur, quasi classibus tempestate perditis exclama- 
verit etiam invito Neptuno victoriam se adeptu- 
rum, ac die circensium proximo sollemni pompae 
simulacrum dei detraxerit. Nec temere plura ac 
maiora pericula ullo alio bello adiit. Traiecto in 
Siciliam exercitu, cum partem reliquam copiarum 
continenti repeteret, oppressus ex inproviso a Demo- 
chare et Apollophane praefectis Pompei uno demum 
navigio aegerrime effugit. Iterum cum praeter 
Locros Regium pedibus iret et prospectis biremibus 


142 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


XVI. The Sicilian war was among the first that he 43,35 
began, but it was long drawn out by many interrup- ** 
tions, now for the purpose of rebuilding his fleets, 
which he twice lost by shipwreck and storms, and 
that, too, in the summer ; and again by making peace 
at the demand of the people, when supplies were cut 
off and there was a severe famine. Finally, after 
new ships were built and twenty thousand slaves 
set free and trained as oarsmen, he made the Julian 
harbour at Baiae by letting the sea into the Lucrine 
lake and lake Avernus. After drilling his forces 
there all winter, he defeated Pompey between Mylae 
and Naulochus, though just before the battle he was 
suddenly overcome by so deep a sleep that his 
friends had to awaken him to give the signal. And 
it was this, 1 think, that gave Antony opportunity for 
the taunt: “ He could not even look with steady 
eyes at the fleet when it was ready for battle, but 
lay in a stupor on his back, looking up at the sky, 
and did not rise or appear before the soldiers until 
the enemy’s ships had been put to flight by Marcus 
Agrippa." Some censured another act and saying of 
his, declaring that when his fleets were lost in the 
storm, he cried out, “I will have the victory spite of 
Neptune,” and that on the next day that there were 
games in the Circus, he removed the statue of that 
god from the sacred procession. And it is safe to 
say that in none of his wars did he encounter more 
dangers or greater ones. For when he had trans- 
ported an army to Sicily and was on his way back to 
the rest of his forces on the mainland, he was sur- 
prised by Pompey's admirals Demochares and Apollo- 
phanes and barely escaped with but a single ship, 
Again, as he was going on foot to Regium by way 


143 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


Pompeianis terram legentibus suas ratus -descen- 
disset ad litus, paene exceptus est. Tunc etiam per 
devios tramites refugientem servus Aemili Pauli 
comitis eius, dolens proscriptum olim ab eo patrem 
Paulum et quasi occasione ultionis oblata, interficere 
conatus est. 

Post Pompei fugam collegarum alterum M. Lepi- 
dum, quem ex Africa in auxilium evocarat, super- 
bientem viginti legionum fiducia summasque sibi 
partes terrore et minis vindicantem spoliavit exercitu - 
supplicemque concessa vita Cerceios in perpetuum 
relegavit. 

XVII. M. Antoni societatem semper dubiam et 
incertam reconciliationibusque variis male focilatam 
abrupit tandem, et quo magis degenerasse eum a 
civili more approbaret, testamentum, quod is Romae 
etiam de Cleopatra liberis inter heredes nuncupatis 
reliquerat, aperiundum recitandumque pro contione 
curavit. Remisit tamen hosti iudicato! necessitudines 
amicosque omnes atque inter alios C. Sosium et 


T. Domitium tunc adhuc consules. Bononiensibus 


quoque publice, quod in Antoniorum clientela anti- 
quitus erant, gratiam fecit coniurandi cum tota Italia 


pro partibus suis. Nec multo post navali proelio 
apud Actium vicit in serum dimicatione protracta, ut 


3 . 


in nave victor pernoctaverit. Ab Actio cum Samum 


! iudicato] indicato, 0. 
? So the manuscripts ; the consul was + Gnaeus Domitius 
Ahenobarbus. 


144 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS. 


of Locri, he saw some of Pompey's biremes coasting 
along the shore, and taking them for his own ships 
and going down to the beach, narrowly escaped 
capture. At that same time, too, as he was making 
his escape by narrow bypaths, a slave of his com- 
panion Aemilius Paulus, nursing a grudge because 
Augustus had proscribed his master's father some 
time before, and thinking that he had an opportunity 
for revenge, attempted to slay him. 

After Pompey's flight, Augustus' other colleague, 
Marcus Lepidus, whom he had summoned from 
Africa to help him, was puffed up by confidence in 
his twenty legions and claimed the first place with 
terrible threats; but Augustus stripped him of his 
army ; and though he granted him his life when he 
sued for it, he banished him for all time to Circei. 

XVII. At last he broke off his alliance with 
Marcus Antonius, which was always doubtful and 
uncertain, and with difficulty kept alive by various 
reconciliations ; and the better to show that his rival 
had fallen away from conduct becoming a citizen, 
he had the will which Antony had left in Rome, 
naming his children by Cleopatra among his heirs, 
opened and read before the people. But when 
Antony was declared a publie enemy, he sent back 
to bim all his kinsfolk and friends, among others 
Gaius Sosius and Titus Domitius, who were still con- 
suls at the time. He also excused the community of 
Bononia from joining in the rally of all Italy to his 
standards, since they had been from ancient days de- 
pendents of the Antonii. .Not long afterwards he won 
the sea-fight at Actium, where the contest continued 
to so late an hour that the victor passed the night on 
board. Having gone into winter quarters at Samos 


145 
VOL. 1. I 


81 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


in hiberna se recepisset, turbatus nuntiis de seditione 
praemia et missionem poscentium, quos ex omni 
numero confecta victoria Brundisium praemiserat, 
repetita Italia! tempestate in traiectu bis conflictatus, 
primo inter promunturia Peloponnesi atque Aetoliae, 
rursus circa montes Ceraunios utrubique parte 
liburnicarum demersa, simul eius, in qua vehebatur, 
fusis armamentis et gubernaculo diffracto; nec 
amplius quam septem et viginti dies, donec ad 
desideria militum omnia? ordinarentur, Brundisii com- 
moratus, Asiae Syriaeque circuitu Aegyptum petit 
obsessaque Álexandrea, quo Antonius cum Cleopatra 
confugerat, brevi potitus est. Et Antonium quidem 
seras condiciones pacis temptantem ad mortem 
adegit viditque mortuum. Cleopatrae, quam ser- 
vatam triumpho magno opere cupiebat, etiam Psyllos 
admovit, qui venenum ac virus exsugerent, quod 
perisse morsu aspidis putabatur. Ambobus com- 
munem sepulturae honorem tribuit ac tumulum ab 
ipsis incohatum perfici iussit. Antonium iuvenem, 
maiorem de duobus Fulvia genitis, simulacro Divi 
Iuli, ad quod post multas et irritas preces confu- 
gerat, abreptum interemit. Item Caesarionem, quem 
ex Caesare patre Cleopatra concepisse praedicabat, 
retractum e fuga supplicio adfecit. Reliquos Antoni 
reginaeque communes liberos non secus ac necessi- 
tudine iunctos sibi et conservavit et mox pro 
condicione cuiusque sustinuit ac fovit. 


! repetita Italia c (Scheffer); repetit alia, mas. 
2 omnia, an addition to the text suggested by Ihm, 


146 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


[atte Actium, he was disturbed by the news of a mutiny 
of the troops that he had selected from every division 
of his army and sent on to Brundisium after the 
victory, who demanded their rewards and discharge ; 
and on his way back to Italy he twice encountered 
storms at sea, first between the headlands of the 
Peloponnesus and Aetolia, and again off the Ceraunian 
mountains. In both places a part of his galleys were 
sunk, while the rigging of the. ship in which he was 
sailing was carried away and its rudder broken. He 
delayed at Brundisium only twenty-seven days— 
just long enough to satisfy all the demands of the 
soldiers—and then went to Egypt by a roundabout 
way through Asia and Syria, laid siege to Alexandria, 
where Antony had. taken refuge with Cleopatra, and 
soon took the eg Although Antony tried to make 
terms at the eleventh hour, Augustus forced him to 
commit suicide, and viewed his corpse. He greatly 

. desired to save Cleopatra alive for his triumph, and 
even had Psylli brought to her, to suck the poison 
from her wound, since it was thought that she died 
from the bite of an asp. He allowed them both the 
honour of burial, and in the same tomb, giving orders 
that the mausoleum which they had begun should 
be finished. The young Antony, the elder of Fulvia's 
two sons, he dragged from the image of the Deified 
Julius, to which he had fled after many vain en- 
treaties, and slew him. Caesarion, too, whom 
Cleopatra fathered on Caesar, he overtook in his 
flight, brought back, and put to death. But he 
spared the rest of the offspring of Antony and 
Cleopatra, and afterwards maintained and reared 
them according to their several positions, as carefully 
as if they were his own kin. 


147 
L 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


XVIII Per idem tempus conditorium et corpus 
Magni Alexandri, cum prolatum e penetrali subie- 
cisset oculis, corona aurea imposita ac floribus 
aspersis veneratus est consultusque, num et Ptole- 
maeum inspicere vellet, regem se voluisse ait 
' videre, non mortuos. Aegyptum in provinciae 
formam redactam ut feraciorem  habilioremque 
annonae urbicae redderet, fossas omnis, in quas 
Nilus exaestuat, oblimatas longa vetustate militari 
opere detersit. Quoque Actiacae victoriae memoria 
celebratior et in posterum esset, urbem Nicopolim 
apud Actium condidit ludosque illic quinquennales 
constituit et ampliato vetere Apollinis templo locum 
castrorum, quibus fuerat usus, exornatum navalibus 
spoliis Neptuno ac Marti consecravit. 

XIX. Tumultus posthac et rerum novarum initia 
coniurationesque complures, prius quam invalescerent 
indicio detectas, compressit alias alio tempore; 
Lepidi iuvenis, deinde Varronis Murenae et Fanni 
Caepionis, mox M. Egnati, exin Plauti Rufi Lucique 
Pauli progeneri sui, ac praeter has L. Audasi falsarum 
tabularum rei ac neque aetate neque corpore integri, 
item Asini Epicadi ex gente Parthina ibridae, ad 
extremum Telephi, mulieris servi nomenculatoris. 
Nam ne ultimae quidem sortis hominum con- 
spiratione et periculo caruit. Audasius atque 
Epicadus Iuliam filiam et Agrippam nepotem ex 

a The sacred precinct at Alexandria (75 kaħoúpevov Zijpa, ò 
wepíBoAos jj», Strabo, 17. 1. 8) containing the tombs of 
Alexander and of the kings. 


b The nomenclator (nomenculator) was a slave whose duty it 
was to remind his master, or mistress, of the names of persons, 


148. 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


XVIII. About this time he had the sarcophagus 
and body of Alexander the Great brought forth 
from its shrine, and after gazing on it, showed 
his respect by placing upon it a golden crown and 
strewing it with flowers; and being then asked 
whether he wished to see the tomb of the Ptolemies 
as well, he replied, “ My wish was to see a king, 
not corpses.” He reduced Egypt to the form of 
a province, and then to make it more fruitful and 
better adapted to supply the city with grain, he 
set his soldiers at work cleaning out all the canals 
into which the Nile overflows, which in the course 
of many years had become choked with mud. To 
extend the fame of his victory at Actium and 
perpetuate its memory, he founded a city called 
Nicopolis near Áctium, and provided for the cele- 
bration of games there every five years; enlarged 
the ancient temple of Apollo ; and after adorning the 
site of the camp which he had occupied with naval 
trophies, consecrated it to Neptune and Mars. 

XIX. After this he nipped in the bud at various 
times several outbreaks, attempts at revolution, and 
conspiracies, which were betrayed before they be- 
came formidable. The ringleaders were, first the 
young Lepidus, then Varro Murena and Fannius 
Caepio, later Marcus Egnatius, next Plautius Rufus 
and Lucius Paulus, husband of the emperor's grand- 
daughter, and besides these Lucius Audasius, who had |. 
been charged with forgery, and was moreover old and 
feeble; also Asinius Epicadius, a half-breed of Parthian 
descent, and finally Telephus, slave and page? of a 
woman; for even men ofthe lowest condition conspired 
against him and imperilled his safety. Audasius and 
Epicadius had planned to take his daughter Julia 


149 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


insulis, quibus continebantur, rapere ad exercitus, 
Telephus quasi debita sibi fato dominatione et ipsum 
et senatum adgredi destinarant. Quin etiam quon- 
dam iuxta cubiculum eius lixa quidam ex Illyrico 
exercitu, ianitoribus deceptis, noctu deprehensus est 
cultro venatorio cinctus, imposne mentis an simulata 
dementia incertum; nihi] enim exprimi quaestione 
potuit. r 

XX. Externa bella duo omnino per se gessit, 
Delmaticum adulescens adhuc et Antonio devicto 
Cantabricum. Delmatico etiam vulnera excepit, una 
acie dextrum genu lapide ictus, altera et crus et 
utrumque brachium ruina pontis  consauciatus. 
Reliqua per legatos administravit, ut tamen quibus- 
dam Pannonicis atque Germanicis aut interveniret 
aut non longe abesset, Ravennam vel Mediolanum 
vel Aquileiam usque ab urbe progrediens. 

XXI. Domuit autem partim ductu partim auspiciis 
suis Cantabriam, Aquitaniam, Pannoniam, Delmatiam 
cum Illyrico omni, item Raetiam et Vindelicos ac 
Salassos, gentes Inalpinas. Coercuit et Dacorum 
incursiones tribus eorum ducibus cum magna copia 
caesis, Germanosque ultra Albim fluvium summovit, 
ex quibus Suebos:et Sigambros dedentis se traduxit 
in Galliam atque in proximis Rheno agris conlocavit. 
Alias item nationes male quietas ad obsequium 


* Applied to expeditions commanded by others, since as 
eommander-in-chief he took the auspices before the army set 
out. 


150 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


and his grandson Agrippa by force to the armies from 
the islands where they were confined, Telephus to 
set upon both Augustus and the senate, under the 
delusion that he himself was destined for empire. 
Even a soldier's servant from the army in Illyricum, 
who had escaped the vigilance of the door-keepers, 
was caught at night near the emperor's bed-room, 
armed with a hunting knife ; but whether the fellow 
was crazy or feigned madness is a question, since 
othing could be wrung from him by torture. 
. XX. He carried on but two foreign wars in 
rson : in Dalmatia, when he was but a youth, and 
with the Cantabrians after the overthrow of Antony. 
He was wounded, too, in the former campaign, being 
struck on the right knee with a stone in one battle, 
and in another having a leg and both arms severely 
injured by the collapse of a bridge. His other wars 
he carried on through his generals, although he was 
either present at some of those in Pannonia and 
Germany, or was not far from the front, since he 
went from the city as far as Ravenna, Mediolanum, 
or Aquileia. 

XXI. In'part as leader, and in part with armies 
serving under his auspices," he subdued Cantabria, 
Aquitania, Pannonia, Dalmatia, and all Illyricum, as 
well as Raetia and the Vindelici and Salassi, which 
are Alpine tribes. He also put a stop to the inroads 
of the Dacians, slaying great numbers of them, 
together with three of their leaders, and forced the 
Germans back to the farther side of the river Albis, 
with the exception of the Suebi and Sigambri, who 
submitted to him and were taken into Gaul and settled 
in lands near the Rhine. He reduced to submission 
other peoples, too, that were in a state of unrest. 


151 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


2 redegit. Nec ulli genti sine iustis et necessariis 
causis bellum intulit, tantumque afuit a cupiditate 
quoquo modo imperium vel bellicam gloriam augendi, 
ut quorundam barbarorum principes in aede Martis 
.Ultoris iurare coegerit mansuros se in fide ac pace 
quam peterent, a quibusdam vero novum genus 
obsidum, feminas, exigere temptaverit, quod negle- 
gere marum pignera sentiebat ; et tamen potestatem 
semper omnibus fecit, quotiens vellent obsides 
recipiendi. Neque aut crebrius aut perfidiosius$ 
rebellantis graviore umquam ultus est poena, quam 
ut captivos sub lege venundaret, ne in vicina regione 
servirent neve intra tricensimum annum liberarentur. 

3 Qua virtutis moderationisque fama Indos etiam ac 
Scythas auditu: modo cognitos pellexit ad amicitiam 
suam populique Rom. ultro per legatos petendam. 
Parthi quoque et Ármeniam vindicanti facile cesse- 
runt et signa militaria, quae M. Crasso et M. 
Antonio ademerant, reposcenti reddiderunt obsides- 
que insuper optulerunt, denique pluribus quondam 
de regno concertantibus, non nisi ab ipso electum 
probaverunt. 

XXII. Ianum Quirinum semel atque iterum a! 
condita urbe ante memoriam suam clausum in multo 
breviore temporis spatio terra marique pace parta ter 
clusit. Bis ovans ingressus est urbem, post Philippense 


3 a, Y; omitted by the other mas. 


a Crassus lost his standards at the battle of Carrhae in 53, 
and Antony through the defeat of his lieutenants in 40 and 
36 B.C. 

è In the reign of Numa, and in 235 B.C., after the first 
Punic war, 


152 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


But he never made war on any nation without 
just and due cause, and he was so far from desiring 
to increase his dominion or his military glory at any 
cost, that he forced the chiefs of certain barbarians 
to take oath in the temple of Mars the Avenger that 
they would faithfully keep the peace for which they 
asked; in some cases, indeed, he tried to exact a new 
kind of hostages, namely women, realizing that the 
barbarians disregarded pledges secured by males; but 
all were giventhe privilege of reclaiming their hostages 


whenever they wished. On those who rebelled . 


often or under circumstances of especial treachery 
he never inflicted any severer punishment than that 
of selling the prisoners, with the condition that they 
should not pass their term of slavery in a country 
near their own, nor be set free within thirty years. 
The reputation for prowess and moderation which he 
thus gained led even the Indians and the Scythians, 
nations known to us only by hearsay, to send envoys 
of their own free will and sue for his friendship and 
that of the Roman people. The Parthians, too, 
readily yielded to him, when he laid claim to 
Armenia, and at his demand surrendered the stand- 
ards which they had taken from Marcus Crassus and 
Marcus Antonius^; they offered him ‘hostages be- 
sides, and once when there were several claimants of 
their throne, they would accept only the one whom 
he selected. 

XXII. The temple of Janus Quirinus, which had 
been closed but, twice before his time since the 
founding of the city,? he closed three times in a 
far shorter period, having won peace on land and 
sea. He twice entered the city in an ovation, after 
the war of Philippi, and again after that in Sicily, 


153 


20 B.C, 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


et rursus post Siculum bellum. Curulis triumphos 
tris egit, Delmaticum, Actiacum, Alexandrinum con- 
tinuo triduo omnes. 

XXIII. Graves ignominias cladesque duas omnino 
nec alibi quam in Germania accepit, Lollianam et 
Varianam, sed Lollianam maioris infamiae quam 
detrimenti, Varianam paene exitiabilem tribus legioni- 
bus cum duce legatisque et auxiliis omnibus caesis. 
Hac nuntiata excubias per urbem indixit, ne quis 
tumultus exsisteret, et praesidibus provinciarum pro- 
 pagavit imperium, ut a peritis et assuetis socii con- 
tinerentur. Vovit et magnos ludos Iovi Optimo 
Maximo, si res p. in meliorem statum vertisset: quod 
factum  Cimbrico Marsicoque bello erat. Adeo 
denique consternatum ferunt, ut per continuos menses 
barba capilloque summisso caput interdum foribus 
illideret vociferans : * Quintili Vare, legiones redde! ” 
diemque cladis quotannis maestum habuerit ac 
lugubrem. 

XXIV. In re militari et commutavit multa et 
instituit atque etiam ad antiquum morem nonnulla 
revocavit. Disciplinam severissime rexit. Ne lega- 
torum quidem cuiquam, nisi gravate hibernisque 
demum mensibus, permisit uxorem  intervisere. 
Equitem R., quod duobus filiis adulescentibus causa 
detrectandi sacramenti pollices amputasset, ipsum 
bonaque subiecit hastae ; quem tamen, quod inminere 


« The ovation was a lesser triumph, in which the general 
entered the city on foot, instead of in a chariot drawn by 
four horses (whence the term triumphus curulis), and with 
other difference described by Gellius, 5. 6. - 


154 


THE DEIF IED AUGUSTUS 


and he celebrated three — triumphs * for his 
victories in Dalmatia, at Actium, and at Alexandria, 
all on three successive days. 

XXIII. He suffered but two severe and igno- 
minious defeats, those of Lollius and Varus, both of 
which were in Germany. Of these the former was 
more humiliating than serious, but the latter was 
almost fatal, since three legions were cut to pieces 
with their general, his lieutenants, and all the 
auxiliaries. When the news of this came, he ordered 
that watch be kept by night throughout the city, to 
prevent any outbreak, and he prolonged the terms 
of the governors of the provinces, that the allies 
might be held to their allegiance by experienced 
men with whom they were acquainted. He also 
vowed great games to Jupiter Optimus Maximus, in 
case the condition of the commonwealth should im- 
prove, a thing which had been done in the Cimbric 
and Marsic wars. In fact, they say that he was so 
greatly affected that for several months in succession 
he cut neither his beard nor his hair, and sometimes 
he would dash his head against a door, crying: 
*Quintilius Varus, give me back my legions!” 
And he observed the day of the disaster each year 
ag one of sorrow and mourning. 

XXIV. He made many changes and innovations 
in the army, besides reviving some usages of former 
times. He exacted the strictest discipline. It was 
with great reluctance that he allowed even his 
generals to visit their wives, and then only in the 
winter season. He sold a Roman knight and his 
property at public auction, because he had cut off the 
thumbs of two young sons, to make them unfit for 
military service; but when he saw that some tax- 


155 


15 B.C.- 
9 A.D, 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


emptioni publicanos videbat, liberto suo addixit, ut 
relegatum in agros pro libero esse sineret. Decimam 
legionem contumacius parentem cum ignominia totam 
dimisit, item alias immodeste missionem postulantes 
citra commoda emeritorum praemiorum exauctoravit. 
Cohortes, si quae cessissent loco, decimatas hordeo 
pavit. Centuriones statione deserta, itidem ut 
manipulares, capitali animadversione  puniit, pro 
cetero delictorum genere variis ignominiis adfecit, 
ut stare per totum diem iuberet ante praetorium, 
interdum tunicatos discinctosque, nonnumquam cum 
decempedis vel etiam caespitem portantes. 

XXV. Neque post bella civilia aut in contione aut 
per edictum ullos militum commilitones appellabat, 
sed milites, ac ne a filiis quidem aut privignis suis 
imperio praeditis aliter appellari passus est, ambitiosius 
id existimans, quam aut ratio militaris aut temporum 
quies aut sua domusque suae maiestas postularet. 
Libertino milite, praeterquam Romae incendiorum 
causa et si tumultus in graviore annona metueretur, 
bis! usus est: semel ad praesidium coloniarum 
Illyricum contingentium, iterum ad tutelam ripae 
Rheni fluminis; eosque, servos adhuc viris feminjsque 
pecuniosioribus indictos ac sine mora manumissos, sub 


1 bis] urbis, MGVL.JP'T. 


^ That is, executed every tenth man, selected by lot. 

> Instead of the usual rations of wheat, 

* Carrying the pole to measure off the camp, or clods for 
building the rampart, was the work of common soldiers; 
hence degrading for officers. 3 Cf. Jul. xxvii. 2 


156 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


gatherers were intent upon buying him, he knocked 
him down to a freeman of his own, with the under- 
standing that he should be banished to the country 
districts, but allowed to live in freedom. He dis- 
missed the entire tenth legion in disgrace, because 
they were insubordinate, and others, too, that 
demanded their discharge in an insolent fashion, he 
disbanded without the rewards which would have 
been due for faithful service. If any cohorts gave 
way in battle, he decimated them,* and fed the 
rest on barley. When centurions left their posts, 
he punished them with death, just as he did the 
rank and file; for faults of other kinds he imposed 
various ignominious penalties, such as ordering them 
to stand all day long before the general’s tent, some- 
times in their tunics without their sword-belts, 
or again holding ten-foot poles or even a clod of 
earth.° 

XXV. After the civil wars he never called any of 
the troops “ comrades,” either in the assembly or in 
an edict, but always “ soldiers” ?; and he would not 
allow them to be addressed otherwise, even by those 
of his sons or stepsons who held military commands, 
thinking the former term too flattering for the 
requirements of discipline, the peaceful state of the 
times, and his own dignity and that of his house- 
hold. Except as a fire-brigade at Rome, and when 
there was fear of riots in times of scarcity, he em- 
ployed freedmen as soldiers only twice: once as a 
guard for the colonies in the vicinity of Illyricum, 
and again to defend the bank of the river Rhine; 
even these he levied on men and women of means 
while they were still slaves, and at once gave them 
freedom ; and he kept them under their original 


157 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


priore vexillo habuit, neque aut commixtos cum in- 
genuis aut eodem modo armatos. 

Dona militaria aliquanto facilius phaleras et tor- 
ques, quicquid auro argentoque constaret, quam val- 
lares ac murales coronas, quae honore praecellerent, 
dabat; has quam parcissime et sine ambitione ac 
saepe etiam caligatis tribuit. M. Agrippam in Sicilia 
post navalem victoriam caeruleo vexillo donavit. Solos 
triumphales, quamquam et socios expeditionum et 
participes victoriarum suarum, numquam donis imper- 
tiendos putavit, quod ipsi quoque ius habuissent 
tribuendi ea quibus vellent. Nihil autem minus per- 
fecto ! duci quam festinationem temeritatemque cons 
venire arbitrabatur. Crebro itaque illa iactabat: 
ae)0e Bpadéws’ 

do$aAÀ1s ydp gor’ ápcívov 1) Ópaa is a rporyAárqs. 

et: “sat celeriter fieri quidquid fiat satis bene." 
Proelium quidem. aut bellum suscipiendum omnino 
negabat, nisi cum maior emolumenti spes quam 
damni metus ostenderetur. Nam minima commoda 
non minimo sectantis discrimine similes aiebat esse 
aureo hamo piscantibus, cuius abrupti damnum nulla 
captura pensari posset. 

XXVI. Magistratus atque honores et ante tempus 
et quosdam novi generis perpetuosque cepit. 
Consulatum vicesimo aetatis anno invasit admotis 
hostiliter ad urbem legionibus missisque qui sibi 
nomine exercitus deposcerent; cum quidem cunctante 


1 perfecto, Bentley ; inperfecto, Mss. 


a That is, he kept them apart from the rest in the companies 
in which they were first enrolled. 

> The phalerae were dises or plates of metal attached to a 
belt or to the harness of horses, 


158 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


standard,* not mingling them with the soldiers of 
free birth or arming them in the same fashion. 

As military prizes he was somewhat more ready to 
give trappings? or collars, valuable for their gold and 
silver, than crowns for scaling ramparts or walls, 
which conferred high honour; the latter he gave as 
sparingly as possible and without favouritism, often 
even to the common soldiers. He presented Marcus 
Agrippa with a blue banner in Sicily after his naval 
victory. Those who had celebrated triumphs were 
the only ones whom he thought ineligible for prizes, 
even though they had been the companions of his 
campaigns and shared in his victories, on the ground 
that they themselves had the privilege of bestowing 
such honours wherever they wished. He thought 
nothing less becoming in a well-trained leader than 
haste and rashness, and, accordingly, favourite say- 
ings of his were : “ More haste, less speed " ; * Better 
a safe commander than a bold”; and * That is 
done quickly enough which is done well enough." 
He used to say that a war or a battle should 
not be begun under any circumstances, unless the 
hope of gain was clearly greater than the fear of loss ; 
for he likened such as grasped at slight gains with no 
slight risk to those who fished with a golden hook, 
the loss of which, if it were carried off, could not be 
made good by any catch 

XXVI. He received offices and honours before the 
usual age, and some of a new kind and for life. He 
usurped the consulship in the twentieth year of his 
age, leading his legions against the city as if it were 
that of an enemy, and sending messengers to demand 
the office for him .in the name of his army; and 


159 


43 B.C, 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK lI 


senatu Cornelius centurio, princeps legationis, reiecto 
sagulo ostendens gladii capulum non dubitasset 
in curia dicere: “ Hic faciet, si vos non feceritis.” 
Secundum consulatum post novem annos, tertium 
anno interiecto gessit, sequentis usque ad undecimum 
continuavit, multisque mox, cum  deferrentur, 
recusatis duodecimum magno, id est septemdecim 
annorum, intervallo et rursus tertium decimum 
biennio post ultro petit, ut C. et Lucium filios 
amplissimo praeditus magistratu suo quemque 
tirocinio deduceret in Forum. Quinque medios 
consulatus a sexto ad decimum annuos gessit, ceteros 
aut novem aut sex aut quattuor aut tribus mensibus, 
secundum vero paucissimis horis. Nam die Kal. Ian. 
cum mane pro aede Capitolini Iovis paululum curuli 
sella praesedisset, honore abiit suffecto alio in locum 
suum. Nec omnes Romae, sed quartum consulatum 
in Asia, quintum in insula Samo, octavum et nonum 
Tarracone init. 

XXVII Triumviratum rei p. constituendae per 
decem annos administravit; in quo restitit quidem 
aliquamdiu collegis ne qua fieret proscriptio, sed 
inceptam utroque acerbius exercuit. Namque illis 
in multorum saepe personam per gratiam et preces 
exorabilibus solus magno opere contendit ne cui 
parceretur, proscripsitque etiam C. Toranium tutorem 
suum, eundem collegam patris sui Octavi in 
160 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


when the Senate hesitated, his centurion, Cornelius, 
leader of the deputation, throwing back his cloak 
and showing the hilt of his sword, did not hesitate 
to say in the House, * This will make him consul, if 
you do not.” He held his second consulship nine 
years later, and a third after a year's interval; the 
rest up to the eleventh were in successive years, then 
after declining a number of terms that were offered 
him, he asked of his own accord for a twelfth after a 
long interval, no less than seventeen years, and two 
years later for a thirteenth, wishing to hold the 
highest magistracy at the time when he introduced 
each of his sons Gaius and Lucius to public life upon 
their coming of age. The five consulships from the 
sixth to the tenth he held for the full year, the rest 
for nine, six, four, or three months, except the 
second, which.lasted only a few hours; for after 
sitting fora short time on the curule chair in front 
of the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus in the early 
morning, he resigned the honour on the Kalends of 
January and appointed another in his place. He 
did not begin all his consulships in Rome, but the 
fourth in Asia, the fifth on the Isle of Samos, the 
eighth and ninth at Tarraco. 

XXVII. He was for ten years a member of the 
triumvirate for restoring the State to order, and 
though he opposed his colleagues for some time and 
tried to prevent a proscription, yet when it was begun, 
he carried it through with greater severity than 
either of them. For while they could oftentimes be 
moved by personal influence and entreaties, he alone 
was most insistent that no one should be spared, 
even adding to the list his guardian Gaius Toranius, 
who had also been the colleague of his father 


161 
VOL. I. M 


83 B.C, 
81 B.C. 


30/23 
B.C. 


5 B.C. 
2 B.C, 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


2 aedilitate. Iulius Saturninus hoc amplius tradit, 
cum peracta proscriptione M. Lepidus in senatu 
excusasset praeterita et spem clementiae in posterum 
fecisset, quoniam satis poenarum exactum esset, hunc 
e diverso professum, ita modum se proscribendi 
statuisse, ut omnia sibi reliquerit libera. In cuius 
tamen pertinaciae paenitentiam postea T. Vinium 
Philopoemenem, quod patronum suum proscriptum 
celasse olim diceretur, equestri dignitate honoravit. 

3 In eadem hac potestate multiplici flagravit invidia. 
Nam et Pinarium equitem R., cum contionante se 
admissa turba paganorum apud milites subscribere 
quaedam animadvertisset, curiosum ac speculatorem 
ratus coram confodi imperavit; et Tedium Afrum 
consulem designatum, quia factum quoddam suum 
maligno sermone carpsisset, tantis conterruit minis, 

4 ut is se praecipitaverit; et Quintum Gallium 
praetorem, in officio salutationis tabellas duplices 
veste tectas tenentem, suspicatus gladium occulere, 
nec quicquam statim, ne aliud inveniretur, ausus 
inquirere, paulo post per centuriones et milites 
raptum e tribunali servilem in modum torsit ac 
fatentem nihil iussit occidi, prius oculis eius sua 
manu effossis; quem tamen scribit conloquio petito 
insidiatum sibi coniectumque a se in custodiam, . 
deinde urbe interdicta dimissum naufragio ve] 


a Se precipitaverit means '* hurled himself headlong,” per- 
haps into the Tiber; more probably from some high place 
such as the Tarpeian Rock, or the roof of a building. 


162 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


Octavius in the aedileship. Julius Saturninus adds 
that after the proscription was over Marcus Lepidus 
addressed the senate in justification of the past and 
held out hope of leniency thereafter, since enough 
punishment had been inflicted; but that Augustus 
on the contrary declared that he had consented to 
end the proscription only on condition that he was 
allowed a free hand for the future. However, to 
show his regret for this inflexibility, he later 
honoured Titus Vinius Philopoemen with equestrian 
rank, because it was said that he had hidden his 
patron, who was on the list. 

While he was triumvir, Augustus incurred general 
detestation by many of his acts. For example, when 
he was addressing the soldiers and a throng of civilians 
had been admitted to the assembly, noticing that 
Pinarius,a Roman knight, was taking notes, he ordered 
that he be stabbed on the spot, thinking him an eaves- 
dropper and a spy. Because Tedius Afer, consul elect, 
railed at some act of his in spiteful terms, he uttered 
such terrible threats that Afer committed suicide." 
Again, when Quintus Gallius, a praetor, held some 
folded tablets under his robe as he was paying his 
respects, Augustus, suspecting that he had a sword 
concealed there, did not dare to make a search on 
the spot for fear it should turn out to be something 
else ; buta little later he had Gallius hustled from the 
tribunal by some centurions, tortured him as if he 
were a slave, and though he made no confession, 
ordered his execution, first tearing out the man’s eyes 
-with his own hand. He himself writes, however, 
that Gallius made a treacherous attack on him after 
asking for an audience, and was haled to prison; 
and that after he was dismissed under sentence of 


163 
M 2 


5 


Ut 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK Ii 


latronum insidiis perisse. Tribuniciam potestatem 
perpetuam recepit, in qua semel atque iterum per 
singula lustra collegam sibi cooptavit. Recepit et 
morum legumque regimen aeque perpetuum, quo 
iure, quamquam sine censurae honore, censum tamen 
populi ter egit, primum ac tertium cum collega, 
medium solus. 

XXVIII. De reddenda re p. bis cogitavit: 
primum! post oppressum statim Antonium, memor 
obiectum sibi ab eo saepius, quasi per ipsum staret 
ne redderetur; ac rursus taedio diuturnae valitu- 
dinis, cum etiam magistratibus ac senatu domum 
accitis rationariun imperii tradidit. Sed reputans 
et se privatum non sine periculo fore et illam 
plurium arbitrio temere committi, in retinenda 
perseveravit, dubium eventu meliore an voluntate. 
Quam voluntatem, cum prae se identidem? ferret, 
quodam etiam edicto his verbis testatus est: “ Ita 
mihi salvam ac sospitem rem p. sistere in sua sede 
liceat atque eius rei fructum percipere, quem peto, 
ut optimi status auctor dicar et moriens ut feram 
mecum spem, mansura in vestigio suo fundamenta 
rei p. quae iecero." Fecitque ipse se compotem voti 
nisus omni modo, ne quem novi status paeniteret. 

! primum, M ; the other mas. have primo. 


? prae se identidem, LP!; the other mas. have praesident 
(praesidens) idem. : 


ea —— M———— 


164 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


banishment, he either lost his life by shipwreck or 
was waylaid by brigands. 

He received the tribunician [power for life, and 
once or twice chose a colleague in the office for 
periods of five years each. He was also given the 
supervision of morals and of the laws for all time, 
and by the virtue of this position, although without 
the title of censor, he nevertheless took the census 
thrice, the first and last time with a colleague, the 
second time alone. 

XXVIII. He twice thought of restoring the 
republic; first immediately after the overthrow of 
Antony, remembering that his rival had often made 
the charge that it was his fault that it was not 
restored ; and again in the weariness of a lingering 
illness, when he went so far as to summon the 
magistrates and the senate to his house, and submit 
an account of the general condition of the empire.? 
Reflecting, however, that as he himself would not be 
free from danger if he should retire, so too it would 
be hazardous to trust the State to the control of the 
populace, he continued to keep it in his hands; and 
it is not easy to say whether his intentions or their 
results were the better His good intentions he not 
only expressed from time to time, but put them on 
record as well ‘in an edict in the following words : 
* May it be my privilege to establish the State in a 
firm and secure position, and reap from that act the 
fruit that I desire; but only if I may be called the 
author of the best possible government, and bear with 
me the hope when I die that the foundations which 
l have laid for the State will remain unshaken.” 
And he realized his hope by making every effort to 
prevent any dissatisfaction with the new régime. 


165 


3 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


Urbem neque pro maiestate imperii ornatam et 
inundationibus incendiisque obnoxiam excoluit adeo, 
ut iure sit gloriatus marmoream se relinquere, quam 
latericiam accepisset. Tutam uero, quantum pro- 
videri humana ratione potuit, etiam in posterum 
praestitit. . 

XXIX. Publica opera plurima exstruxit, e quibus 
vel praecipua: forum cum aede Martis Ultoris,templum 
Apollinis in Palatio, aedem Tonantis Iovis in Capitolio. 
Fori exstruendi causa fuit hominum et iudiciorum 
multitudo, quae videbatur non sufficientibus duobus 
etiam tertio indigere ; itaque festinatius necdum per- 
fecta Martis aede publicatum est cautumque, ut 
separatim in eo publica iudicia et sortitiones iudicum 
fierent. Aedem Martis bello Philippensi pro ultione! 
paterna suscepto voverat; sanxit ergo, ut de bellis 
triumphisque hic consuleretur senatus, provincias cum 
imperio petituri hinc deducerentur, quique victores 
redissent, huc insignia triumphorum conferrent. 


Templum Apollinis in ea parte Palatinae domus 


excitavit, quam fulmine ictam desiderari a deo 
haruspices pronuntiarant?; addidit porticus cum 
bibliotheca Latina Graecaque, quo loco iam senior 
saepe etiam. senatum habuit decuriasque iudi- 
1 ultione, ç (p); visione, Q. 


2 pronuntiaraut, Stephanus; pronuntiarent, Q (-runt T, 
Bentley). 


a Latericiam is strictly ** of sun-dried brick.” 
5 See Jul. lxxi. 


166 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


Since the city was not adorned as the dignity 
of the empire demanded, and was exposed to 
flood ‘and fire, he so beautified it that he could 
justly boast that he had found it built of brick* 
and left it in marble. He made it safe too for 
the future, so far as human foresight could provide 
for this. 

XXIX. He built many public works, in particular 
the following: his forum with the temple of Mars 
the Avenger, the temple of Apollo on the Palatine, 
and the fane of Jupiter the Thunderer on the 
Capitol. His reason for building the forum was the 
increase in the number of the people and of cases at 
law, which seemed to call for a third forum, since 
two were no longer adequate. Therefore it was 
opened to the public with some haste, before the 
temple of Mars was finished, and it was provided 
that the public prosecutions be held there apart 
from the rest, as well as the selection of jurors by 
lot. He had made a vow to build the temple of Mars 
in the war of Philippi, which he undertook to avenge 
his father; accordingly he decreed that in it the 
senate should consider wars and claims for triumphs, 
from it those who were on their way to the pro- 
vinces with military commands should be escorted,? 
and to it victórs on their return should bear the 
tokens of their triumphs. He reared the temple of 
Apollo in that part of his house on the Palatine for 
which the soothsayers declared that the god had 
shown his desire by striking it with lightning. He 
joined to it colonnades with Latin and Greek 
libraries, and when he was getting to be an old man 
he often held meetings of the senate there as well, 
and revised the lists of jurors. He dedicated the 


167 


24 RC. 
28 B.C. 
22 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


cum recognovit. Tonanti Iovi aedem consecravit 
liberatus periculo, cum expeditione Cantabrica per 
nocturnum iter lecticam eius fulgur praestrinxisset 
servumque praelucentem  exanimasset. | Quaedam 
etiam opera sub nomine alieno, nepotum scilicet et 
uxoris sororisque fecit, ut porticum basilicamque Gai 
et Luci, item porticus Liviae et Octaviae theatrum- 
que Marcelli. Sed et ceteros principes viros saepe 
hortatus est, ut pro facultate quisque monimentis vel 
novis vel refectis et excultis urbem adornarent. 
Multaque a multis tunc exstructa sunt, sicut a Marcio 
Philippo aedes Herculis Musarum, a L. Cornificio 
aedes Dianae, ab Asinio Pollione atrium Libertatis, a 
Munatio Planco aedes Saturni, a Cornelio Balbo 
theatrum, a Statilio Tauro amphitheatrum, a M. vero 
Agrippa complura et egregia. 

XXX. Spatium urbis in regiones vicosque divisit in- 
stituitque, ut illas annui magistratus sortito tuerentur, 
hos magistri e plebe cuiusque viciniae lecti. Adversus 
incendia excubias nocturnas vigilesque commentus est ; 
ad coercendas inundationes alveum Tiberis laxavit ac 
repurgavit completum olim ruderibus et aedificiorum 
prolationibus coartatum. Quo autem facilius undique 


urbs adiretur, desumpta sibi Flaminia via Arimino 
168 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


shrine to Jupiter the Thunderer because of a narrow 
escape; for on his Cantabrian expedition during a 
march by night, a flash of lightning grazed his litter 
and struck the slave dead who was carrying a torch 
before him. He constructed some works too in the 
name of others, his grandsons to wit, his wife and 
his sister, such as the colonnade and basilica of Gaius 
and Lucius; also the colonnades of Livia and 
Octavia, and the theatre of Marcellus. More than 
that, he often urged other prominent men to adorn 
the city with new monuments or to restore and 
embellish old ones, each according to his means. 
And many such works were built at that time by 
many men ; for example, the temple of Hercules of 
the Muses by Marcius Philippus, the temple of 
Diana by Lucius Cornificius, the Hall of Liberty by 
Asinius Pollio, the temple of Saturn by Munatius 
Plancus, a theatre by Cornelius Balbus, an amphi- 
theatre by Statilius Taurus, and by Marcus Agrippa 
in particular many magnificent structures. 

XXX. He divided the area of the city into regions 
and wards, arranging that the former should be under 
the charge of magistrates selected each year by lot, 
and the latter under “masters” elected by the 
inhabitants of the respective neighbourhoods. To 
guard against frres he devised a system of stations 
of night watchmen, and to control the floods he 
widened and cleared out the channel of the Tiber, 
which had for some time been filled with rubbish 
and narrowed by jutting buildings. Further, to 
make the approach to the city easier from every 
direction, he personally undertook to rebuild. the 
Flaminian Road all the way to Ariminum, and 
assigned the rest of the high-ways to others who had 


169 


12 B.C. 
15 & 33 5.6. 
13 b.c. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


tenus munienda reliquas triumphalibus viris ex ma- 
nubiali pecunia sternendas distribuit. 

Aedes sacras vetustate conlapsas aut incendio ab- 
sumptas refecit easque et ceteras opulentissimis donis 
adornavit, ut qui in cellam Capitolini Iovis sedecim 
milia pondo auri gemmasque ac margaritas quingenties 
sestertium una donatione contulerit. 

XXXI. Postquam vero pontificatum maximum, 
quem numquam vivo Lepido auferre sustinuerat, 
mortuo demum suscepit, quidquid fatidicorum li- 
brorum Graeci Latinique generis nullis vel parum 
idoneis auctoribus vulgo ferebatur, supra duo milia 
contracta undique cremavit ac solos retinuit Sibyllinos, 
hos quoque dilectu habito; condiditque duobus 
forulis auratis sub Palatini Apollinis basi. Annum a! 
Divo Iulio ordinatum, sed postea neglegentia contur- 
batum atque confusum, rursus ad pristinam rationem 
redegit; in cuius ordinatione Sextilem mensem e suo 
cognomine nuncupavit magis quam Septembrem quo 
erat natus, quod hoc sibi et primus consulatus et in- 
signes victoriae optigissent. Sacerdotum et numerum 
et dignitatem sed et commoda auxit, praecipue Vesta- 
lium virginum. Cumque in demortuae locum aliam 
capi oporteret ambirentque multi ne filias in sortem 
darent, adiuravit, si cuiusquam neptium suarum 

! MGV omit a, | 
170 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


been honoured with triumphs, asking them to use 
their prize-money in paving them. 

He restored sacred edifices which had gone to 
ruin through lapse of time or had been destroyed by 
fire, and adorned both these and the other temples 
with most lavish gifts, depositing in the shrine of 
Jupiter Capitolinus as a single offering sixteen 
thousand pounds of gold, besides pearls and other 
precious stones to the value of fifty million sesterces. 

XXXI. After he finally assumed the office of 
pontifex maximus on the death of Lepidus (for he 
could not make up his mind to deprive him of the 


honour while he lived) he collected whatever pro- 


phetic- writings of Greek or Latin origin were in 
circulation anonymously or under the names of 
authors of little repute, and burned more than two 
thousand of them, retaining only the Sibylline books 
and making a choice even among those; and he 
deposited them in two gilded cases under the 
pedestal of the Palatine Apollo. Inasmuch as the 
calendar, which had been set in order by the Deified 
Julius, had later been confused and disordered through 
negligence, he restored it to its former system ; and 
. in making this arrangement he called the month 
Sextilis by his own surname, rather than his birth- 
month September, because in the former he had won 
his first consulship and his most brilliant victories. 
He increased the number and importance of the 
priests, and also their allowances and privileges,. in 
particular those of the Vestal virgins. Moreover, 
when there was occasion to choose another vestal in 
place of one who had died, and many used all their 
influence to avoid submitting their daughters to 
the hazard of the lot, he solemnly swore that if 


171 


13 B.C. 


8 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


4 competeret aetas, oblaturum se fuisse eam. Nonnulla 
etiam ex antiquis caerimoniis paulatim abolita restituit, 
ut Salutis augurium, Diale flamonium, sacrum Luper- 
cale, ludos Saeculares et Compitalicios. Lupercalibus 
vetuit currere inberbes, item Saecularibus ludis iu- 
venes utriusque sexus prohibuit ullum nocturnum 
spectaculum frequentare nisi cum aliquo maiore natu 
propinquorum. Compitales Lares ornari bis anno in- 
stituit vernis floribus et aestivis. 

95 . Proximum a dis immortalibus honorem memoriae 
ducum praestitit, qui imperium p. R. ex minimo maxi- 
mum reddidissent. Itaque et opera cuiusque manenti- 
bus titulis restituit et statuas omnium triumphali 
effigie in utraque fori sui porticu dedicavit, professus 
et! edicto : commentum id se, ut ad illorum vitam ? 
velut ad exemplar et ipse, dum viveret, et inse- 
quentium aetatium principes exigerentur a civibus. 
Pompei quoque statuam contra theatri eius regiam 
marmoreo Iano superposuit translatam e curia, in qua 
C. Caesar fuerat occisus. 

XXXII. Pleraque pessimi exempli in perniciem 
publicam aut ex consuetudine licentiaque bellorum 
civilium duraverant aut per pacem etiam exstiterant. 
Nam et grassatorum plurimi palam se ferebant 
succincti ferro, quasi tuendi sui causa, et rapti per 


1 et, Bentley ; est, 2. 
? vitam, supplied by Bücheler ; normam, Oudendorp. 


a See Index under Salus, and Dio 37. 24. 

ò Hxigere is the technical term for making weights and 
measures correspond with the standards in charge of the 
aediles; see C.I. L. XIV. 4124. 1,2; X. 8067. 2; etc. 

* According to Richter, T'opographie von Rom, p. 229, the 
regia, was the main door, leading from the stage of the theatre 
to the colonnade. 


172 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


anyone of his grand-daughters were of eligible age, 
he would have proposed her name. He also revived 
some of the ancient rites which had gradually fallen 
into disuse, such as the augury of Safety," the office 
of Flamen Dialis, the ceremonies of the Lupercalia, 
the Secular Games, and the festival of the Compitalia. 
At the Lupercalia he forbade beardless youths to 
join in the running, and at the Secular Games he 
would not allow young people of either sex to attend 
any entertainment by night except in company with 
some adult relative. He provided that the Lares of 
the Crossroads should be crowned twice a year, with 
spring and summer flowers, 

Next to the immortal Gods he honoured the 
memory of the leaders who had raised -the estate of 
the Roman people from obscurity to greatness. 
Accordingly he restored the works of such men with 
their original inscriptions, and in the two colon- 
nades of his forum dedicated statues of all of them 
in triumphal garb, declaring besides in a proclama- 
tion: “I have contrived this to lead the citizens to 
require ® me, while I live, and the rulers of later 
times as well, to attain the standard set by those 
worthies of old.” He also moved the statue of 
Pompey from the hall in which Gaius Caesar had 
been slain and placed it on a marble arch opposite the 
grand door* of Pompey's theatre. 

XXXII. Many pernicious practices militating 
against public security had survived as a result of the 
lawless habits of the civil wars, or had even arisen in 
time of peace. Gangs of footpads openly went about 
with swords by their sides, ostensibly to protect 
themselves, and travellers in the country, freemen 
and slaves alike, were seized and kept in confinement 


173 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


agros viatores sine discrimine liberi servique ergastulis 
possessorum supprimebantur, -et plurimae factiones 
titulo collegi novi ad nullius non facinoris societatem 
coibant. Igitur grassaturas | dispositis per opportuna 
loca stationibus inhibuit, ergastula recognovit, collegia 
praeter antiqua et legitima dissolvit. Tabulas veterum 
aerari debitorum, vel praecipuam calumniandi mate- 
riam, exussit;? loca in urbe publica iuris ambigui 
possessoribus adiudicavit ; diuturnorum reorum et ex 
quorum sordibus nihil aliud quam voluptas inimicis 
quaereretur nomina abolevit condicione proposita, ut 
si quem quis repetere vellet, par periculum poenae 
subiret. Ne quod autem maleficium negotiumve in- 
punitate vel mora elaberetur, triginta amplius dies, 
qui honoraris ludis occupabantur, actui rerum ac- 
commodavit. Ad tris iudicum decurias quartam 
addidit? ex inferiore censu, quae ducenariorum 
vocaretur iudicaretque de levioribus summis. Iudices 
a tricensimo * aetatis anno adlegit, id est quinquennio - 
maturius quam solebant. Ac plerisque iudicandi 
munus detractantibus vix concessit, ut singulis decuriis 


1 grassaturas, V; grassatur ad, M; grassaturam, G; the 
other mss. have graseatores. 
2 exussit, Beroaldus (cf. xavoe, Dio, 53.2) ; excussit, mss. 
3 addidit, Stephanus; addixit, n. 
* tricensimo, M (the other mss. have tricesimo) ; vicesimo, 
Custacius; xxv. Shuckburgh. The number is apparently wrong, 
but the error may have been made by Suetonius himself. 


^ The ergastula were prisons for slaves, who were made to 
work in chains in the fields. 

> Collegia, or guilds, of workmen were allowed and were 
numerous; not infrequently they were a pretext for some 
illegal secret organization. 

¢ Sordibus refers especially to the mourning garb in which 
it was usual for the accused to appear in public. 


174 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


in the workhouses^ of the land owners; numercus 
leagues, too, were formed for the commission of 
crimes of every kind, assuming the title of some new 
guild Therefore to put a stop to brigandage, he 
stationed guards of soldiers wherever it seemed 
advisable, inspected the workhouses, and disbanded 
all guilds, except such as were of long standing and 
formed for legitimate purposes He burned the 
records of old debts to the treasury, which were by 
far the most frequent source of blackmail. He made 
over to their holders places in the city to which the 
claim of the state was uncertain. He struck off the 
lists the names of those who had long been under 
accusation, from whose humiliation ^ nothing was to 
be gained except the gratification of their enemies, 
with the stipulation that if anyone was minded to 
renew the charge, he should be liable to the same 
penalty. To prevent any action for damages or on 
a disputed claim from falling through or being put off, 
he added to the term of the courts-thirty more days, 
which had before been taken up with honorary 
games. To the three divisions of jurors he added a 
fourth of a lower estate, to be called ducenarti ¢ and to 
sit on cases involving trifling amounts. He enrolled 
as jurors men of thirty years or more, that is five 
years younger than usual, But when many strove to 
escape court duty, he reluctantly consented that each 
division in turn should have a year’s exemption, 
and that the custom of holding court during the 


@ That is, if he failed to win his suit, he should suffer the 
penalty that would have been inflicted on the defendant, if 
he had been convicted. 

¢ Men whose property amounted to 200,000 sesterces, or 
half of a knight’s estate. 


175 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


per vices annua vacatio esset et ut solitae agi Novem- 
bri ac Decembri mense res omitterentur. 

XXXIII. Ipse ius dixit assidue et in noctem 
nonnumquam, si parum corpore valeret lectica pro 
tribunali collocata, vel etiam domi cubans. Dixit 
autem ius non diligentia modo summa sed et lenitate, 
siquidem manifesti parricidii reum, ne culleo in- 
sueretur, quod non nisi confessi adficiuntur hac poena, 
ita fertur interrogasse :- Certe patrem tuum non 
occidisti?” Et cum de falso testamento ageretur 
omnesque signatores! lege Cornelia tenerentur, non 
tantum duas tabellas, damnatoriam et absolutoriam, 
simul cognoscentibus dedit, sed tertiam quoque, qua 
ignosceretur iis, quos fraude ad signandum vel errore 
inductos constitisset. Appellationes quotannis ur- 
banorum quidem litigatorum praetori delegabat ur- 
bano, at provincialium consularibus viris, quos singulos 
cuiusque provinciae negotiis praeposuisset. 

XXXIV. Leges retractavit et quasdam ex integro 
sanxit, ut sumptuariam et de adulteriis et de 
pudicitia, de ambitu, de maritandis ordinibus. Hane 
cum aliquanto severius quam ceteras emendasset, 
prae tumultu recusantium perferre non potuit 
nisi adempta demum lenitave parte poenarum et 


1 signatores, Beroaldus ; senatores, f. 


^ Parricides were sewn up in a sack with a dog, a cock, a 
snake, and a monkey, aud thrown into the sea or a river. 
The word is here used in its modern sense ; cf. Js. xlii. 3. 

^ These consisted of various immunities, especially those 
connected with the zus irium liberorum (see Introd. p. x). 


176 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 
months of November and December should be given 


up. 

XXXIII. He himself administered justice regularly 
and sometimes up to nightfall, having a litter placed 
upon the tribunal, if he was indisposed, or even lying 
down at home. In his administration of justice he was 
both highly conscientious and very lenient; for to 
save aman clearly guilty of parricide from being sewn 
up in the sack,? a punishment which was inflicted only 
on those who pleaded guilty, he is said to have put 
the question to him in this form: * You surely did not 
kill your father, did you?" Again, in a case touch- ' 
ing a forged will, in which all the signers were liable 
to punishment by the Cornelian Law, he distributed 
to the jury not merely the two tablets for condem- 
nation or acquittal, but a third as well, for the: 
pardon of those who were shown to have been 
induced to sign by misrepresentation or misunder- 
standing. Each year he referred appeals of cases 
involving citizens to the city praetor, but those 
between foreigners to ex-consuls, of whom he had 
put one in charge of the business affairs-of eaeh 
province. 

XXXIV. He revised existing laws and enacted 
some new ones, for example, on extravagance, on 
adultery and chastity, on bribery, and on the 
encouragement of marriage among the various classes 
of citizens. Having made somewhat more stringent 
changes in the last of these than in the others, he 
was unable to carry it out because of an open revolt 
against its provisions, until he had abolished or miti- 
gated a part of the penalties, besides increasing the 
rewards? and allowing a three years' exemption from 
the obligation to marry after the death of a husband 


177 


VOL. I. . N 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I1 


2 vacatione trienni data auctisque praemiis. Sic 


quoque abolitionem eius publico spectaculo perti- 
naciter postulante equite, accitos Germanici liberos 
receptosque partim ad se partim in patris gremium 
ostentavit, manu vultuque significans ne gravarentur 
imitari iuvenis exemplum. Cumque etiam inma- 
turitate sponsarum et matrimoniorum crebra muta- 
tione vim legis eludi sentiret, tempus sponsas 
habendi coartavit, divortiis modum imposuit, 

XXXV. Senatorum affluentem numerum deformi 
et incondita turba — erant enim super mille, et 
quidam indignissimi et post necem Caesaris per 
gratiam et praemium adlecti, quos orcivos! vulgus 
vocabat — ad modum pristinum et splendorem 
redegit duabus lectionibus: prima ipsorum arbitratu, 
quo vir virum legit, secunda suo et Agrippae; quo 
tempore existimatur lorica sub veste munitus ferro- 
que cinctus praesedisse decem valentissimis senatorii 
ordinis amicis sellam suam circumstantibus. Cordus 
Cremutius scribit ne admissum quidem tunc quem- 
quam senatorum nisi solum et praetemptato sinu. 
Quosdam ad excusandi se verecundiam compulit 
servavitque etiam  excusantibus? insigne vestis et 
spectandi in orchestra epulandique publice ius. 
Quo autem lecti probatique et religiosius et minore 
molestia senatoria munera fungerentur, sanxit, ut 
prius quam consideret quisque ture ac mero sup- 


1 orcivos, MGV. abortivos, X ; orcinos, gc. .— 
? excusantibus, Roman and first Venetian editions; ex- 
cusantis, 2; excusatis, 7's, Gruter. 


^ Orcivi or Orcini, ‘“‘freedmen by the grace of Orcus," 
were slaves set free by their master’s will The Orci 
senatores were those admitted by Mark Antony under pre- 
tence that they had been nained in the papers left by Caesar. 


178 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


or wife. When the knights even then persistently 
called for its repeal at a public show, he sent for the 
children of Germanicus and exhibited them, some in 
his own lap and some in their father’s, intimating by 
his gestures and expression that they should not 
refuse to follow that young man’s example. And on 
finding that the spirit of the law was being evaded 
by betrothal with immature girls and by frequent 
changes of wives, he shortened the duration of 
betrothals and set a limit on divorce. 

XXXV. Since the number of the senators was 
. swelled by a low-born and ill-assorted rabble (in fact, 
the senate numbered more than a thousand, some of 
whom, called by the vulgar Orcivi,“ were wholly un- 
worthy, and had been admitted after Caesar's death 
through favour or bribery) he restored it to its former 
limits and distinction bytwo enrolments,one according 
to the choice of the members themselves, each man 
naming one other, and a second made by Agrippa and 
himself. On the latter occasion it is thought that he 
wore a coat of mail under his tunic as he presided, 
and a sword by his side, while ten of the most robust 
of his friends among the senators stood by his chair. 
Cremutius Cordus writes that even then the senators 
were not allowed to approach except one by one, 
and after the folds of their robes had been carefully 
searched. Some he shamed into resigning, but he 
allowed even these to retain their distinctive dress, 
as well as the privilege of viewing the games from 
the orchestra and taking part in the public banquets 
of the order. Furthermore, that those who were 
chosen and approved might perform their duties 
more conscientiously,and also with less inconvenience, 
he provided that before taking his seat each member 


' 179 
N 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


plicaret apud aram eius dei, in cuius templo coiretur, 
et ne plus quam bis in mense legitimus senatus 
ageretur, Kalendis et Idibus, neve Septembri 
Octobrive mense ullos adesse alios necesse esset 
quam sorte ductos, per quorum numerum decreta 
confici possent; sibique instituit consilia sortiri 
semenstria, cum quibus de negotiis ad frequentem 
senatum referendis ante tractaret. Sententias de 
maiore negotio non more atque ordine sed prout 
libuisset perrogabat, ut perinde quisque animum 
intenderet ac si censendum magis quam adsentien- 
dum esset. 

XXXVI. Auctor et aliarum rerum fuit, in quis: 
ne acta senatus publicarentur, ne magistratus de- 
posito! honore statim in provincias mitterentur, ut 
proconsulibus ad mulos et tabernacula, quae publice 
locari solebant, certa pecunia constitueretur, ut cura 
aerari a quaestoribus urbanis ad praetorios praeto- 
resve transiret, ut centumviralem hastam quam quae- 
sturam functi consuerant cogere decemviri cogerent. 

XXXVII. Quoque plures partem administrandae 
rei p. caperent, nova officia excogitavit: curam 
operum publicorum, viarum, aquarum, alvei Tiberis, 
frumenti populo dividundi, praefecturam urbis, trium- 


1 deposito, ^; disposito, 2. 


a Cf. Jul. xx. 1. 

> A very ancient tribunal, consisting at first of 105 mem- 
bers, three from each tribe, but later of 180. It sat in the 
Basilica Julia, with a spear (hasta), the ancient symbol of 
Quiritary ownership, planted before it. It was divided into 
four chambers, which usually sat separately, but sometimes 
altogether, or in two divisions, 

* The decemviri stlitabus iudicandis. 


180 a 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


should offer incense and wine at the altar of the god 
in whose temple the meeting was held ; that regular 
meetings of the senate should be held not oftener 
than twice a month, on the Kalends and the Ides; 
and that in the months of September and October 
only those should be obliged to attend who were 
drawn by lot, to a number sufficient for the passing 
of decrees. He also adopted the plan of privy 
councils chosen by lot for terms of six months, with 
which to discuss in advance matters which were 
to come before the entire body. On questions of 
special importance he called upon the senators to 
give their opinions, not according to the order 
established by precedent, but just as he fancied, to 
induce each man to keep his mind on the alert, as if 
he were to initiate action rather than give assent to 
others. 

XXXVI. He introduced other innovations too, 
among them these: that the proceedings of the senate 
should not be published ^; that magistrates should 
not be sent to the provinces immediately after laying 
down their office ; that a fixed sum should be allowed 
the proconsuls for mules and tents, which it is the 
custom to contract for and charge to the State ; that 
the management of the public treasury should be 
transferred from the city quaestors to ex-praetors or 
praetors; and that the centumviral court,? which it 
was usual for ex-quaestors to convoke, should be 
summoned by the Board of Ten. _ 

XXXVII. To enable more men to take part in 
the administration of the State, he devised new 
offices: the charge of public buildings, of the roads, 
of the aqueducts, of the channel of the Tiber, of the 
distribution of grain to the people, as weil as the 


181 


bo 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


viratum legendi senatus et alterum recognoscendi 
turmas equitum, quotiensque opus esset. Censores 
creari desitos longo intervallo creavit. Numerum 
praetorum auxit. Exegit etiam, ut quotiens con- 
sulatus sibi daretur, binos pro singulis collegas 
haberet, nec optinuit, reclamantibus cunctis satis 
maiestatem eius imminui, quod honorem eum non 
solus sed cum altero gereret. 

XXXVIII. Nec parcior in bellica virtute hono- 
randa, super triginta ducibus iustos triumphos et ali- 


quanto pluribus triumphalia ornamenta decernenda 


curavit. 

Liberis senatorum, quo celerius rei p. assuescerent, 
protinus a! virili toga latum clavum induere et curiae 
interesse permisit militiamque auspicantibus non 
tribunatum modo legionum, sed et praefecturas 
alarum dedit; ac ne qui expers castrorum esset, 
binos plerumque laticlavios praeposuit singulis alis. | 

Equitum turmas frequenter recognovit, post 
longam intercapedinem reducto more travectionis. 
Sed neque detrahi quemquam in travehendo ab 


.accusatore passus est, quod fieri solebat, et senio vel 


aliqua corporis labe insignibus permisit, praemisso 
in ordine equo, ad respondendum quotiens citarentur 
pedibus venire; mox reddendi equi gratiam fecit . 


1 a, quidam apud Torrentium ; Ihm suggests sumpta. 


e See note on chap. xxii. | 
b That is, were so old or infirm that they could not ride, 
or would cut a sorry figure if they did. 


182 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


prefecture of the city, a board of three for choosing 
senators, and another for reviewing the companies of 
the knights whenever it should be necessary. He 
appointed censors, an office which had long been 
discontinued. He increased the number of praetors. 

He also demanded that whenever the consulship 
was conferred on him, he should have two colleagues 
instead of one; but this was not granted, since all 
cried out that it was a sufficient offence to his supreme 
dignity that lie held the office with another and not 
alone. 

XXXVIII. He was not less generous in honouring 
martial prowess, for he had regular triumphs ^ voted 
to above thirty generals, and the triumphal regalia 
to somewhat more than that number. ¢ 

To enable senators’ sons to gain an earlier 
acquaintance with public business, he allowed them 
to assume the broad purple stripe immediately after 
the gown of manhood and to attend meetings of the 
senate; and when they began their military career, 
he gave them not merely a tribunate in a 3 an but 
the command of a division of cavalry as well; and to 
furnish all of them with experience in camp life, he 
usually appointed two senators’ sons to command 
each division. 

He reviewed the companies of knights at fr equent 
intervals, reviving the custom of the procession after 
long disuse. But he would not allow an accuser to 
force anyone to dismount as he rode by, as was often 
done in the past ; and he permitted those who were 
conspicuous because of old age or any bodily infirmity 5 
to send on their horses in the review, and come on 
foot to answer to their names whenever they were 
summoned. Later he excused those who were over 


183 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I! 


eis, qui maiores annorum quinque et triginta 
retinere eum nollent. 

XXXIX. Impetratisque a senatu decem adiutoribus 
unum quemque equitum rationem vitae reddere 
coegit atque ex improbatis ! alios poena, alios ignomi- 
nia notavit, plures admonitione, sed varia.  Lenissi- 
mum genus admonitionis fuit traditio coram pugil- 
iarium, quos taciti et ibidem statim legerent?; nota- 
vitque' aliquos, quod pecunias levioribus usuris 
mutuati graviore faenore collocassent. 

XL. Ac comitiis tribuniciis si deessent candidati 
senatores, ex equitibus R. creavit, ita ut potestate 
transacta in utro vellent ordine manerent. Cum 
autem plerique equitum  attrito bellis civilibus 
patrimonio spectare ludos e quattuordecim non 
auderent metu poenae theatralis, pronuntiavit non 
teneri ea, quibus ipsis parentibusve equester census 
umquam fuisset. 

Populi recensum vicatim egit, ac ne plebs frumen- 
tationum causa frequentius ab negotiis avocaretur, 
ter in annum quaternum mensium tesseras dare 
destinavit ; sed desideranti consuetudinem veterem 
concessit rursus, ut sui cuiusque mensis acciperet. 
Comitiorum quoque pristinum ius reduxit ac multi- 
plici poena coercito ambitu, Fabianis et Scaptiensibus 


1 ex improbatis, ¢ ; the best mss. have in exprobratis. 
2 legerent] legerint, MGV.L?8. 


a See note on chap. x. 9. 
! See note on Jul, xxxix. 2, and cf. chap. xiv. 
e Cf. Jul. xli. 


184 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


thirty-five years of age and did not wish to retain 
their horses from formally surrendering them. 

XXXIX. Having obtained ten assistants from the 
senate, he compelled each knight to render an 
account of his life, punishing some of those whose 
conduct was scandalous and degrading others; but 
the greater part he reprimanded with varying degrees 
of severity. The mildest form of reprimand was to 
hand them a pair of tablets publicly, which they 
were to read in silence on the spot. He censured 
some because they had borrowed money at low 
interest and invested it at a higher rate. 

XL. At the elections for tribunes if there were 
not candidates enough of senatorial rank,“ he made 
appointments from among the knights, with the 
understanding that after their term they might 
remain in whichever order they wished. Morever, 
since many knights whose property was diminished 
during the civil wars did not venture to view the 
games from the fourteen rows? through fear of the 
penalty of the law regarding theatres, he declared 
that none were liable to its provisions, if they \them- 
selves or their parents had ever possessed a 47s 
estate. 

He revised the lists of the people street by street, 
and to prevent the commons from being called away 
from their occupations too often because of the 
distributions of grain, he determined to give out 
tickets for four months’ supply three times a year; 
but at their urgent request he allowed a return to 
the old custom of receiving a share every month. 
He also revived the old time election privileges, 
trying to put a stop to bribery by numerous penalties, 
and distributing to his fellow members of the Fabian 


185 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK I] 


tribulibus! suis die comitiorum, ne quid a quoquam 
candidato desiderarent, singula milia nummum a se 
dividebat. 

Magni praeterea existimans sincerum atque ab 
omni colluvione peregrini ac servilis sanguinis 
incorruptum servare populum, et civitates Romanas 
parcissime dedit et manumittendi modum termi- 
navit. Tiberio pro cliente Graeco petenti rescripsit, 
non aliter se daturum, quam si praesens sibi per- 
suasisset, quam iustas petendi causas haberet; et 
Liviae pro quodam tributario Gallo roganti civitatem 
negavit, immunitatem optulit affirmans facilius se 
passurum fisco detrahi aliquid, quam civitatis 
Romanae vulgari honorem. Servos non contentus 
multis difficultatibus a libertate et multo pluribus 
a libertate iusta removisse, cum et de numero et de 
condicione ac differentia eorum, qui manumitte- 
rentur, curiose cavisset, hoc quoque adiecit, ne 
vinctus umquam tortusve quis ullo libertatis genere 
civitatem adipisceretur. 

Etiam habitum vestitumque pristinum reducere 
studuit, ac visa quondam pro contione pullatorum 
turba indignabundus et clamitans : “ en 
1 >? 


Romanos, rerum dominos, gentemque togatam 


negotium aedilibus dedit, ne quem posthac pate-: 


l Scaptiensibus  tribnlibus, Beroaldus;  scaptensibus 
tribubus, 2. 


9 Augustus was a member of the latter because of his con- 
nection with the Octavian family; of the former, through 
his adoption into the Julian gens. 

> That is, even by usta libertas, which conferred citizen- 
ship. Slaves who had been punished for crimes (facinora) 


186 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


and Scaptian tribes% a thousand sesterces a man from 
his own purse on the day of the elections, to keep 
them from looking for anything from any of the 
candidates. 

Considering it also of great importance to keep 
the people pure and unsullied by any taint of foreign 
or servile blood, he was most chary of conferring 
Roman citizenship and set a limit to manumission. 
When Tiberius requested citizenship for a Grecian 
dependent of his, Augustus wrote in reply that he 
would not grant it unless the man appeared in person 
and convinced him that he had reasonable grounds for 
the request; and when Livia asked it for a Gaul 
from a tributary province, he refused, offering instead 
freedom from tribute, and declaring that he would 
more willingly suffer a loss to his privy purse than 
the prostitution of the honour of Roman citizenship. 
Not content with making it difficult for slaves to 
acquire freedom, and still more so for them to attain 
full rights, by making careful provision as to the 
number, condition, and status of those who were 
manumitted, he added the proviso that no one who 
had ever been put in irons or tortured should acquire 
citizenship by any grade of freedom.? 

He desired also to revive the ancient fashion of 
dress, and once when he saw in an assembly a 
throng of men in dark cloaks, he cried out 
indignantly, ** Behold them 


Romans, lords of the world, the nation clad in the 
toga," * 
and he directed the aediles never again to allow 


or disgraceful acts ( (flagitia) became on manumission dediticts, 
* prisoners of war.' ¢ Verg. Aen. 1. 282. 


197 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


rentur in Foro circave! nisi positis lacernis togatum 
consistere. 

XLI. Liberalitatem omnibus ordinibus per oc- 
casiones frequenter exhibuit. Nam et invecta urbj 
Alexandrino triumpho regia gaza tantam copiam 
nummariae rei effecit, ut faenore deminuto plurimum 
agrorum pretiis accesserit, et postea, quotiens ex 
damnatorum bonis pecunia superflueret, usum eius 
gratuitum iis, qui cavere in duplum possent, ad 
certum tempus indulsit. Senatorum censum ampli- 
avit ac pro octingentorum milium summa duodecies 
sestertium taxavit supplevitque non habentibus. 
Congiaria populo frequenter dedit, sed diversae fere 
summae : modo quadringenos, modo trecenos,? non- 
numquam ducenos quinquagenosque nummos; ac ne 
minores quidem pueros praeteriit, quamvis non nisi 
ab undecimo aetatis anno accipere consuessent. 
Frumentum quoque in annonae difficultatibus saepe 
levissimo, interdum nullo pretio viritim admensus 
est tesserasque nummarias duplicavit. 

XLII. Sed ut salubrem magis quam ambitiosum 
principem scires, querentem de inopia et caritate vini 
populum severissima coercuit voce: satis provisum 
a genero suo Agrippa perductis pluribus aquis, ne 
homines sitirent. Eidem populo promissum quidem 


1 circave] circove, GY. 
2 trecenos, Torrentius (c) ; tricenos, Q. 


a Congiarium, strictly a distribution of oil (from congtus, a 
liquid measure) came to be used of any largess. 

b The tesserae nummulariae were small tablets or round 
hollow balls of wood, marked with numbers. They were 
distributed to the people instead of money and entitled the 
holder to receive the sum inscribed upon them. Grain, oil, 


188 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


anyone to appear in the Forum or its neighbour- 
hood except in the toga and without a cloak. _ 

XLI. He often showed generosity to all classes 
when occasion offered. For example, by bringing 
the royal treasures to Rome in his Alexandrian 
triumph he made ready money so abundant, that the 
rate of interest fell, and the value of real estate rose 
greatly ; and after that, whenever there was an 
excess of funds from the property of those who had 
been condemned, he loaned it for fixed periods to any 
who could give security for double the amount. He 
increased the property qualification for senators, 
requiring one million two hundred thousand 
sesterces, instead of eight hundred thousand, and 
making up the amount for those who did not possess 
it. He often gave largess^ to the people, but usually 
of different sums: now four hundred, now three 
hundred, now two hundred and fifty sesterces a 
man; and he did not even exclude young boys, 
though it had been usual for them to receive a share 
only after the age of eleven. In times of dnd 
too he often distributed grain to each man at a very 
low figure, sometimes for nothing, and he doubled 
the money tickets.^ 

XLII. But to show that he was a prince via 
desired the publie welfare rather than popularity, 
when the people complained of the scarcity and high 
price of wine, he sharply rebuked them by saying: 
* My son-in-law Agrippa has taken good care, by 
building several aqueducts, that men shall not 
go thirsty.” Again, when the people demanded 
largess which he had in fact promised, he replied : 
and various commodities were distributed by similar tesserae ; 
cf. chap, xl. 2; Nero, xi; Dom. iv. 


189 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


congiarium reposcenti bonae se fidei esse respondit ; 
non promissum autem flagitanti turpitudinem et 
impudentiam edicto exprobravit affirmavitque non 
daturum se quamvis dare destinaret. Nec minore 
gravitate atque constantia, cum proposito congiario 
multos manumissos  insertosque civium numero 
comperisset, negavit accepturos quibus promissum 
non esset, ceterisque minus quam promiserat dedit, 
ut destinata summa sufficeret. Magna vero quondam 
sterilitate ac difficili remedio cum  venalicias et 
lanistarum familias peregrinosque omnes exceptis 
medicis et praeceptoribus partimque servitiorum urbe 
expulisset, ut tandem annona convaluit, impetum 
se cepisse scribit frumentationes publicas in per- 
petuum abolendi, quod earum fiducia cultura agrorum 
cessaret! ; neque tamen perseverasse, quia certum 
haberet posse per ambitionem quandoque restitui. 
Atque ita posthac rem temperavit, ut non minorem 
aratorum ac negotiantium quam populi rationem 
deduceret. 

XLIII. Spectaculorum et assiduitate et varietate 
et magnificentia omnes antecessit.  Fecisse se 
ludos ait suo nomine quater, pro aliis magistratibus, 
qui aut abessent aut non sufficerent, ter et vicies. 
Fecitque nonnumquam etiam vicatim ac pluribus 
scaenis per omnium linguarum histriones, munera ? 
non in Foro modo, nec in amphitheatro, sed et in 


l cesseret, c ; cesserat, 9. 

4 munera, added by Perizonius; ciscenebus ludis gladitori- 
isque muneribus frequentissime editis interiecit plerumque 
. bestiarum Africanarum venationes, Roth (cf. Mon. Ancyr. iv. 
39 ff. and Claud. xxi.). 


a Cf, Jul. xxxix. 1. : 
190 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


* Jam a man of my word”; but when they called for 
one which had not been promised, he rebuked them 
in a proclamation for their shameless impudence, and 
declared that he would not give it, even though he 
was intending to do so. . With equal dignity and 
firmness, when he had announced a distribution of 
money and found that many had been manumitted 
and added to the list of citizens, he declared 
that those to whom no promise had been made 
should receive nothing, and gave the rest less 
than he had promised, to make the appointed sum 
suffice. Once indeed in a time of great scarcity 
when it was difficult to find a remedy, he expelled 
from the city the slaves that were for sale, as well as 
the schools of gladiators, all foreigners with the 
exception of physicians and teachers, and a part 
of the household slaves; and when grain at last 
became more plentiful, he writes: “I was strongly 
inclined to do away forever with distributions of 
grain, because through dependence on them agri- ` 
culture was neglected; but I did not carry qut my 
purpose, feeling sure that they would one day be 
renewed through desire for popular favour." \But 
from that time on he regulated the practice with 
no less regard for the interests of the farmers and 
grain-dealers than for those of the populace. 

XLIII. He surpassed all his predecessors in the fre- 
quency, variety,and magnificence of his public shows. 
He says that he gave games four times in his own 
name and twenty-three times for other magistrates, 
who were either away from Rome or lacked means. 
He gave them sometimes in all the wards and on 
many stages with actors in all languages,* and combats 
of gladiators not only in the Forum or the amphi- 


191 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


Circo et in Saeptis, et aliquando nihil praeter 
venationem edidit; athletas quoque exstructis in 
campo Martio sedilibus ligneis; item navale proelium 
circa Tiberim cavato solo, in quo nunc Caesarum 
nemus est. Quibus diebus custodes in urbe disposuit, 
ne raritate remanentium grassatoribus obnoxia esset. 
In Circo aurigas cursoresque et confectores ferarum, 
et nonnumquam ex nobilissima iuventute, produxit. 
Sed et Troiae lusum edidit frequentissime maiorum! 
minorumque puerorum, prisci decorique moris ex- 
istimans clarae stirpis indolem sic notescere. In hoc 
ludicro Nonium Asprenatem lapsu debilitatum aureo 
torque donavit passusque est ipsum  posterosque 
Torquati ferre cognomen. Mox finem fecit talia 
edendi Asinio Pollione oratore graviter invidioseque 
in curia questo Aesernini ? nepotis sui casum, qui et 


ipse crus fregerat. 
Ad seaenicas quoque et gladiatorias operas et equi- 


tibus Romanis aliquando usus est, verum prius quam 

senatus consulto interdiceretur. Postea nihil sane 

praeterquam adulescentulum Lycium? honeste natum 

exhibuit, tantum ut ostenderet, quod erat bipedali 

minor, librarum septemdecim ac vocis immensae. 

Quodam autem muneris die Parthorum obsides tunc 
1 maiorum, c; magnorum, 2. 


2 Aesernini, Beroaldus; Asernini, 2. 
3 Lycium, mss. (lucium, F; lictum, HT”); L., Icium, Roth, 


a Of, Jul. xxxix. 2. 


TQ2 


; THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


theatre, but in the Circus and in the Saepta; some- 
times, however, he gave nothing except a fight with 
wild beasts. He gave athletic contests too in the 
Campus Martius, erecting wooden seats; also a sea- 
fight, constructing an artificial lake near the Tiber, 
where the grove of the Caesars now stands. On such 
occasions he stationed guards in various parts of the 
city, to prevent it from falling a prey to brigands 
because of the few people who remained at home. 
In the Circus he exhibited charioteers, runners, and 
slayers of wild animals, who were sometimes young 
men of the highest rank. Besides he gave frequent 
performances of the game of Troy by older and 
younger boys, thinking it a time-honoured and worthy 
custom for the flower of the nobility to become 
known in this way. When Nonius Asprenas was 
lamed by a fall while taking part in this game, he 
presented him with a golden necklace and allowed 
him and his descendants to bear the surname 
Torquatus. But soon afterwards he gave up that 
form of entertainment, because Asinius Pollio the 
orator complained bitterly and angrily in the s 
of an accident to his grandson Aeserninus, who also. 
had broken his leg. 

He sometimes employed even Roman knights in 
scenic and gladiatorial performances, but only before 
it was forbidden by decree of the senate. After 
that he exhibited no one of respectable parentage, 
with the exception of a young man named Lycius, 
whom he showed merely as a curiosity ; for he was 
less than two feet tall, weighed but seventeen 
pounds, yet had a stentorian voice. He did how- 
ever on the day of one of the shows make a dis- 
play of the first Parthian hostages that had ever 


193 


VOL. I. oO 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


primum missos per mediam harenam ad spectaculum 
induxit superque se subsellio secundo collocavit. 
Solebat etiam citra spectaculorum dies, si quando 
quid invisitatum dignumque cognitu advectum esset, 
id extra ordinem quolibet loco publicare, ut rhinoce- 
rotem apud Saepta, tigrim in scaena, anguem quin- 
quaginta cubitorum pro Comitio. 

5 Accidit votivis circensibus, ut correptus valitudine 
lectica cubans tensas deduceret; rursus commissione 
ludorum, quibus theatrum Marcelli dedicabat, evenit 
ut laxatis sellae curulis compagibus caderet supinus. 
Nepotum quoque suorum munere cum consternatum 
ruinae metu populum retinere et confirmare nullo 
modo posset, transiit e loco suo atque in ea parte 
consedit, quae suspecta maxime erat. 

XLIV. Spectandi confusissimum ac solutissimum 
morem correxit ordinavitque, motus iniuria senatoris, 
quem Puteolis per celeberrimos ludos consessu fre- 
quenti nemo receperat. Facto igitur decreto patrum 
ut, quotiens quid spectaculi usquam publice ederetur, 
primus subselliorum ordo vacaret senatoribus, Romae 
legatos liberarum sociarumque gentium vetuit in 
orchestra sedere, cum quosdam etiam libertini generis 
mitti deprendisset. Militem  secrevit a populo. 

2 Maritis e plebe proprios ordines assignavit, praetex- 
tatis cuneum suum, et proximum paedagogis, sanxit- 
que ne quis pullatorum media cavea sederet. Feminis 


194 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


been sent to Rome, by leading them through the 
middle of the arena and placing them in the second 
row above his own seat. Furthermore, if anything 
rare and worth seeing was ever brought to the city, 
it was his habit to make a special exhibit of it in 
any convenient place on days when no shows were 
ne For example a rhinoceros in the Saepta, 

a tiger on the stage and a snake of fifty cubits in 
the Comitium. 

It chanced that at the time of the games which 
he had vowed to give in the circus, he was taken 
ill and headed the sacred. procession lying in a litter; 
again, at the opening of the games with which he 
dedicated the theatre of Marcellus, it happened that 
the joints of his curule chair gave way and he fell 
on his back. At the games for his grandsons, when 
the people were in a panic for fear the theatre should 
fall, and he could not calm them or encourage them 
in any way, he left his own place and took his seat 
inthe part which appeared most dangerous. | 

XLIV. He put a stop by special regulations wo the 
disorderly and indiscriminate fashion of viewing the 
games, through exasperation at the insult to a senator, 
to whom no one offered a seat in a crowded house at 
some largely attended games in Puteoli. In conse- 
quence of this the senate decreed that, whenever any - 
public show was given anywhere, the first row of 
seats should be reserved for senators; and at Rome 
he would not allow the envoys of the free and allied 
nations to sit in the orchestra, since he was informed 
that even freedmen were sometimes appointed. He 
separated the soldiery from the people. He assigned 
special seats to the married men of the commons, to 
boys under age their own section and the adjoining 
one to their preceptors ; and he decreed that no one 


195 
o 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


ne gladiatores quidem, quos promiscue spectari sol- 
lemne olim erat, nisi ex superiore loco spectare 


3 concessit. Solis virginibus Vestalibus locum in 


2 


theatro separatim et contra praetoris tribunal dedit. 
Athletarum vero spectaculo muliebre secus omne 
adeo summovit, ut pontificalibus ludis pugilum par 
postulatum distulerit in insequentis diei matutinum 
tempus edixeritque mulieres ante horam quintam 
venire in theatrum non placere. 

XLV. Ipse circenses ex amicorum fere libertorum- 
que cenaculis spectabat, interdum ex pulvinari et 
quidem cum coniuge ac liberis sedens. Spectaculo 
plurimas horas, aliquando totos dies aberat, petita 
venia commendatisque qui suam vicem praesidendo 
fungerentur. Verum quotiens adesset, nihil praeterea 
agebat, seu vitandi rumoris causa, quo patrem 
Caesarem vulgo reprehensum commemorabat, quod 
inter spectandum epistulis libellisque legendis aut 
rescribendis vacaret, seu studio spectandi ac volup- 
tate, qua teneri se neque dissimulavit umquam et 
saepe ingenue professus est. Itaque corollaria et 
praemia in alienis quoque muneribus ac ludis et 
crebra et grandia de suo offerebat nullique Graeco 
certamini interfuit, quo non pro merito quemque 

? The auditorium was divided horizontally into three parts: 
ima (prima), media, and summa (ultima) cavea. 

> This puzzling statement is thus explained by Baum.- 
Crusius: ' 4e. ex aedibus proxime adjacentibus, unde pro- 
spectus erat in Circuin. Coenacula autem in summis aedibus 
esse solebant. Idem narrat Dio 57. 11 de Tiberio: robs rar 


(mmev &y&vas ép oiklas kal abrds vOv &mreXevÜEpov tivds TOA- 
Adkis €dpa.” 

¢ Pulvinar was originally a sacred couch for a god. The 
honour was given to Julius Caesar (see Jul. Ixxvi. 1) and the 
term was later applied, as here, to the place reserved for the 
emperor and his family ; cf. Claud. iv. 3. 

4 That is, given at Rome in the Greek language and dress. 
Or Graeco certamini may mean *'a contest in Greece.” 


196 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


wearing a dark cloak should sit in the middle of 
the house.* He would not allow women to view even 
the gladiators except from the upper seats, though it 
had been the custom for men and women to sit 
together at such shows. ‘Only the Vestal virgins 
were assigned a place to themselves, opposite the 
praetor's tribunal. As for the contests of the athletes, 
he excluded women from them so strictly, that when 
a contest between a pair of boxers had been called 
for at the games in honour of his appointment as 
pontifex maximus, he postponed it until early the 
: following day, making proclamation that it was his 
desire that women should not come to the theatre 
before the fifth hour. 

XLV. He himself usually watched the games in 
the Circus from the upper rooms of his friends 
and freedmen,? but sometimes from the imperial box, 
and even in company with his wife and children. 
He was sometimes absent for several hours, and, now 
and then for whole days, making his excuses “and 
appointing presiding officers to take his place. But — 
whenever he was present, he gave his entire atten- 
tion to the performance, either to avoid the censure 
to which he realized that his father Caesar had been 
generally exposed, because he spent his time in 
reading or answering letters and petitions; or from 
his interest and pleasure in the spectacle, which 
he never denied but often frankly confessed. Be- 
cause of this he used to offer special prizes and 
numerous valuable gifts from his own purse at games 
given by others, and he appeared at no contest in 
the Grecian fashion ^ without making a present to 
each of the participants according to his deserts. 


t97 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


certantium honorarit. Spectavit autem studiosissime 
pugiles et maxime Latinos, non legitimos atque 
ordinarios modo, quos etiam committere cum Graecis 
solebat, sed et catervarios oppidanos inter angustias 
vicorum pugnantis temere ac sine arte. Universum 
denique genus operas aliquas publico spectaculo 
praebentium etiam cura sua dignatus est; athletis 
et conservavit privilegia et ampliavit, gladiatores sine 
missione edi prohibuit, coercitionem in histriones 
magistratibus omni tempore et loco! lege vetere 
permissam ademit praeterquam ludis et scaena.? 
. Nec tamen eo minus aut xysticorum certationes aut 
gladiatorum pugnas severissime semper exegit. Nam 
liistrionum licentiam adeo compescuit, ut Stepha- 
nionem togatarium, cui in puerilem habitum circum- 
tonsam matronam ministrasse compererat, per trina 
theatra virgis caesum relegaverit, Hylan pantomi- 
mum querente praetore in atrio domus suae nemine 
excluso flagellis verberarit et Pyladen urbe atque 
Italia summoverit, quod spectatorem, a quo exsibila- 
batur, demonstrasset digito conspicuumque fecisset. 
XLVI. Ad hune modum urbe urbanisque rebus 
administratis Italiam duodetriginta coloniarum nu- 
mero deductarum a se frequentavit operibusque ac 
vectigalibus publicis plurifariam instruxit, etiam iure 
ac dignatione urbi quodam modo pro parte aliqua 


! loco, early editions; longo, 2. 
2 ludis et scaena, Stephanus; ludos et scenam, 0. 


* Those of Pompey, Balbus, and Marcellus, 
ò That is, his middle finger, infamis digitus; it implied a 
charge of obscenity ; cf. Calig. lvi. 2. 


198 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


He was especially given to watching boxers, particu- 
larly those of Latin birth, not merely such as were 
recognized and classed as professionals, whom he 
was wont to match even with Greeks, but the common 
untrained townspeople that fought rough and tumble 
and. without skill in the narrow streets. In fine, he 
honoured with his interest all classes of performers 
who took part in the public shows ; maintained the 
privileges of the athletes and even increased them ; 
forbade the matching of gladiators without the right 
of appeal for quarter; and deprived the magistrates 
of the power allowed them by an ancient law of 
punishing actors anywhere and everywhere, restrict- 
ing it to the time of games and to the theatre. 
Nevertheless he exacted the severest discipline in 
the contests in the wrestling halls and the combats 
of the gladiators. In particular he was so strict in 
curbing the lawlessness of the actors, that when he 
learned that Stephanio, an actor of Roman plays, was 
waited on by a matron with hair cut short to look 
like a boy, he had him whipped with rods through 
the three theatres* and then banished him. Hylas, 
a pantomimic actor, was publicly scourged in the © 
atrium of his own house, on complaint of a praetor, 
and Pylades was expelled from the city and from 
Italy as well, because by pointing at him with his 
finger ^ he turned all eyes upon a spectator who was 
hissing him, 

XLVI. After having thus set the city and its 
affairs in order, he added to the population of Italy 
by personally establishing twenty-eight colonies; 
furnished many parts of it with public buildings and 
revenues ; and even gave it, at least to some degree, 
equal rights and dignity with the city of Rome, by 


199 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


adaequavit excogitato genere suffragiorum, quae de 
magistratibus urbicis decuriones colonici in sua quis- 
que colonia ferrent et sub die comitiorum obsignata 
Romam mitterent. Ac necubi aut honestorum de- 
ficeret copia aut multitudinis suboles, equestrem 
militiam petentis etiam ex commendatione publica 
cuiusque oppidi ordinabat, at iis, qui e plebe regiones 
sibi revisenti filios filiasve approbarent, singula num- 
morum milia pro singulis dividebat. 

XL VII. Provincias validiores et quas annuis 
magistratuum imperiis regi nec facile nec tutum 
erat, ipse suscepit, ceteras proconsulibus sortito 
permisit ; et tamen nonnullas commutayit interdum 
atque ex utroque genere plerasque saepius adiit. 
Urbium quasdam, foederatas sed ad exitium licentia 
praecipites, libertate privavit, alias aut aere alieno 
laborantis levavit aut terrae motu subversas denuo 
condidit aut merita erga populum R. adlegantes 
Latinitate vel civitate donavit. Nec est, ut opinor, 
provincia, excepta dum taxat Africa et Sardinia, 
quam non adierit, In has fugato Sex. Pompeio 
traicere ex Sicilia apparantem continuae et immo- 
dicae tempestates inhibuerunt nec mox occasio aut 
causa traiciendi fuit. 

XLVITI. Regnorum quibus belli iure potitus est, 
praeter pauca, aut iisdem quibus ademerat reddidit 


a That is, appointed them to the offices of Zribunus cohortis, 
praefectus alae, and tribunus legionis, usually open only to 
knights. M 

> A limited citizenship, taking its name from the old Latin 
eities and varying in different cases and at different times. 


200 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


devising a kind of votes which the members of 
the local senate were to cast in each colony for can- 
didates for the city offices and send under seal to 
Rome against the day of the elections. To keep up 
the supply of men of rank and induce the commons to 
increase and multiply, he admitted to the equestrian 
military career“ those who were recommended by 
any town, while to those of the commons who could 
lay claim to worthy sons and daughters when he 
made his rounds of the city he distributed a thousand 
sesterces for each child. 

XLVII. The stronger provinces, which could 
neither easily nor safely be governed by annual 
magistrates, he took to himself; the others he 
assigned to proconsular governors selected by lot. 
But he changed some of them at times from one 
class to the other, and often visited many of both 
sorts. Certain of the cities which had treaties with 
Rome, but were on the road to ruin through their 
lawlessness, he deprived of their independence ; he 
relieved others that were overwhelmed with debt, 
rebuilt some which had been destroyed by earth> 
quakes, and gave Latin rights® or full cüsemldp 
to such as could point to services rendered the 
Roman people. I believe there is no province, ex- 
cepting only Africa and Sardinia, which he did not 
visit; and he was planning to cross to these from 
Sicily after his defeat of Sextus Pompeius, but was 
prevented by a series of violent storms, and later 
had neither opportunity nor occasion to make the 
voyage. 

XLVIII. Except in a few instances he restored 
the kingdoms of which he gained possession by the 
right of conquest to those from whom he had taken 


201 


27 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


aut alienigenis contribuit. Reges socios etiam inter 
semet ipsos necessitudinibus mutuis iunxit, prompt- 
issimus affinitatis cuiusque atque amicitiae conciliator 
et fautor; nec aliter universos quam membra 
partisque imperii curae habuit, rectorem quoque 
solitus apponere aetate parvis aut mente lapsis, 
donec adolescerent aut resipiscerent ; ac plurimorum 
liberos et educavit simul cum suis et instituit. 

XLIX. Ex militaribus copiis legiones et auxilia 
provinciatim distribuit, classem Miseni et alteram 
Ravennae ad tutelam Superi et Inferi maris 
conlocavit, ceterum numerum partim in urbis partim 
in sui custodiam adlegit dimissa Calagurritanorum 
manu, quam usque ad devictum Antonium, item 
Germanorum, quam usque ad cladem Varianam 
inter armigeros circa se habuerat. Neque tamen 
umquam plures quam tres cohortes in urbe esse 
passus est easque sine castris, reliquas in hiberna 
et aestiva circa finitima oppida dimittere assuerat. 
Quidquid autem ubique militum esset, ad certam 
stipendiorum praemiorumque formulam adstrinxit 
definitis pro gradu cuiusque et temporibus militiae 
et commodis missionum, ne aut aetate aut inopia 
post missionem sollicitari ad res novas possent. 
Utque perpetuo ac sine difficultate sumptus ad 
tuendos eos prosequendosque suppeteret, aerarium 
militare cum vectigalibus novis constituit. 

202 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


them or joined them with other foreign nations. He 
also united the kings with whom he was in alliance 
by mutual ties, and was very ready to propose or 
favour intermarriages or friendships among them. 
He never failed to treat them all with consideration 
as integral parts of the empire, regularly appointing 
a guardian for such as were too young to rule or whose 
minds were affected, until they grew up or recovered ; 
and he brought up the children of many of them 
and educated them with his own. 

XLIX. Of his military forces he assigned legions 
and auxiliaries to the various provinces, stationed 
a fleet at Misenum and another at Ravenna, to 
defend the Upper and Lower seas, and employed 
the remainder partly in the defence of the city and 
partly in that of his own person, disbanding a troop 
of Calagurritani which had formed a part of his 
body-guard until the overthrow of Antony, and also 
one of Germans, which he had retained until 
the defeat of Varus. However, he never allowed 
more than three cohorts to remain in the city-and 
even those were without a permanent camp; the—— 
rest he regularly sent to winter or summer quarters 
in the towns near Rome. Furthermore, he restricted 
all the soldiery everywhere to a fixed scale of pay 
and allowances, designating the duration of their 
service and the rewards on its completion according 
to each man's rank, in order to keep them from 
being tempted to revolution after their discharge 
either by age or poverty. To have funds ready at 
all times without difficulty for maintaining the 
soldiers and paying the rewards due to them, he 
established a B treasury, supported by new 
taxes. 


203 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


3 Et quo celerius ac sub manum adnuntiari cog- 
noscique posset, quid in provincia quaque gereretur, 
iuvenes primo modicis intervallis per militaris vias, 
dehinc vehicula disposuit. Commodius id visum 
est, ut qui a loco idem perferunt litteras, interrogari 
quoque, si quid res exigant, possint. 

L. In diplomatibus libellisque et epistulis signandis 
initio sphinge usus est, mox imagine Magni Alexan- 
dri, novissime sua, Dioscuridis manu scalpta,! qua 
signare insecuti quoque principes perseverarunt. 
Ad epistulas omnis horarum quoque momenta nec 
diei modo sed et noctis, quibus datae significarentur, 
addebat. 

LI. Clementiae civilitatisque eius multa et magna 
documenta sunt. Ne enumerem, quot et quos 
diversarum partium venia et incolumitate donatos 
principem etiam in civitate locum tenere passus sit: 
Iunium Novatum et Cassium Patavinum e plebe 
homines alterum pecunia, alterum levi exilio punire 
satis habuit, cum ille Agrippae iuvenis nomine 
asperrimam de se epistulam in vulgus edidisset, hic 
convivio pleno proclamasset neque votum sibi neque 

9 animum deesse confodiendi eum. Quadam vero 
cognitione, cum Aemilio Aeliano Cordubensi inter 
cetera crimina vel maxime obiceretur quod male 
opinari de Caesare soleret, conversus ad accusatorem 
commotoque similis: * Velim," inquit, “hoc mihi 

1 scalpta, Ernesti; sculpta, A. 


* Diploma, strictly any document written on a two-leaved 
tablet, is used especially of those which secured to travellers 
the use of the public post (see chap. xlix. 3) and other privi- 
leges; cf. Cic. Ad Fam. 6. 19. 


204 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


To enable what was going on in each of the pro- 
vinces to be reported and known more speedily and 
promptly, he at first stationed young men at short 
intervals along the military roads, and afterwards 


post-chaises. The latter has seemed the more con- . 


venient arrangement, since the same men who bring 
the dispatches from any place can, if occasion de- 
mands, be questioned as well, 

L. In passports,* dispatches, and private letters he 
used as his seal at first a sphynx, later an image of 
Alexander the Great, and finally his own, carved by 
the hand of Dioscurides ; and this his successors con- 
tinued to use as their seal. He always attached 
to all letters the exact hour, not only of the day, 
but even of the night, to indicate precisely when they 
were written. 

LI. The evidences of his clemency and modera- 
tion are numerous and strong. Not to give the 


P 


full list of the men of the opposite faction whom he “ 


not only pardoned and spared, but allowed to hold^ 
high positions in the state, I may say that he thought 
it enough to punish two plebeians, Junius Novatus 
and Cassius Patavinus, with a fine and a mild form of 
banishment respectively, although the former had 
circulated a most scathing letter about him under 
the name of the young Agrippa, while the latter had 
openly declared at a large dinner party that he 
lacked neither the earnest desire nor the courage to 
stab him. Again, when he was hearing a case against 
Aemilius Aelianus of Corduba and it was made the chief 
offence, amongst other charges, that he was in the 
habit of expressing a bad opinion of Caesar, Augustus 
turned to the accuser with assumed anger and said : 
«I wish you could prove the truth of that. I'll let 


205 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


probes; faciam sciat Aelianus et me linguam habere, 
plura enim de eo loquar" ; nec quicquam ultra aut 

3 statim aut postea inquisiit. Tiberio quoque de eadem 
re, sed violentius! apud se per epistulam conquerenti 
ita rescripsit: * Aetati tuae, mi Tiberi, noli in hac 
re indulgere et nimium indignari quemquam esse, 
qui de me male loquatur; satis est enim, si hoc 
habemus ne quis nobis male facere possit." 

LII. Templa, quamvis sciret etiam proconsulibus 
decerni solere, in nulla tamen provincia nisi communi 
suo Romaeque nomine recepit. Nam in urbe quidem 
pertinacissime abstinuit hoc bonore; atque etiam 
argenteas statuas olim sibi positas conflavit omnis 
exque iis? aureas cortinas Apollini Palatino dedicavit. 

Dictaturam magna vi offerente populo genu nixus 
deiecta ab umeris toga nudo pectore deprecatus est. 

LIII. Domini appellationem ut maledictum et 
obprobrium semper exhorruit. Cum spectante eo 
ludos pronuntiatum esset in mimo : 


* O dominum aequum et bonum ! " 


et universi quasi de ipso dictum exsultantes compro- 
bassent, et statim manu vultuque indecoras adula- 
tiones repressit et insequenti die gravissimo corripuit 
edicto; dominumque se posthac appellari ne a 
liberis quidem aut nepotibus suis vel serio vel ioco 

1 sed violentius, Pithoews; sedulo lentius, MGVY; sedulo 
violentius, XN ; sed dolentius, Bentley. 


? exque iis, Casaubon ; ex quis M V (ex quis, M?) ; the other 
mss. have ex quis (ex quib., ) 


~~ Dominus, ** master," in the time of the Republic indi- 
cated the relation between master and slaves. Tiberius also 
shrank from it (Tib. xxvii), and it was first adopted by 
Caligula and Domitian. From the time of Trajan it was 
usual in the sense of ** Lord " or ** Sire,” 


206 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


Aelianus know that I have a tongue as well as he, 
for I'll say even more about him ;” and he made no 
further inquiry either at the time or afterwards. 
When Tiberius complained to him of the same thing 
in a letter, but in more forcible language, he replied 
as follows: “My dear Tiberius, do not be carried 
away by the ardour of youth in this matter, or take 
it too much to heart that anyone speak evil of /me ; 
we must be content if we can stop anyone from 
doing evil to us.” 


LII. Although well aware that it was usual to vote - 


temples even to proconsuls, he would not accept one 
even in a province save jointly in his own name and 
that of Rome. In the city itself he refused this 
honour most emphatically, even melting down the 
silver statues which had been set up in his honour in 
former times and with the money coined from them 
dedicating golden tripods to Apollo of the Palatine. 


When the people did their best to force the, h 


dictatorship upon him, he knelt down, threw off 
his toga from his shoulders and with bare breást 
begged them not to insist. 

LIIT. He always shrank from the title of Lord ^ as 
reproachful and insulting. When the words 


“O just and gracious Lord!” 


were uttered in a farce at which he was a spectator 
and all the people sprang to their feet and applauded 
as if they were said of him, he at once checked their 
unseemly flattery by look and gesture, and on the 
following day sharply reproved them in an edict. 
After that he would not suffer himself to be called 
Sire even by his children or his grandchildren either 
in jest or earnest, and he forbade them to use 


207 


N 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


passus est atque eius modi blanditias etiam inter 

2 ipsos prohibuit. Non temere urbe oppidove ullo 
egressus aut quoquam ingressus est nisi vespera 
aut noctu, ne quem officii causa inquietaret. In 
consulatu pedibus fere, extra consulatum saepe 
adoperta! sella per publicum incessit. Promiscuis 
salutationibus admittebat et plebem, tanta comitate 
adeuntium desideria excipiens, ut quendam ioco 
corripuerit, quod sic sibi libellum porrigere dubitaret, 

3 “quasi elephanto stipem." Die senatus numquam 
patres nisi in curia salutavit et quidem sedentis ac 
nominatim singulos nullo submonente; etiam dis- 
cedens eodem modo sedentibus valere dicebat. 
Officia cum multis mutuo exercuit, nec prius dies 
cuiusque sollemnes frequentare desiit, quam grandior 
iam natu? et in turba quondam sponsaliorum die 
vexatus. Gallum Cerrinium senatorem minus sibi 
familiarem, sed captum repente oculis et ob id inedia? 
mori destinantem praesens consolando revocavit 
ad vitam. 

LIV. In senatu verba facienti dictum est: * Non 
intellexi,” et ab alio: “Contra dicerem tibi, si locum 
haberem." Interdum ob immodicas disceptantium 
altercationes e curia per iram se proripienti quidam 
ingesserunt licere oportere senatoribus de re p. 

1 adoperta, mss. ; adaperta, Beroaldus (Shuckburgh). 


? grandior iam natu] grandi iam ornatu, Q. 
3 id inedia, Bologna ed. of 1488; inediam, ^. 


? That is, they did not makea morning call on him, as in 
other days. ; | 


208 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


such flattering terms even among themselves. He 
did not if he could help it leave or enter any city or 
town except in the evening or at night, to avoid dis- 
turbing anyone by the obligations of ceremony. In 
his consulship he commonly went through the streets 
on foot, and when he was not consul, generally in 
.a closed litter. His morning receptions were open 
to all, including even the commons, and he met 
the requests of those who approached him with great 
affability, jocosely reproving one man because he 
presented a petition to him with as much hesitation 
* as he would a penny to an elephant." On the day 
of a meeting of the senate he always greeted the 
members in the House “ and in their seats, calling 
each man by name without a prompter; and when 
he left the House, he used to take leave of them 
in the same manner, while they remained seated.  . - 
He exchanged social calls with many, and did not ,^ 
cease to attend all their anniversaries, until he a 
well on in years and was once incommoded by the 
crowd on the day of a betrothal. When Gallus 
Cerrinius, a senator with whom he was not at all 
intimate, had become blind and had therefore re- 
solved to end his life by starvation, Augustus called 
on him and by his consoling words induced him to 
live. | 

LIV. As he was speaking in the senate someone 
said to him: “I did not understand," and another : 
“I would contradict you if I had an opportunity." 
Several times when he was rushing from the House 
in anger at the excessive bickering of the disputants, 
some shouted after him: “Senators ought to have 
the right of speaking their mind on publie affairs." 
At the selection of senators when each member chose 


209 
VOL. I. P 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


loqui. Antistius Labeo senatus lectione, cum vir 
virum ! legeret, M. Lepidum hostem olim eius et tunc 
exsulantem legit interrogatusque ab eo an essent alii 
digniores, suum quemque iudicium habere re- 
spondit. Nec ideo libertas aut contumacia fraudi 
cuiquam fuit. 

LV. Etiam sparsos de se in curia famosos libellos 
nec expavit et magna cura redarguit ac ne requisitis 
quidem auctoribus id modo censuit, cognoscendum 
posthac de iis, qui libellos aut carmina ad infamiam 
cuiuspiam sub alieno nomine edant. 

LVI. Iocis quoque quorundam invidiosis aut petu- 
lantibus lacessitus contra dixit edicto. Et tamen 
ne de inhibenda testamentorum licentia quicquam 
constitueretur intercessit, Quotiens magistratuum 
comitiis interesset, tribus eum candidatis suis circuibat 
supplicabatque more sollemni.  Ferebat et ipse 
suffragium in tribu,? ut unus e populo. Testem se 
in iudiciis et interrogari et refelli aequissimo animo 
patiebatur. Forum angustius fecit non ausus ex- 
torquere possessoribus proximas domos. Numquam 
filios suos populo commendavit ut non adiceret: “Si 
merebuntur." Eisdem praetextatis adhuc assurrectum 
ab universis in theatro et a stantibus plausum 
gravissime questus est. Amicos ita magnos et 
potentes in civitate esse voluit, ut tamen pari iure 
essent quo ceteri legibusque iudiciariis aeque teneren- 


1 vir virum, Torrentius; triumvirum, 2. 
? tribu, Erasmus ; tribus, Q. 


^ See chap. xxxv. 1. 

> The Romans in their wills often express their opinion 
freely about public men and affairs ; cf. chap. lxvi., and Cassius 
Dio, 58. 25, where it is said that Fulcinius Tiro, who died in 
prison, bitterly assailed Tiberius in his will. 


2rO 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


another," Antistius Labeo named Marcus Lepidus, an 
old enemy of the emperor's and at the time in ban- 
ishment; and when Augustus asked him whether 
there were not others more deserving of the honour, 
Labeo replied that every man had his own opinion. 
Yet for all that no one suffered for his freedom of 
speech or insolence. 

. LV. He did not even dread the lampoons against 
him which were scattered in the senate house, but 
took great pains to refute them ; and without trying 
to discover the authors, he merely proposed that 
thereafter such as published notes or verses defama- 
tory of anyone under a false name should be called 
to account. 

LVI. When he was assailed with scurrilous or spite- 
ful jests by certain men, he made reply in a public 
proclamation ; yet he vetoed a law to check freedom 
of speech in wills. Whenever he took part in the 
election of magistrates, he went the round of the 
tribes with his candidates and appealed for them in 
the traditional manner. He also cast his own vote in 
his tribe, as one of the people. When he gave 
testimony in court, he was most patient in submitting 
to questions and even to contradiction. He made 
his forum narrower than he had planned, because he 
did not venture to eject the owners of the neighbour- 
ing houses. He never recommended his sons for office 
without adding “If they be worthy of it." When 
they were still under age and the audience at the 
theatre rose as one man in their honour, and stood 
up and applauded them, he expressed strong dis- 
approval He wished his friends to be prominent 
and influential in the state, but to be bound by 
the same laws as the xest and equally liable to 


2II 
P2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


3 tur. Cum Asprenas Nonius artius ei iunctus causam 
veneficii accusante Cassio Severo diceret, consuluit 
senatum, quid officii sui putaret ; cunctari enim se, 
ne si superesset, eripere! legibus reum, sin deesset, 
destituere ac praedamnare amicum existimaretur ; 
et consentientibus universis sedit in subselliis per 
aliquot horas, verum tacitus et ne laudatione quidem 

4 iudiciali data,  Affuit et clientibus, sicut Scutario 
cuidam evocato quondam suo, qui postulabatur 
iniuriarum. Unum omnino e reorum numero ac ne 
eum quidem nisi precibus eripuit, exorato coram 
iudicibus accusatore, Castricium, per quem de coniu- 
ratione Murenae cognoverat. 

LVII. Pro quibus meritis quanto opere dilectus sit, 
facile est aestimare. Omitto senatus consulta, quia 
possunt videri vel necessitate expressa vel verecundia. 
Equites R. natalem eius sponte atque consensu ? biduo 
semper celebrarunt. Omnes ordines in lacum Curti 
quotannis ex voto pro salute eius stipem iaciebant, 
item Kal. Ian. strenam in Capitolio etiam absenti, ex 
qua summa pretiosissima deorum simulacra mercatus 
vicatim dedicabat, ut Apollinem Sandaliarium et 

2 Jovem Tragoedum aliaque. In restitutionem Palatinae 
domus incendio absumptae veterani, decuriae, tribus 


1 eripere, Juncker ; eriperet, 0. 
2 consensu] concessu, 0. 


a The movable seats provided for the advocates, witnesses, 
ete. 

» The custom of defending an accused person by a general 
eulogy of his character was forbidden by Pompey in his 
third consulship (Dio, 40. 52), but was nevertheless resorted 
to, even by Pompey himself (Dio, 40. 55). 

¢ September 22 and 23. l 

4 Probably of the scribes and other minor officials. 


212 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


prosecution. When Nonius Asprenas, a close friend of 
his, was meeting a charge of poisoning made by 
Cassius Severus, Augustus asked the senate what 
they thought he ought to do ; for he hesitated, he said, 
for fear that if he should support him, it might be 
thought that he was shielding a guilty man, but if he 
failed to do so, that he was proving false to a friend 
and prejudicing his case. Then, since all approved 
of his appearing in the case, he sat on the benches ^ 
for several hours, but in silence and without even 
speaking in praise of the defendant? He did how- 
ever defend some of his clients, for instance a certain 
Scutarius, one of his officers, who was accused of 
slander. But he secured the acquittal of no more 
than one single man, and then only by entreaty, 
making a successful appeal to the accuser in the 
presence of the jurors; this was Castricius, through 
whom he had learned of Murena's conspiracy. 

LVII. It may readily be imagined how much he 
was beloved because of this admirable conduct. I 
say nothing of decrees of the senate, which might 
seem to have been dictated by necessity or by 
awe. The Roman knights celebrated his birthday of 
their own accord by common consent, and always for 
two successive days. All sorts and conditions of 
men, in fulfilment of a vow for his welfare, each year 
threw a small coin into the Lacus Curtius, and also 
brought a New Year's gift to the Capitol on the 
Kalends of January, even when he was away from 
Rome. With this sum he bought and dedicated in 
each of the city wards costly statues of the gods, such 
as Apollo Sandaliarius, Jupiter Tragoedus, and others. 
To rebuild his house on the Palatine, which had been 
destroyed by fire, the veterans, the guilds,? the tribes, 


213 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK Il 


atque etiam singillatim e cetero genere hominum 
libentes ac pro facultate quisque pecunias contulerunt, 
delibante tantum modo eo summarum acervos neque 
ex quoquam plus denario auferente. Revertentem ex 
provincia non solum faustis ominibus, sed et modulatis 
carminibus prosequebantur. Observatum etiam est, 
ne quotiens introiret urbem, supplicium de quoquam 
sumeretur. 

LVIII. Patris patriae cognomen universi repentino 
maximoque consensu detulerunt ei: prima plebs 
legatione Antium missa; dein, quia non recipiebat, 
ineunti Romae spectacula frequens et laureata; mox 
in curia senatus, neque decreto neque adclamatione, 
sed per Valerium Messalam. Is mandantibus cunctis : 
* Quod bonum," inquit, * faustumque sit tibi domui- 
que tuae, Caesar Auguste! Sic enim nos perpetuam 
felicitatem rei p. et laeta huic precari existimamus: 
senatus te consentiens cum populo R. consalutat 
patriae patrem." Cui lacrimans respondit Augustus 
his verbis—ipsa enim, sicut Messalae, posui—: 
* Compos factus votorum meorum, p. c., quid habeo 
aliud deos immortales precari, quam ut hunc con- 
sensum vestrum ad ultimum finem vitae mihi perferre 
liceat ?" 

LIX. Medico Antonio Musae, cuius opera ex 
ancipiti morbo convaluerat, statuam aere conlato 
iuxta signum Aesculapi statuerunt. Nonnulli patrum 
familiarum testamento caverunt, ut ab heredibus suis 
praelato titulo victumae in Capitolium ducerentur 


| 214 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


and even individuals of other conditions gladly con- 
tributed money, each according to his means; but he 
merely took a little from each pile as a matter of 
form, not more than a denarius from any of them. 
On his return from a province they received him 
not only with prayers and good wishes, but with 
songs. It was the rule, too, that whenever he entered 
the city, no one should suffer punishment. 

LVIII. The whole body of citizens with a sudden 
unanimous impulse proffered him the title of Father 
of his Country: first the commons, by a deputation 
sent to Antium, and then, because he declined it, 
again at Rome as he entered the theatre, which 
they attended in throngs, all wearing laurel wreaths ; 
the senate afterwards in the House, not by a decree 
or by acclamation, but through Valerius Messala. He, 
speaking for the whole body, said: “ Good fortune 
and divine favour attend thee and thy house, Caesar 
Augustus ; for thus we feel that we are praying for 
lasting prosperity for our country and happiness for 
ourcity. The senate in accord with the people of Rome 
hails thee Father of thy Country." Then Augustus 
with tears in his eyes replied as follows (and I have 
given his exact words, as I did those of Messala): 
* Having attained my highest hopes, Fathers of the 
Senate, what more have I to ask of the immortal 
gods than that I may retain this same unanimous 
approval of yours to the very end of my life." 

LIX. In honour of his physician, Antonius Musa, 
through whose care he had recovered from a dangerous 
illness, a sum of money was raised and Musa's statue 
set up beside that of Aesculapius. Some house- 
holders provided in their wills that their heirs should 
drive victims to the Capitol and pay a thank-offering 


215 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


votumque pro se solveretur, quod superstitem 
Augustum reliquissent. Quaedam Italiae civitates 
diem, quo primum ad se venisset, initium anni 
fecerunt. Provinciarum pleraeque super templa et 
aras ludos quoque quinquennales paene oppidatim 
constituerunt. 

LX. Reges amici atque socii et singuli. in suo 
quisque regno Caesareas urbes condiderunt et cuncti 
simul aedem lovis Olympii Athenis antiquitus in- 
cohatam perficere communi sumptu destinaverunt 
Genioque eius dedicare ; ac saepe regnis relictis non 
Romae modo sed et provincias peragranti cotidiana 
officia togati ac sine regio insigni more clientium 
praestiterunt, 

LXI. Quoniam qualis in imperiis ac magistratibus. 
regendaque per terrarum orbem pace belloque re p. 
fuerit, exposui, referam nunc interiorem ac familiarem 
eius vitam quibusque moribus atque fortuna domi et 
inter suos egerit a iuventa usque ad supremum vitae 
diem. | 

9 Matrem amisit in primo consulatu, sororem Octa- 
viam quinquagensimum et quartum agens aetatis an- 
num. Utrique cum praecipua officia vivae praestitisset, 
etiam defunctae honores maximos tribuit. 

LXII. Sponsam habuerat adulescens P. Servili 
Isaurici filiam, sed reconciliatus. post primam dis- 
cordiam Antonio, expostulantibus utriusque militibus 


a One'stutelary divinity, or familiar spirit, closely identified 
with the person himself, 


216 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


in their behalf, because Augustus had survived them, 
and that a placard to this effect should be carried 
before them. Some of the Italian cities made the 
day on which he first visited them the beginning 
of their year. Many of the provinces, in addition to 
temples and altars, established quinquennial games 
in his honour in almost every one of their towns. 
LX. His friends and allies among the kings each 
in his own realm founded a city called Caesarea, and 
all joined in a plan to contribute the funds for 
finishing the temple of Jupiter Olympius, which was 
begun at Athens in ancient days, and to dedicate it 
to his Genius*; and they would often leave their 


kingdoms and show him the attentions usual in, 


dependents, clad in the toga and without the emblems 


of royalty, not only at Rome, but even when he was 


travelling through the provinces. 

LXI. Now that I have shown how he conducted 
himself in civil and military positions, and in ruling 
the State in all parts of the world in peace and in war, 
I shall next give an account of his private and domestic 
life, describing his character and his fortune at home 
and in his household from his youth until the last 
day of his life. | 

He lost his mother during his first consulship and 
his sister Octavia in his fifty-fourth year. To both 
he showed marked devotion during their lifetime, 
and also paid them the highest honours after their 
death. 

LXII. In his youth he was betrothed to the 
daughter of Publius Servilius Isauricus, but when he 
became reconciled with Antony after their first 
quarrel,and their troops begged that the rivals be 
further united by some tie of kinship, he took to 


217 


48 B.C. 
9 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


ut et necessitudine aliqua iungerentur, privignam 
eius Claudiam, Fulviae ex P. Clodio filiam, duxit 
uxorem vixdum nubilem ac simultate cum Fulvia 
socru orta dimisit intactam adhuc et virginem. 
Mox Scriboniam in matrimonium accepit nuptam 
ante duobus consularibus, ex altero etiam matrem. 
Cum hac quoque divortium fecit, * pertaesus,' ut 
scribit, * morum perversitatem eius,’ ac statim 
Liviam Drusillam matrimonio Tiberi Neronis et 
quidem praegnantem. abduxit dilexitque et probavit 
unice ac perseveranter. 

LXIII. Ex Scribonia Iuliam, ex Livia nihil liber- 
orum tulit, cum maxime cuperet. Infans, qui 
conceptus erat,immaturus est editus. Iuliam primum 
Marcello Octaviae sororis suae filio tantum quod 
pueritiam egresso, deinde, ut is obiit, M. Agrippae 
nuptum dedit exorata sorore, ut sibi genero cederet ; 
nam tunc Agrippa alteram Marcellarum habebat et 
ex ea liberos. Hoc quoque defuncto, multis ac diu, 
etiam ex equestri ordine, cireumspectis condicionibus, 
Tiberium privignum suum elegit coegitque praegnan- 
tem uxorem et ex qua iam pater erat dimittere. 
M. Antonius scribit primum eum Antonio filio suo 
despondisse luliam, dein Cotisoni Getarum regi, quo 
tempore sibi quoque in vicem filiam regis in matri- 
monium petisset. 

LXIV. Nepotes ex Agrippa et Iulia tres habuit 
C. et L. et Agrippam, neptes duas Iuliam et Agrip- 
pinam. Iuliam L. Paulo censoris filio, Agrippinam 


218 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


wife Antony’s stepdaughter Claudia, daughter of 
Fulvia by Publius Clodius, althou;h she was barely 
of marriageable age; but because of a falling out 
with his mother-in-law Fulvia, he divorced her before 
they had begun to live together. Shortly after 
that he married Scribonia, who had been wedded 
before to two ex-consuls, and was a mother by one 
of them. He divorced her also, “unable to put 
up with her shrewish disposition," as he himself 
writes, and at once took Livia Drusilla from her 
husband Tiberius Nero, although she was with child 
at the time ; and he loved and esteemed her to the 
end without a rival. 

LXIII. By Scribonia he had a daughter Julia, by 
Livia no children at all, although he earnestly desived 
issue. One baby was conceived, but was prematurely 
born. He gave Julia in marriage first to Marcellus, 
son of his sister Octavia and hardly more than a 
boy, and then after his death to Marcus Agrippa, 
prevailing upon his sister to yield her son-in-law 
to him; for at that time Agrippa had to wife 
one of the Marcellas and children from her. When 
Agrippa also died, Augustus, after considering various 
alliances for a long time, even in the equestrian 
order, finally chose his stepson Tiberius, obliging 
him to divorce his wife, who was with child and 
by whom he was already a father. Mark Antony 
writes that Augustus first betrothed his daughter to 
his son Antonius and then to Cotiso, king of the 
Getae, at the same time asking for the hand of the 
king's daughter for himself in turn. 

LXIV. From Agrippa and Julia he had three 
grandsons, Gaius, Lucius, and Agrippa, and two 
granddaughters, Julia and Agrippina. He married 


219 


48 R.C 


40 B.C. 


38 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


Germanico sororis suae nepoti collocavit. Gaium et 
L. adoptavit domi per assem et libram emptos a 
patre Agrippa venerosque adhuc ad curam rei p. 
admovit et consules designatos circum provincias 
exercitusque dimisit. Filiam et neptes ita instituit, 
ut etiam lanificio assuefaceret vetaretque loqui aut 
agere quicquam nisi propalam et quod in diurnos 
commentarios referretur ; extraneorum quidem coetu 
adeo prohibuit, ut L. Vinicio, claro decoroque iuveni, 
scripserit quondam parum modeste fecisse eum, quod 
filiam suam Baias salutatum venisset. Nepotes et 
litteras et natare! aliaque rudimenta per se plerum- 
que docuit, ac nihil aeque elaboravit quam ut imitar- 
entur chirographum suum ; neque cenavit una, nisi ut 
in imo lecto assiderent, neque iter fecit, nisi ut 
vehiculo anteirent aut circa adequitarent. 

LXV. Sed laetum eum atque fidentem et subole 
et disciplina domus Fortuna destituit. Iulias, filiam 
et neptem, omnibus probris contaminatas relegavit ; 
G. et L. in duodeviginti mensium spatio amisit 
ambos, Gaio in Lycia, Lucio Massiliae defunctis. 
Tertium nepotem Agrippam simulque privignum 
Tiberium adoptavit in foro lege curiata; ex quibus 


1 natare, mss. ; notare, Lipsius. 


^ The form of purchase consisted in thrice touching a 
balance (libra) with a penny (as), in the presence of the 
praetor. 

> A record of the events of the imperial household. The 
custom of keeping such a day-book apparently dated from 
the time of Augustus. See Friedländer, Roman Life and 
Manners (Eng. Trans.), IV. p. 56. 

c The host usually occupied the summus locus on the imus 
lectus. 

4 Ancient divisions of the citizens for political purposes. 
In cases of adoption the curiae were represented by thirty 


220 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


Julia to Lucius Paulus, the censor’s son, and 
Agrippina to Germanicus his sisters grandson. 
Gaius and Lucius he adopted at home, privately 
buying them from their father by a symbolic sale,* 
and initiated them into administrative life when they 
were still young, sending them to the provinces and 
the armies as consuls elect. In bringing up his 
daughter and his granddaughter he even had them 
taught spinning and weaving, and he forbade them 
to say or do anything except openly and such as 
might be recorded in the household diary He was 
most strict in keeping them from meeting strangers, 
once writing to Lucius Vinicius, a young man of 
good position and character: “You have acted 
presumptuously in coming to Baiae to call on my 
daughter.” He taught his grandsons reading, swim- 
ming, and the other elements of education, for the 
most part himself, taking special pains to train them to 
imitate his own handwriting; and he never dined 
in their company unless they sat beside him on the 
lowest couch,’ or made a journey unless they pre- 
ceded his carriage or rode close by it on either side. 
LXV. But at the height of his happiness and his 
confidence in his family and its training, Fortune 
proved fickle. He found the two Julias, his daughter 
and granddaughter, guilty of every form of vice, and 
banished them. He lost Gaius and Lucius within. 
the span of eighteen months, for the former died in 
Lycia and the latter at Massilia. He then publicly 
adopted his third grandson Agrippa and at the same 
time his stepson Tiberius by a bill passed in the 
assembly of the curiae*; but he soon disowned 


lictors, presided over by the pontifex maximus. This form 
of adoption was usual with adults ; cf. chap. lxiv. 1. 


221 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


Agrippam brevi ob ingenium sordidum ac ferox 
abdicavit seposuitque Surrentum. 

Aliquanto autem patientius mortem quam dedecora 
suorum tulit. Nam C. Lucique casu non adeo fractus, 
de filia absens ac libello per quaestorem recitato 
notum senatui fecit abstinuitque congressu hominum 
diu prae pudore, etiam de necanda deliberavit. 
Certe cum sub idem tempus una ex consciis liberta 
Phoebe ! suspendio vitam finisset, maluisse se ait 
Phoebes ? patrem fuisse. Relegatae usum vini 
omnemque delicatiorem cultum ademit neque adiri a 
quoquam libero servove? nisi se consulto permisit, 
et ita ut certior fieret, qua is aetate, qua statura, quo 
colore esset, etiam quibus corporis notis vel cicatrici- 
bus. Post quinquennium demum ex insula in 
continentem lenioribusque paulo condicionibus trans- 
tulit eam. Nam ut omnino revocaret, exorari nullo 
modo potuit, deprecanti saepe p. R. et pertinacius 
instanti tales filias talesque coniuges pro contione 
inprecatus. Ex nepte Iulia post damnationem editum 
infantem adgnosci alique vetuit. Agrippam nihilo 
tractabiliorem, immo in dies amentiorem, in insulam 
transportavit saepsitque insuper custodia militum, 
Cavit etiam s. c. ut eodem loci in perpetuum contine- 


1 Phoebe, Pulmann ; foede, n. 
2 Phoebes, Pulmann ; foedes (fedes, fede), mas. 
? servove, Basle ed. of 1518, in the margin; servoque, A. 


^ Pandataria. 5 Planasia. 


222 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


Agrippa because of his low tastes and violent temper, 
and sent him off to Surrentum. 

He bore the death of his kin with far more 
resignation than their misconduct. For he was not 
greatly broken by the fate of Gaius and Lucius, but 
he informed the senate of his daughter’s fall through 
a letter read in his absence by a quaestor, and for 
very shame would meet no one for a long time, and 
even thought of putting her to death. At all events, 
when one of her confidantes, a freedwoman called 
Phoebe, hanged herself at about that same time, 
he said: *I would rather have been Phoebe's father." 
After Julia was banished, he denied her the use of 
wine and every form of luxury, and would not allow 
any man, bond or free, to come near her without his 
permission, and then not without being informed of 
his stature, complexion, and even of any marks or 
scars upon his body. It was not until five years later 
that he moved her from the island ? to the mainland 
and treated her with somewhat less rigour. But he 
could not by any means be prevailed on to recall her 
altogether, and when the Roman people several 
times interceded for her and urgently pressed their 
suit, he in open assembly called upon the gods to 
curse them with like daughters and like wives. He 
would not allow the child born to his granddaughter 
Julia after her sentence to be recognized or reared. 
As Agrippa grew no more manageable, but on the 
contrary became madder from day to day, he trans- 
ferred him to an island ? and set a guard of soldiers 
over him besides, He also provided by a decree of 

| 223 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


retur. Atque ad omnem et eius et Iuliarum men- 
tionem ingemiscens proclamare etiam solebat : 


AlO’ ódeXov &yapós T Epevar dyovós T àoAéoQas, 


nec aliter eos appellare quam tris vomicas ac tria 
carcinomata sua. 

LXVI. Amicitias neque facile admisit et constantis- 
sime retinuit, non tantum virtutes ac merita cuiusque 
digne prosecutus, sed vitia quoque et delicta, dum 
taxat modica, perpessus. Neque enim temere ex 
omni numero in amicitia eius afflicti reperientur 
praeter Salvidienum ! Rufum, quem ad consulatum 
usque, et Cornelium Gallum, quem ad praefecturam 
Aegypti, ex infima utrumque fortuna provexerat. 
Quorum alterum res novas molientem damnandum 
senatui tradidit, alteri ob ingratum et malivolum 
animum domo et provinciis suis interdixit. Sed Gallo 
quoque et accusatorum denuntiationibus et senatus 
consultis ad necem conpulso laudavit quidem pieta- 
tem tanto opere pro se indignantium, ceterum et 
inlacrimavit et vicem suam conquestus est, quod 
sibi soli non liceret amicis, quatenus vellet, irasci. 
Reliqui potentia atque opibus ad finem vitae sui? 
quisque ordinis principes floruerunt, quanquam et 


! Salvidienus] Salvidenius, N, corrected in the Basle ed. of 
1533. 2 sui, ç; suae, Q. 

* Iliad 3. 40, where the line is addressed by Hector to 
Paris, with the verbs in the second person. 

> See chap. xlvii., at the beginning. 

c As well as Salvidienus. 

4 That is, while a private citizen could quarrel and make 


224 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


the senate that he should be confined there for all 
time, and at every mention of him and of the Julias 
he would sigh deeply and even cry out: 


* Would that 1 ne'er had wedded and would I had 
died without offspring ” ;? 


and he never alluded to them except as his three 
boils and his three ulcers. 

LXVI. He did not readily make friends, but he 
clung to them with the utmost constancy, not only 
suitably rewarding their virtues and deserts but 
even condoning their faults, provided they were not 
too great. In fact one cannot readily name any of 
his numerous friends who fell into disgrace, except 
Salvidienus Rufus, whom he had advanced to a con- 
sul's rank, and Cornelius Gallus, whom he had raised 
to the prefecture of Egypt, both from the lowest 
estate. The former he handed over to the senate that 
it might condemn him to death, because he was plot- 
ting revolution; the latter he forbade his house and 
the privilege of residence in the imperial provinces? 
because of his ungrateful and envious spirit. But 
when Gallus too * died by his own hand, driven to it 
by the menaces of his accusers and the decrees of the 
senate, though commending their loyalty and their 
indignation on his account, Augustus yet shed tears 
and bewailed his lot, because he alone could not set 
what limits he chose to his anger with his friends.? 
All the rest continued to enjoy power and wealth to 
the end of their lives, each holding a leading place 
in his own class, although sometimes differences 
uP ig his friends, the emperor's position made his anger 
atal. 

¢ That is to say, holding the highest place in the ordo 
(senatorius, equestris, plebesus) of which he was a member. 

225 

VOL. I. Q 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


offensis intervenientibus. Desideravit enim non- 
numquam, ne de pluribus referam, et M. Agrippae 
patientiam et Maecenatis taciturnitatem, cum ille ex 
levi frigoris ! suspicione et quod Marcellus sibi ante- 
ferretur, Mytilenas se relictis omnibus contulisset,? 
hic secretum de comperta Murenae coniuratione 
uxori Terentiae prodidisset. 

Exegit et ipse in vicem ab amicis benivolentiam 
mutuam, tam a defunctis quam a vivis. Nam 
quamvis minime appeteret hereditates, ut qui 
numquam ex ignoti testamento capere quicquam 
sustinuerit, amicorum tamen suprema iudicia moro- 
sissime pensitavit, neque dolore dissimulato, si parcius 
aut citra honorem verborum, neque gaudio, si grate 
pieque quis se prosecutus fuisset. Legata vel partes 
hereditatium a quibuscumque parentibus relicta sibi 
aut statim liberis eorum concedere aut, si pupillari 
aetate essent, die virilis togae vel nuptiarum cum 
incremento restituere consueverat. 

LXVII. Patronus dominusque non minus severus 
quam facilis et clemens multos libertorum in honore 
et usu maximo habuit, ut . Licinum? et Celadum 
aliosque. Cosmum servum gravissime de se opinantem 
non ultra quam compedibus coercuit. Diomeden 
dispensatorem, a quo simul ambulante incurrenti 
repente fero apro per metum obiectus est, maluit 
timiditatis arguere quam noxae, remque non minimi 

1 frigoris, Lipsius; rigoris, mss. _ 

? et after contulisset, mss. ; omitted by T'orrentius. 


* Licinum, Torrentius; Licinium, mss.; et Celadum, 
Casaubon ; enceladum, 2. 


a Cf. chap. lvi. 1 and the note. 
226 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


arose. Not to mention the others, he occasionally 
found Agrippa lacking in patience and Maecenas in 
the gift of silence ; for the former because of a slight 
suspicion of coolness and of a preference shewn for 
Marcellus, threw up everything and went off to 
Mytilene, while the latter betrayed to his wife 
Terentia the secret of the discovery of the con- 
spiracy of Murena. 

In return he demanded of his friends affection on 
their part, both in life and after death.^ For though 
he was in no sense a legacy-hunter, and in fact 
could never bring himself to accept anything from 
the will of a stranger, yet he was highly sensitive in 
weighing the death-bed utterances of his friends, 
concealing neither his chagrin if he was left a nig- 
gardly bequest or one unaccompanied with compli- 
ments, nor his satisfaction, if he was praised in terms 
of gratitude and affection. Whenever legacies or 
shares in inheritances were left him by men of any 
station who had offspring, he either turned them over 
to the children at once, or if the latter were in their 
minority, paid the money back with interest on the 
day when they assumed the gown of manhood or 
married. 

LXVII. As patron and master he was no less strict 
than gracious and merciful, while he held many 
of his freedmen in high honour and close intimacy, 
such as Licinus, Celadus, and others. His slave 
Cosmus, who spoke of him most insultingly, he 
merely put in irons. When he was walking with his 
steward Diomedes, and the latter in a panic got 
behind him when they were suddenly charged by a: 
wild boar, he preferred to tax the man with timorous- 
ness rather than with anything more serious, and 


227 


Q 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


periculi, quia tamen fraus aberat, in iocum vertit. 
Idem Polum ex acceptissimis libertis mori coegit 
compertum adulterare matronas; Thallo a manu, 
quod pro epistula prodita denarios quingentos 
accepisset, crura ei fregit; paedagogum ministrosque 
C. fili, per occasionem valitudinis mortisque eius 
superbe avareque in provincia grassatos, oneratis! 
gravi pondere cervicibus praecipitavit in flumen. 

LXVIII. Prima iuventa variorum dedecorum in- 
famiam subiit. Sextus Pompeius ut effeminatum 
insectatus est; M. Antonius adoptionem avunculi 
stupro meritum ; item L. Marci frater, quasi pudi- 
ciiam delibatam a Caesare Aulo etiam Hirtio in 
Hispania trecentis milibus nummum  substraverit 
solitusque sit crura suburere nuce ardenti, quo 
mollior pilus surgeret. Sed et populus quondam 
universus ludorum die et accepit in contumeliam 
eius et adsensu maximo conprobavit versum in 
scaena pronuntiatum de gallo Matris Deum tym- 
panizante : 

* Videsne, ut cinaedus orbem digito temperat ? ” 


LXIX. Adulteria quidem exercuisse ne amici 
quidem negant, excusantes sane non libidine, sed 
ratione commissa, quo facilius consilia adversariorum 
per cuiusque mulieres exquireret. M. Antonius 
super festinatas Liviae nuptias obiecit et feminam 


1 oneratis, Te; onenitos, G; the other mas. have oneratos. 


* A double word-play on orbem, ‘‘round drum” and 
** world,” and temperat, ‘* beats” and “sways.” 


228 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


turned a matter of grave danger into a jest, because 
after all there was no evil intent. But he forced 
Polus, a favourite freedman of his, to take his own 
life, because he was convicted of adultery with 
Roman matrons, and broke the legs of his secretary 
Thallus for taking five hundred denarii to betray the 
the contents of a letter. Because the tutor and 
attendants of his son Gaius took advantage of their 
master's illness and death to commit acts of arrogance 
and greed in his province, he had them thrown into 
a river with heavy weights about their necks. 

LXVIII. In early youth he incurred the reproach 
of sundry shameless acts. Sextus Pompey taunted 
him with effeminacy; Mark Antony with having 
earned adoption by his uncle through unnatural 
relations ; and Lucius, brother of Mark Antony, that 
after sacrificing his honour to Caesar he had given 
himself to Aulus Hirtius in Spain for three. hundred 
thousand sesterces, and that he used to singe his 
legs with red-hot nutshells, to make the hair grow 
softer. What is more, one day when there were 
plays in the theatre, all the people took as directed 
against him and loudly applauded the following line, 
spoken on the stage and referring to a priest of the 
Mother of the Gods, as he beat his drum : 


* See'st how a wanton's finger sways the world ? "^ 


LXIX. That he was given to adultery not even 
his friends deny, although it is true that they 
excuse it as committed not from passion but from 
policy, the more readily to get track of his adver- 
saries’ designs through the women of their house- 
holds. :Mark Antony charged him, besides his 
hasty marriage with Livia, with taking the wife 


229 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


consularem e triclinio viri coram in cubiculum 
abductam, rursus in convivium rubentibus auriculis 
incomptiore capillo reductam ; dimissam Scriboniam, 
quia liberius doluisset nimiam potentiam paelicis ; 
condiciones quaesitas per amicos, qui matres familias 
et adultas aetate virgines denudarent atque per- 
spicerent, tamquam Toranio mangone vendente. 
Scribit etiam ad ipsum haec familiariter adhuc 
necdum plane inimicus aut hostis : “Quid te mutavit ? 
Quod reginam ineo? Uxor mea est. Nunc coepi 
an abhinc annos novem? Tu deinde solam Drusillam 
inis? Ita valeas, uti tu, hanc epistulam cum leges, 
non inieris Tertullam aut Terentillam aut Rufillam 
aut Salviam Titiseniam aut omnes. An refert, ubi 
et in qua arrigas ? " 

LXX. Cena quoque eius secretior in fabulis fuit, 
quae vulgo Sw9exáÓ«os vocabatur; in qua deorum 
dearumque habitu discubuisse convivas et ipsum 
pro Apolline ornatum non Antoni modo epistulae 
singulorum nomina amarissime enumerantis ex- 
probrant, sed et sine auctore notissimi versus ; 


“ Cum primum istorum conduxit mensa choragum, 
Sexque deos vidit Mallia sexque deas, 
Impia dum Phoebi Caesar mendacia ludit, 
Dum nova divorum cenat adulteria : 
Omnia se a terris tunc numina declinarunt, 
Fugit et auratos Iuppiter ipse thronos.” 


a Probably referring to Livia. 

> The choragus at Athens had charge of the costuming and 
stage setting of plays. Hence the meaning is here ‘“ when 
they had found someone to make them up.” 

e According to some, the choragus ; others regard it as the 
name of a place, 


230 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


of an ex-consul from her husband’s dining room 
before his very eyes into a bed-chamber, and 
bringing her back to the table with her hair 
in disorder and her ears glowing ; that Scribonia 
was divorced because she expressed her resentment 
too freely at the excessive influence of a rival; 
that his friends acted as his panders, and stripped 
and inspected matrons and well-grown girls, as 
if Toranius the slave-dealer were putting them up 
for sale. Antony also writes to Augustus himself 
in the following familiar terms, when he had not 
yet wholly broken with him privately or publicly : 
* What has made such a change in you? Because 
I lie with the queen? She is my wife. Am I just 
beginning this, or was it nine years ago? What 
then of you—do you lie only with Drusilla? Good 
luck to you if when you read this letter you have 
not been with Tertulla or Terentilla or Rufilla 
or Salvia Titisenia, or all of them. Does it matter 
where or with whom you take your pleasure? " 

LXX. There was besides a private dinner of his, 
commonly called that of the **twelve gods," which was 
the subject of gossip. At this the guests appeared 
in the guise of gods and goddesses, while he himself 
was made up to represent Apollo, as was charged 
not merely in letters of Antony, who spitefully 
gives the names of all the guests, but also in these 
anonymous lines, which everyone knows: 

“As soon as that table of rascals had secured a 
choragus® and Mallia* saw six gods and six goddesses, 
while Caesar impiously plays the false réle of Apollo 
and feasts amid novel debaucheries of the gods; then 
all the deities turned their faces from the earth and 
Jupiter himself fled from his golden throne." 


231 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


2 Auxit cenae rumorem summa tunc in civitate 
penuria ac fames, adclamatumque est postridie: 
Omne frumentum deos comedisse et Caesarem 
esse plane Apollinem, sed Tortorem, quo cognomine 
is deus quadam in parte urbis colebatur. Notatus 
est et ut pretiosae supellectilis Corinthiorumque 
praecupidus et aleae indulgens. Nam et proscriptionis 
tempore ad statuam eius ascriptum est: 


* Pater argentarius, ego Corinthiarius,” 


cum existimaretur quosdam propter vasa Corinthia 
inter proscriptos curasse referendos; et deinde bello 
Siciliensi epigramma vulgatum est : 


* Postquam bis classe victus naves perdidit, 
Aliquando ut vincat, ludit assidue aleam." 


LXXI. Ex quibus sive criminibus sive maledictis 
infamiam impudicitiae facillime refutavit et praesentis 
et posterae vitae castitate ; item lautitiarum invidiam, 
cum et Alexandria capta nihil sibi praeter unum 
murrinum calicem ex instrumento regio retinuerit 
et mox vasa aurea assiduissimi usus conflaverit 
omnia. Circa libidines haesit, postea quoque, ut 
ferunt, ad vitiandas virgines promptior, quae sibi 
undique etiam ab uxore conquirerentur. Aleae 

* Corinthiarius: coined in jest on the analogy of argenta- 
rius; used in inscr. of slaves in charge of the vasa Corinthia. 


> Cf. chap. xli. 1. 
232 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


The scandal of this banquet was the greater because 
of dearth and famine in the land at the time, 
and on the following day there was an outcry 
that the gods had eaten all the grain and that 
Caesar was in truth Apollo, but Apollo the 
Tormentor, a surname under which the god was 
worshipped in one part of the city. He was 
criticized too as over fond of costly furniture 
and Corinthian bronzes and as given to gaming. 
Indeed, as early as the time of the proscriptions 
there was written on his statue— 


* [n silver once my father dealt, now in Corin- 
thians @ I," 
since it was believed that he caused some men to be 
entered in the list of the proscribed because of 
their Corinthian vases. Later, during the Sicilian 
war, this epigram was current : 


* After he has twice been beaten at sea and lost 
his ships, he plays at dice all the time, in the hope 
of winning one victory.” 


LXXI. Of these charges or slanders (whichever 
we may call them) he easily refuted that for . 
unnatural vice by the purity of his life at the time 
and afterwards; so too the odium of extravagance 
by the fact that when he took Alexandria, he 
kept none of the furniture of the palace for himself ^ 
except a single agate cup, and presently melted 
down all the golden vessels intended for everyday 
use. He could not dispose of the charge of 
lustfulness and they say that even in his later 
years he was fond of deflowering maidens, who 
were brought together for him from all quarters, 
even by his own wife. He did not in the least 


233 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


rumorem nullo modo expavit lusitque simpliciter 
et palam oblectamenti causa etiam senex ac praeter- 
quam Decembri mense aliis quoque festis et profestis 
diebus. Nec id dubium est. Autographa quadam 
epistula: * Cenavi," ait, “mi Tiberi, cum iisdem; 
accesserunt convivae Vinicius et Silius pater. Inter 
cenam lusimus geronticos et heri et hodie; talis 
enim iactatis, ut quisque canem aut senionem 
miserat, in singulos talos singulos denarios in 
medium conferebat, quos tollebat universos, qui 
Venerem iecerat.” Et rursus aliis litteris: “ Nos, 
mi Tiberi, Quinquatrus satis iucunde egimus; 
lusimus enim per omnis dies forumque aleatorum ! 
calfecimus. Frater tuus magnis clamoribus rem 
gessit; ad summam tamen perdidit non multum, 
sed ex magnis detrimentis praeter spem paulatim 
retractum est. Ego perdidi viginti milia nummum 
meo nomine, sed cum effuse in lusu liberalis fuissem, 
ut soleo plerumque. Nam si quas manus remisi 
cuique exegissem aut retinuissem quod cuique 
donavi, vicissem vel quinquaginta milia. Sed hoc 
malo; benignitas enim mea me ad caelestem 
gloriam efferet." Scribit ad filiam: “Misi tibi 
denarios ducentos quinquaginta, quos singulis con- 
vivis dederam, si vellent inter se inter cenam vel 
talis vel par impar ludere." 

LXXII. In ceteris partibus vitae continentissimum 
constat ac sine suspicione ullius vitii. Habitavit 


1 aleatorum, mss, ; aleatorium, Venice ed. of 1420, and the 
editora generally. 


a When the freedom of the Saturnalia justified it. 

è When only aces appeared, the throw was called canis ; 
when all the dice turned up different numbers, Venus, 

* The ‘five-day ” festival of Minerva, March 20-25, 


234 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


shrink from a reputation for gaming, and played 
frankly and openly for recreation, even when he 
was well on in years, not only in the month of 
December,” but on other holidays as well, and on 
working days too. There is no question about 
this, for in a letter in his own handwriting he 
says: “JI dined, dear Tiberius, with the same 
company; we had besides as guests Vinicius and 
the elder Silius. We gambled like old men during 
the meal both yesterday and to-day; for when 
the dice were thrown, whoever turned up the ‘ dog’? 
or the six, put a denarius in the pool for each one 
of the dice, and the whole was taken by anyone 
who threw the ‘ Venus." Again in another letter: 
* We spent the Quinquatria ^ very merrily, my dear 
Tiberius, for we played all day long and kept 
the gaming-board warm. Your brother made a 
great outcry about his luck, but after all did not 
come out far behind in the long run; for after 
losing heavily, he unexpectedly and little by little 
got back a good deal. For my part, I lost twenty 
thousand sesterces, but because Í was extravagantly 
generous in my play, as usual. If I had demanded 
of everyone the stakes which I let go, or had 
kept all that I gave away, I should have won 
fully fifty thousand. But I like that better, for 
my generosity wil exalt me to immortal glory." 
To his daughter he writes: “I send you two 
hundred and fifty denarii, the sum which I gave 
each of my guests, in case they wished to play 
at dice or at odd and even during the dinner." 
LXXII. In the other details of his life it is generally 
agreed that he was most temperate and without 
even the suspicion of any fault. He lived at first 


2395 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


primo iuxta Romanum Forum supra Scalas anularias, 
in domo quae Calvi oratoris fuerat; postea in 
Palatio, sed nihilo minus aedibus modicis Horten- 
sianis, et neque laxitate neque cultu conspicuis, 
ut in quibus porticus breves essent Albanarum 
columnarum et sine marmore ullo aut insigni 
pavimento conclavia. Ac per annos amplius quad- 
raginta eodem cubiculo hieme et aestate mansit, 
quamvis parum salubrem valitudini suae urbem 
hieme experiretur assidueque in urbe hiemaret. 
Si quando quid secreto aut sine interpellatione 
agere proposuisset, erat illi locus in edito singularis, 
quem Syracusas et technyphion! vocabat; huc 
transibat aut in alicuius libertorum suburbanum ; 
aeger autem in domo Maecenatis cubabat. Ex 
secessibus praecipue frequentavit maritima insulasque 
Campaniae aut proxima urbi oppida, Lanuvium, 
Praeneste, Tibur, ubi etiam in porticibus Herculis 
templi persaepe ius dixit. Ampla et operosa praetoria 
gravabatur. Et neptis quidem suae Iuliae, profuse ab 
ea exstructa, etiam diruit ad solum, sua vero quamvis 
modica non tam statuarum tabularumque pictarum 
ornatu quam xystis et nemoribus excoluit rebusque 
vetustate ac raritate notabilibus, qualia sunt Capreis 
immanium beluarum ferarumque membra praegrandia, 
uae dicuntur gigantum ossa, et arma heroum. 
LXXIII. Instrumenti eius et supellectilis parsi- 
monia apparet etiam nunc residuis lectis atque 


! technyphion (rexvóqiov), Bentley ; tegnophion, 2. 


a Commonly called peperino, a hard grey volcanic stone with 
black nodules resembling peppercorns. ° Cf. chap. Ixxxii. 1. 

¢ With reference to the study of Archimedes, or perhaps 
to the general use of such elevated rooms in Syracuse. 

4 “Tittle workshop’; a diminutive from réxyn. 


| 236 


4e cot 


r 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


near the Forum Romanum, above the Stairs of the 
Ringmakers, in a house which had belonged to the 
orator Calvus; afterwards, on the Palatine, but in 
the no less modest dwelling of Hortensius, which 
was remarkable neither for size nor elegance, having 
but a short colonnade with columns of Alban stone,” 
and rooms without any marble decorations or hand- 
some pavements, For more than forty years too he 
used the same bedroom in winter and summer ;? 
although he found the city unfavourable to his 
health in the winter, yet continued to winter there. 
If ever he planned to do anything in private or 
without interruption, he had a retired place at the 
top of the house, which he called “ Syracuse ” * and 
*«technyphion." ? In this he used to take refuge, or 
else in the villa of one of his freedmen in the 
suburbs; but whenever he was not well, he slept 
at Maecenas's house. For retirement he went most 
frequently to places by the sea and the islands of 
Campania, or to the towns near Rome, such as 
Lanuvium, Praeneste or Tibur, where he very often 
held court in the colonnades of the Temple of 
Hercules. He disliked large and sumptuous country 
palaces, actually razing to the ground one which his 
granddaughter Julia built on a lavish scale. His own 
villas, which were modest enough, he decorated not 


so much with handsome statues and pictures as with 


terraces, groves, and objects noteworthy for their 
antiquity and rarity ; for example, at Capreae the 
monstrous bones of huge sea monsters and wild 
beasts, called the * bones of the giants" and the 
* weapons of the heroes." | 
LXXIII. The simplicity of his furniture and house- 
hold goods may be seen from couches and tables still in 


237 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


mensis, quorum! pleraque vix privatae elegantiae 
sint. Ne toro quidem cubuisse aiunt nisi humili 
et modice instrato. Veste non temere alia quam 
domestica usus est, ab sorore et uxore et filia 
neptibusque confecta; togis neque restrictis neque 
fusis, clavo nec lato nec angusto, calciamentis altius- * 
culis, ut procerior quam erat videretur. Et forensia 
autem et caleeos numquam non intra cubiculum 
habuit ad subitos repentinosque casus parata. 

LXXIV. Convivabatur assidue nec umquam nisi 
recta, non sine magno ordinum hominumque dilectu. 
Valerius Messala tradit, neminem umquam liber- 
tinorum adhibitum ab eo cenae excepto Mena, sed 
asserto in ingenuitatem post proditam Sexti Pompei 
classem. Ipse scribit, invitasse se quondam, in 
cuius villa maneret, qui speculator suus olim fuisset. 
Convivia nonnumquam et serius inibat et maturius 
relinquebat, cum convivae et cenare inciperent, 
prius quam ille discumberet, et permanerent digresso 
eo. Cenam ternis ferculis aut cum abundantissime 
senis praebebat, ut non nimio sumptu, ita summa 
comitate. Nam et ad communionem sermonis 
tacentis vel summissim fabulantis provocabat, et 
aut acroamata? et histriones aut etiam triviales ex 
circo ludios * interponebat ac frequentius aretalogos. 

1 quorum, Sabellicus ; quarum, 0. 

.2 quondam] quendam Xu. 


3 acroamata, Sabellicus; acromata, mas. (cromata, Mf’). 
1 ludios, Beroaldus ; ludos, mes. 


a Opposed to vestis forensis or forenata (vestimenta); cf. Vit. 
viii. 1. | 

ò The cena recta was a regular dinner, at which the guests 
reclined on couches at a table, contrasted with sportula, an in- 
formal meal (Claud. xxi. 4) or a distribution of food. See Fried- 
lander, Roman Life and Manners (Eng. trans.), IV. pp. 77 ft, 


238 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


existence, many of which are scarcely fine enough 
for a private citizen. They say that he always slept 
on a low and plainly furnished bed. Except on 
special occasions he wore common clothes for the 
house," made by his sister, wife, daughter or grand- 
daughters; his togas were neither close nor full, his 
purple stripe neither narrow nor broad, and his shoes 
somewhat high-soled, to make him look taller than 
he really was. But he always kept shoes and 
clothing to wear in public ready in his room for 
sudden and unexpected occasions. 

LXXIV. He gave dinner parties constantly and 
always formally, with great regard to the rank and 
personality of his guests. Valerius Messala writes 
that he never invited a freedman to dinner with the 
exception of Menas, and then only when he had 
been enrolled among the freeborn after betraying the 
fleet of Sextus Pompey. Augustus himself writes that 
he once entertained a man at whose villa he used to 
stop,° who had been one of his body-guard. He would 
sometimes come to table late on these occasions and 
leave early, allowing his guests to begin to dine 
before he took his place and keep their places after 
he went out. He served a dinner of three courses or 
of six when he was most lavish, without needless 
extravagance but with the greatest goodfellowship. 
For he drew into the general conversation those 
who were silent or chatted under their breath, and 
introduced music and actors, or even strolling players 
from the circus, and especially story-tellers.4 


e See chap. lxxii. 2. 

4 Tellers of marvellous tales; cf. Juv. 15. 16, and Mayor 
e lor. Doubtless the same as the fabulatores, Ixxviii. 2, 

ow. 


239 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


LXXV. Festos et sollemnes dies profusissime, 
nonnumquam tantum ioculariter celebrabat. Saturn- 
alibus, et si quando alias libuisset, modo munera 
dividebat, vestem et aurum et argentum, modo 
nummos omnis notae, etiam veteres regios ac 
peregrinos, interdum nihil praeter cilicia et spongias 
et rutabula et forpices atque alia id genus titulis 
obscuris et ambiguis. Solebat et inaequalissimarum 
rerum Sortes et aversas tabularum picturas in 
convivio venditare incertoque casu spem mercantium 
vel frustrari vel explere, ita ut per singulos lectos 
licitatio fieret et seu iactura seu lucrum communi- 
caretur. 

LXXVI. Cibi—nam ne haec quidem omiserim 
—minimi erat atque vulgaris fere. Secundarium 
panem et pisciculos minutos et caseum bibulum! 
manu pressum et ficos virides biferas maxime 
appetebat; vescebaturque et ante cenam quocumque 
tempore et loco, quo stomachus desiderasset. Verba 
ipsius ex epistulis sunt: * Nos in essedo panem et 
palmulas gustavimus." Et iterum : “ Dum lectica 
ex regia domum redeo, panis unciam cum paucis 
acinis uvae duracinae comedi." Et rursus: “Ne 
Iudaeus quidem, mi Tiberi, tam diligenter sabbatis 
ieiunium servat quam ego hodie servavi, qui in balineo 
demum post horam primam noctis duas buccas 
manducavi prius quam ungui inciperem.” Ex hac 
inobservantia nonnumquam vel ante initum vel 


1 bibulum, 0 ; bubulum, ç and the editors. 


a See chap. xxxi. 5; some think that the reference is to 
the Regia in the Forum. 

* That is, grapes suited for eating and not for making 
wine ; cf. Mart. 13. 22; Colum. 3, 2. 


240 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


LXXV. Festivals and holidays he celebrated lavishly 
as a rule, but sometimes only in a spirit of fun. On 
the Saturnalia, and at any other time when he took 
it into his head, he would now give gifts of clothing 
or gold and silver; again coins of every device, 
including old pieces of the kings and foreign money; 
another time nothing but hair cloth, sponges, pokers 
and tongs, and other such things under misleading 
names of double meaning. He used also at a dinner 
party to put up for auction lottery-tickets for articles 
of most unequal value, and paintings of which only 
the back was shown, thus by the caprice of fortune 
disappointing or filling to the full the expectations of 
the purchasers, requiring however that all the guests 
should take part in the bidding and share the loss or 

ain. 

LXXVI. He wasa light eater (for I would not omit 
even this detail) and as a rule of plain food. He 
particularly liked coarse bread, small fishes, hand- 
made moist cheese, and green figs of the second 
crop; and he would eat even before dinner, wherever 
, and whenever he felt hungry. I quote word for 
word from some of his letters: “I ate a little bread 
and some dates in my carriage." And again: *As] 
was going home from the Colonnade of Pompey" in my 
litter, I devoured an ounce of bread and a few berries 
from a cluster of hard-fleshed grapes." ^ Once more: 
* Not even a Jew, my dear Tiberius, fasts so scru- 
pulously on his sabbaths as I have to-day ; for it was 
not until after the first hour of the night that I ate 
two mouthfuls of bread in the bath before I began 


to be anointed.” Because of this irregularity he 
sometimes ate alone either before a dinner. party 
241 


VOL. I. R 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


post dimissum convivium solus cenitabat, cum pleno 
convivio nihil tangeret. 
. LXXVII. Vini quoque natura parcissimus erat. 
Non amplius ter bibere eum solitum super cenam 
in castris apud Mutinam, Cornelius Nepos tradit. - 
Postea quotiens largissime se invitaret, senos sex- 
tantes non excessit, aut si excessisset, reiciebat. 
Et maxime delectatus est Raetico neque temere 
interdiu bibit. Pro potione sumebat perfusum aqua 
frigida panem aut cucumeris frustum vel lactuculae 
thyrsum aut recens aridumve pomum suci vinosioris. 
LXXVIII. Post cibum meridianum, ita ut vestitus 
calciatusque erat, retectis pedibus paulisper con- 
quiescebat opposita ad oculos manu. A cena in 
lecticulam se lucubratoriam recipiebat ; ibi, donec 
residua diurni actus aut omnia aut ex maxima parte 
conficeret, ad multam noctem permanebat. In 
lectum inde transgressus non amplius cum plurimum 
quam septem horas dormiebat, ac ne eas quidem 
continuas, sed üt in illo temporis spatio ter aut . 
quater expergisceretur. Si interruptum somnum 
reciperare, ut evenit, non posset, lectoribus aut 
fabulatoribus arcessitis resumebat producebatque ultra 
primam saepe lucem. Nec in tenebris vigilavit 
umquam nisi assidente aliquo. Matutina vigilia 
offendebatur ; ac si vel officii vel sacri causa maturius 
vigilandum esset, ne id contra commodum faceret, . 
in proximo cuiuscumque domesticorum  cenaculo 
manebat. Sic quoque saepe indigens somni, et dum 


a Like an acid wine. 

è That is, without a blanket over his feet, because he had 
his shoes on, 

* Lucubratorum, ** for working by lamp-light.” 
242 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


began or after it was over, touching nothing while it 
was in progress. 

LXXVII. He was by nature most sparing also in 
his use of wine. Cornelius Nepos writes that in 
camp before Mutina it was his habit to drink not 
more than three times at dinner. Afterwards, when 
he indulged most freely he never exceeded a pint; 
or if he did, he used to throw it up. He liked 
Raetian wine best, but rarely drank before dinner. 
Instead he would take a bit of bread soaked in cold 
water, a slice of cucumber, a sprig of young lettuce, 
or an apple with a tart flavour, either fresh or dried. 

LXXVIII. After his midday meal he used to rest for 
a while just as he was, without taking off his clothes 
or his shoes, with his feet uncovered? and his hand to 
his eyes. After dinner he went to a couch in his 
study, where he remained to late at night, until he 
had attended to what was left of the day's business, 
either wholly or in great part. Then he went to 
bed and slept not more than seven hours at most, 
and not even that length of time without a break, 
but waking three or four times. If he could not 
resume his sleep when it was interrupted, as would 
happen, he sent for readers or story-tellers, and when 
sleep came to him he often prolonged it until after 
daylight. He would never lie awake in the dark 
without having someone sit by his side. He detested 
early rising and when he had to get up earlier than 
usual because of some official or religious duty, to 
avoid inconveniencing himself he spent the night in 
the room of one of his friends near the appointed 
place. Even so, he often suffered from want of. 
sleep, and he would drop off while he was being 


243 
R 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


per vicos deportaretur et deposita lectica inter aliquas 
moras condormiebat. 

LXXIX. Forma fuit eximia et per omnes aetatis 
gradus venustissima, quamquam et omnis lenocinii 
neglegens; in capite comendo tam incuriosus, ut 
raptim compluribus simul tonsoribus operam daret 
ac modo tonderet modo raderet barbam eoque ipso 
tempore aut legeret aliquid aut etiam scriberet. Vultu 
erat vel in sermone vel tacitus adeo tranquillo 
serenoque, ut quidam e primoribus Galliarum con- 
fessus sit inter suos, eo se inhibitum ac remollitum 
quo minus, ut destinarat, in transitu Alpium per 
simulationem conloquii propius admissus in prae- 
cipitium propelleret. Oculos habuit claros ac nitidos, 
quibus etiam existimari volebat inesse quiddam divini 
vigoris, gaudebatque, si qui sibi acrius contuenti 
quasi ad fulgorem solis vultum summitteret; sed in 
senecta sinistro minus vidit; dentes raros et exiguos 
et scabros ; capillum leviter inflexum et subflavum ; 
supercilia coniuncta; mediocres aures; nasum et a 
summo eminentiorem et ab imo deductiorem ; colorem 
inter aquilum candidumque; staturam brevem— 
quam tamen Iulius Marathus libertus et a memoria! 
eius quinque pedum et dodrantis fuisse tradit, —sed 
quae commoditate et aequitate membrorum occulere- . 


1 et a memoria, Lipsius ; etiam memoriam, etiam in 
memoriam, mss. 


5 The so-called ** Roman nose.” 
^ Roman measure ; a little less than five feet seven inches 
(5°58) English. 


244 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


carried through the streets and when his litter was 
set down because of some delay. 

LXXIX. He was unusually handsome and ex- 
ceedingly graceful at all periods of his life, though 
he cared nothing for personal adornment. He was 
so far from being particular about the dressing of his 
hair, that he would have several barbers working in a 
hurry at the same time, and as for his beard he now 
had it clipped and now shaved, while at the very same 
time he would either be reading or writing something. 
His expression, whether in conversation or when 
he was silent, was so calm and mild, that one of 
the leading men of the Gallic provinces admitted 
to his countrymen that it had softened his heart, 
and kept him from carrying out his design of pushing 
the emperor over a cliff, when he had been allowed 
to approach him under the pretence of a conference, 
as he was crossing the Alps. He had clear, bright 
eyes, in which he liked to have it thought that 
there was a kind of divine power, and it greatly 
pleased him, whenever he looked keenly at anyone, 
if he let his face fall as if before the radiance of the 
sun ; but in his old age he could not see very well 
with his left eye. His teeth were wide apart, small, 
and ill-kept; his hair was slightly curly and inclining 
to golden; his eyebrows met. His ears were of 
moderate size, and his nose projected a little at the 
top and then bent slightly inward.” His complexion 
was between dark and fair. He was short of stature 
(although Julius Marathus, his freedman and keeper 
of his records, says that he was five feet and nine 
inches in height?) but this was concealed by the 
fine proportion and symmetry of his figure, and was 


245 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


tur, ut non nisi ex comparatione astantis alicuius 
procerioris intellegi posset. 

LXXX. Corpore traditur maculoso dispersis per 
pectus atque alvum genetivis notis in modum et 
ordinem ac numerum stellarum caelestis ursae, sed 
et callis quibusdam ex prurigine corporis adsiduoque 
et vehementi strigilis usu plurifariam concretis ad 
impetiginis formam. Coxendice! et femore et crure 
sinistro non perinde valebat, ut saepe etiam in- 
claudicaret ; sed remedio harenarum atque harumdi- 
num confirmabatur. Dextrae quoque manus digitum 
salutarem tam imbecillum interdum sentiebat, ut 
torpentem contractumque frigore vix cornei circuli 
supplemento scripturae admoveret. Questus est et de 
vesica, cuius dolore calculis demum per urinam eiectis 
levabatur. 

LXXXI. Graves et periculosas valitudines per 
omnem vitam aliquot expertus est; praecipue 
Cantabria domita, cum etiam destillationibus iocinere 
vitiato ad desperationem redactus contrariam et an- 
cipitem rationem medendi necessario subiit; quia 
calida fomenta non proderant, frigidis curari coactus 
auctore Antonio Musa. 

Quasdam et anniversarias ac tempore certo recur- 
rentes experiebatur ; nam sub natalem suum plerum- 
que languebat ; et initio veris praecordiorum inflatione 
temptabatur, austrinis autem tempestatibus gravedine. 
Quare quassato corpore neque frigora neque aestus | 
facile tolerabat. 


1 coxendice] coxaindice, 2 ; corrected in the fifteenth century. 


a Ursa major, Charles’s Wain, the Great Dipper. 
> Apparently a form of poultice; some read habenarum 
and explain as a kind of truss. ° Cf. Hor. Epist. 1. 15. 2-3. 


246 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


noticeable only by comparison with some taller person 
standing beside him. 

LXXX. It is said that his body was covered with 
spots and that he had birthmarks scattered over his 
breast and belly, corresponding in form, order and 
number with the stars of the Bear in the heavens ;4 
also numerous callous places resembling ringworm, 
caused by a constant itching of his body and a 
vigorous use of the strigil. He was not very strong 
in his left hip, thigh, and leg, and even limped 
slightly at times; but he strengthened them by 
treatment with sand and reeds.’ He sometimes found 
the forefinger of his right hand so weak, when it was 
numb and shrunken with the cold, that he could 
hardly use it for writing even with the aid of a 
finger-stall of horn. He complained of his bladder 
too, and was relieved of the pain only after passing 
stones in his urine. 

LXXXI. In the course of his life he suffered from 
several severe and dangerous illnesses, especially 
after the subjugation of Cantabria, when he was in 
such a desperate plight from abscesses of the liver, 
that he was forced to submit to an unprecedented and 
hazardous course of treatment. Since hot fomenta- 
tions gave him no relief, he was led by the advice 
of his physician Antonius Musa to try cold ones. 

He experienced also some disorders which recurred 
every year at definite times ; for he was commonly 
ailing just before his birthday ; and at the beginning 
of spring he was troubled with an enlargement of 
the diaphragm, and when the wind was in the 
south, with catarrh. Hence his constitution was so 
weakened that he could not readily endure either 
cold or heat. 


247 


28 B.C, 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


LXXXII. Hieme quaternis cum pingui toga tunicis 
et subucula et thorace! laneo et feminalibus et 
tibialibus muniebatur, aestate apertis cubiculi foribus 
ac saepe in peristylo saliente aqua atque etiam venti- 
lante aliquo cubabat. Solis vero ne hiberni quidem 
patiens, domi quoque non nisi petasatus sub divo 
spatiabatur. Itinera lectica et noctibus fere eaque 
lenta ac minuta faciebat, ut Praeneste vel Tibur 
biduo procederet; ac si quo pervenire mari posset, 
potius navigabat. Verum tantam infirmitatem magna 
cura tuebatur, in primis lavandi raritate ; unguebatur 
enim saepius aut sudabat ad flammam, deinde per- 
fundebatur egelida aqua vel sole multo tepefacta. 
At quotiens nervorum causa marinis Albulisque calidis 
utendum esset, contentus hoc erat ut insidens ligneo 
solio, quod ipse Hispanico verbo duretam vocabat, 
manus ac pedes alternis iactaret. 

LXXXIII. Exercitationes campestres equorum et 
armorum statim post civilia bella omisit et ad pilam 
primo folliculumque transiit, mox nihil aliud quam 
vectabatur et deambulabat, ita ut in extremis spatiis 
subsultim decurreret segestria? vel lodicula involu- 
tus. Animi laxandi causa modo piscabatur hamo, 
modo talis aut ocellatis nucibusque ludebat cum 


1 subucula et thorace, Beroaldus ; subuculaethorace, 0. 
2 segestria, Roth (segestro, Cusactus) ; sestertio, mss. 


a Of. chap. lxxii. 1, note b. 

è Albulae aquae were the sulphur springs which flow into 
the Anio between Rome and Tivoli (Tibur). 

* The pila was a small hard ball. Three players stood at 
the three points of a triangle (whence the game was called 
irigon) and passed the ball from one to the other. A skilful 
player used his left hand as well as his right, 


248 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


LXXXII. In winter he protected himself with 
four tunics and a heavy toga, besides an undershirt, 
a woollen chest-protector and wraps for his thighs 
and shins, while in summer he slept with the doors 
of his bed-room open, oftentimes in the open court 
near a fountain, besides having someone to fan him. 
Yet he could not endure the sun even in winter, and 
never walked in the open air without wearing a 
broad-brimmed hat, even at home. He travelled in 
a litter, usually at night, and by such slow and easy 
stages that he took two days to go to Praeneste or 
Tibur ; and if he could reach his destination by sea, 
he preferred to sail Yet in spite of all he made good 
his weakness by great care, especially by moderation 
in bathing ; for as a rule he was anointed or took a 
sweat by a fire, after which he was doused with 
water either lukewarm or tepid from long exposure 
to the sun. When however he had to use hot salt water 
and sulphur baths? for rheumatism, he contented 
himself with sitting on a wooden bath-seat, which he 
called by the Spanish name dureta, and plunging his 
hands and feet in the water one after the other. 

LXXXIII. Immediately after the civil war he 
gave up exercise with horses and arms in the Campus 
Martius, at first turning to pass-ball^ and balloon- 
ball, but soon confining himself to riding or taking 
a walk, ending the latter by running and leaping, 
wrapped in a mantle or a blanket. To divert his 
mind he sometimes angled and sometimes played at 
dice, marbles and nuts* with little boys, searching 


4 The folliculus was a large light ball. The players wore 
a guard on the right arm, with which they struck the ball, 
as in the Italian giuco del p 

* Many games were played with nuts; cf. Hor, Serm. 2. 
3. 171, Mart. 5. 84, etc. 240 


t9 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


pueris minutis, quos facie et garrulitate amabilis 
undique conquirebat, praecipue Mauros et Syros. 
Nam pumilos atque distortos et omnis generis 
eiusdem ut ludibria naturae malique ominis abhor- 
rebat. | 
LXXXIV. Eloquentiam studiaque liberalia ab 
aetate prima et cupide et laboriosissime exercuit. 
Mutinensi bello in tanta mole rerum et legisse et 
scripsisse et declamasse cotidie traditur. Nam 
deinceps neque in senatu neque apud populum heque 
apud milites locutus est umquam nisi meditata et 
composita oratione, quamvis non deficeretur ad subita 
extemporali facultate. Ac ne periculum memoriae 
adiret aut in ediscendo tempus absumeret,! instituit 
recitare omnia. Sermones quoque cum singulis atque 
etiam cum Livia sua graviores non nisi scriptos? et 
e libello habebat, ne plus minusve loqueretur ex 
tempore. Pronuntiabat dulci et proprio quodam oris 
sono dabatque assidue phonasco operam ; sed non- 
numquam infirmatis faucibus praeconis voce ad popu- 
lum contionatus est. 

LXXXV. Multa varii generis prosa oratione com- 
posuit, ex quibus nonnulla in coetu familiarium velut 
in auditorio recitavit, sicut ** Rescripta Bruto de 
Catone," quae volumina cum iam senior ex magna 
parte legisset, fatigatus Tiberio tradidit perlegenda ; 
item “ Hortationes ad Philosophiam," et aliqua * De 


1 absumeret, Se; assumeret (adsumeret), n. 
? scriptos, c; scriptis, Q. 


a See chap. lxxxi. at the end. 
> Brutus published a eulogy of Cato in 46 B.c.; cf. Cic. 
ad Att. 12, 2]. 


250 


` . 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


everywhere for such as were attractive for their 
pretty faces or their prattle, especially Syrians and 
Moors ; for he abhorred dwarfs, cripples, and every- 
thing of that sort,as freaks of nature and of ill 
omen. 

LXXXIV. From early youth he devoted himself 
eagerly and with the utmost diligence to oratory and 
liberal studies. During the war at Mutina, amid such 
a press of affairs, he is said to have read, written 
and declaimed every day. In fact he never after- 
wards spoke in the senate, or to the people or the 
soldiers, except in a studied and written address, 
although he did not lack the gift of speaking off- 
hand without preparation. Moreover, to avoid the 
danger of forgetting what he was to say, or wasting 
time in committing it to memory, he adopted the 
practice of reading everything from a manuscript. 
Even his conversations with individuals and the 
more important of those with his own wife Livia, he 
always wrote out and read from a note-book, for 
fear of saying too much or too little if he spoke 
offhand. He had an agreeable and rather character- 
istic enunciation, and he practised constantly with a 
teacher of elocution; but sometimes because of 
weakness of the throat? he addressed the people 
through a herald. 

LXXXV. He wrote numerous works of various 
kinds in prose, some of which he read to a group 
of his intimate friends, as others did in a lecture- 
room; for example, his “ Reply to Brutus on Cato." b 
At the reading of these volumes he had all but 
come to the end, when he grew tired and handed 
them to Tiberius to finish, for he was well on 
in years, He also wrote “ Exhortations to Philosophy ” 


251 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


Vita Sua,” quam tredecim libris Cantabrico tenus 
bello nec ultra exposuit. Poetica summatim attigit. 
Unus liber exstat scriptus ab eo hexametris versibus, 
cuius et argumentum et titulus est “ Sicilia " ; exstat 
alter aeque modicus * Epigrammatum," quae fere 
tempore balinei meditabatur. Nam tragoediam magno 
impetu exorsus, non succedenti stilo, abolevit 
quaerentibusque amicis quidnam Aiax ageret, 
respondit Aiacem suum in spongiam incubuisse. 

LXXXVI. Genus eloquendi secutus est elegans et 
temperatum vitatis sententiarum ineptiis atque con- 
cinnitate et “ reconditorum verborum," ut ipse dicit, 
*fetoribus" ; praecipuamque curam duxit sensum 
animi quam apertissime exprimere. Quod quo 
facilius efficeret aut necubi lectorem vel auditorem 
obturbaret ac moraretur, neque praepositiones urbi- 
bus addere neque coniunctiones saepius iterare 
dubitavit, quae detractae afferunt aliquid obscuritatis, 
etsi gratiam augent.  Cacozelos et antiquarios, ut 
diverso genere vitiosos, pari fastidio sprevit exagita- 
batque nonnumquam ; in primis Maecenatem suum, 
cuius * myrobrechis," ut ait, *cincinnos " usque qua- 
que persequitur et imitando per iocum irridet. Sed 
nec Tiberio parcit et exoletas interdum et reconditas 
voces aucupanti. M. quidem Antonium ut insanum 
increpat, quasi ea scribentem, quae mirentur potius 
252 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


and some volumes of an::Autobiography, giving an 
account of his life in thirteen books up to the time 
of the Cantabrian war, but no farther. His essays in 
poetry were but slight. One book has come down to 
us written in hexameter verse, of which the subject 
and the title is “Sicily.” There is another, equally 
brief, of “Epigrams,” which he composed for the 
most part at the time of the bath. Though he 
began a tragedy with much enthusiasm, he destroyed 
it because his style did not satisfy him, and when 
some of his friends asked him what in the world 
had become of Ajax, he answered that “ his Ajax had 
fallen on his sponge." 

LXXXVI. He cultivated a style of speaking that 
was chaste and elegant, avoiding the vanity of 
attempts at epigram and an artificial order, and 
as he himself expresses it, “the noisomeness of 
far-fetched words,’ making it his chief aim to 
express his thought as clearly as possible. With 
this end in view, to avoid confusing and checking 
his reader or hearer at any point, he did not 
hesitate to use prepositions with names of cities, 
nor to repeat conjunctions several times, the omission 
of which causes some obscurity, though it adds 
grace. He looked on innovators and archaizers 
with equal contempt, as faulty in opposite directions, 
and he sometimes had a fling at them, in particular 
his friend Maecenas, whose “unguent-dripping curls,” 
as he calls them, he loses no opportunity of belabour- 
ing and pokes fun at them by parody. He did 
not spare even Tiberius, who sometimes hunted 
up obsolete and pedantic expressions; and as for 
Mark Antony, he calls him a madman, for writing 
rather to be admired than to be understood. Then 


253 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


homines quam intellegant ; deinde ludens malum et 


inconstans in eligendo genere dicendi iudicium! eius, ' 


addit haec: * Tuque dubitas, Cimberne Annius an 


Veranius Flaccus imitandi sint tibi, ita ut verbis,. 


quae Crispus Sallustius excerpsit ex  Originibus 
Catonis, utaris? An potius Asiaticorum oratorum 
inanis sententiis verborum volubilitas in nostrum 
sermonem  transferenda?" Et quadam epistula 
Agrippinae neptis ingenium conlaudans : * Sed opus 
est," inquit, “dare te operam, ne moleste scribas et 
loquaris." 

LXXXVII. Cotidiano sermone quaedam frequent- 
ius et notabiliter usurpasse eum, litterae ipsius 
autographae ostentant, in quibus identidem, cum 
aliquos numquam  soluturos significare vult, “ad 
Kalendas Graecas soluturos" ait; et cum hortatur 
ferenda esse praesentia, qualiacumque sint: * con- 
tenti simus hoc Catone"; et ad exprimendam fest- 
inatae rei velocitatem: “celerius quam asparagi 
cocuntur." Ponit assidue et pro stulto *baceolum" et 
pro pullo? “pulleiaceum”’ et pro cerrito “vacerrosum”’ 
et *vapide" se habere pro male et ** betizare " pro 
languere, quod vulgo *lachanizare" dicitur; item 
* simus" pro sumus et * domos" genetivo casu sin- 


1 judicium, Bentley; ingenium, YT; omitted by the other 
mss. . * et pro pullo, Sç ; apud pullum, ^. 

a Evidently two archaizing grammarians of the day. 

è See De Grammaticis, x, at the end. 

* Thus characterized in contrast with the studied simplicity 
of the Attic school of orators. 4 See Index. 

e Cf. Catull. 67. 21, languidior tenera beta. All these words, 
which Augustus is said to have used, are colloquialisms or 


254 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


going on to ridicule his perverse and inconsistent 
taste in choosing an oratorical style, he adds the 
following: “Can you doubt whether you ought 
to imitate Annius Cimber or Veranius Flaccus,* 
that you use the words which Sallustius Crispus 
gleaned from Cato's Origines?® Or would you rather 
introduce into our tongue the verbose and unmeaning 
fluency of the Asiatic orators?’’¢ And in a letter 
praising the talent of his granddaughter Agrippina 
he writes: “ But you must take great care not to 
write and talk affectedly.”’ 

LXXXVII. That in his everyday conversation he 
used certain favourite and peculiar expressions 
appears from letters in his own hand, in which 
he says every now and then, when he wishes to 
indicate that certain men will never pay, that 
“they will pay on the Greek Kalends.” Urging 
his correspondent to put up with present circum- 
stances, such as they are, he says : * Let's be satisfied 
with the Cato we have ;" 4 and to express the speed 
of a hasty action, “Quicker than you can cook 
asparagus." He continually used baceolus (dolt) for 
stultus (fool), for pullus (dark) pulletaceus (darkish), and 
for cerritus (mad) vacerrosus (blockhead); also vapide 
se habere (feel flat) for male se habere (feel badly), and 
betizare * (be like a beet) for languere (be weak), for 
which the vulgar term is /lachamizare. Besides he 
used simus for sumus/ and domos in the genitive 


slang, and the exact form and derivation of many of them 
are uncertain. 

^ Since sumus was originally enclitic, the forms simus, 
sumus may have represented the sound between w and 1 in 
maximus, maxumus, etc. Or simus may have been formed 
on the analogy of agimus and similar forms. 


255 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


gulari pro domuos, Nec umquam aliter haec duo, 
ne quis mendam magis quam consuetudinem putet. 

Notavi et in chirographo eius illa praecipue : non 
dividit verba nec ab extrema parte versuum abund- 
antis litteras in alterum transfert, sed ibidem statim 
subicit cireumducitque. 

LXXXVIII. Orthographiam, id est formulam ra- 
tionemque scribendi a grammaticis institutam, non 
adeo custodit ac videtur eorum potius sequi opinio- 
nem, qui perinde scribendum ac loquamur existiment. 
Nam quod saepe non litteras modo sed syllabas aut 
permutat aut praeterit, communis hominum error est. 
Nec ego id notarem, nisi mihi mirum videretur 
tradidisse aliquos, legato eum consulari successorem 
dedisse ut rudi et indocto, cuius manu ixi" pro 
* ipsi" scriptum animadverterit. Quotiens autem per 
notas scribit, B pro A, C pro B ac deinceps eadem 
ratione sequentis litteras ponit; pro X autem 
duplex A. 

LXXXIX. Ne Graecarum quidem disciplinarum 
leviore studio tenebatur. In quibus et ipsis prae- 
stabat largiter magistro dicendi usus Apollodoro 
Pergameno, quem iam grandem natu Apolloniam 
quoque secum ab urbe iuvenis adhuc eduxerat, 
deinde eruditione etiam varia repletus per Arei 
philosophi filiorumque eius Dionysi et Nicanoris con- 
tubernium; non tamen ut aut loqueretur expedite 
aut componere aliquid auderet; nam et si quid res 


1 per Arei, Salmasius; sperarei, MG Vt ; omitted by X. 


^ Domuos is the earlier form of the genitive, with the 
suffix -os, domus the later, with the suffix -s. There was no 
form domos, and if Augustus used it, he probably did so on 
the analogy of domos, domus in the acc. plur. 

è Cf. Jul. lvi. 6—7, and Aul. Gell. 17. 9. 1-5. 


256 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


singular instead of domuos.t The last two forms he 
wrote invariably, for fear they should be thought 
errors rather than a habit. 

I have also observed this special peculiarity in 
his manner of writing: he does not divide words 
or carry superfluous letters from the end of one 
line to the beginning of the next, but writes them 
just below the rest of the word and draws a loop 
around them. 

LXXXVIII He does not strictly comply with 
orthography, that is to say the theoretical rules 
of spelling laid down by the grammarians, seeming 
to be rather of the mind of those who believe that 
we should spell exactly as we pronounce. Of course 
his frequent transposition or omission of syllables 
as well as of letters are slips common to all 
mankind. I should not have noted this, did it not 
seem to me surprising that some have written that 
he cashiered a consular governor, as an uncultivated 
and ignorant fellow, because he observed that he 
had written za for ipsi. Whenever he wrote in 
cipher, he wrote B for A, C for B, and the rest 
of the letters on the same principle, using AA for X. 

LXXXIX. He was equally interested in Greek 
studies, and in these too he excelled greatly. His 
teacher of declamation was Apollodorus of Per- 
gamon, whom he even took with him in his youthful 
days from Rome to Apollonia, though Apollodorus 
was an old man at the time. Later he became 
versed in various forms of learning through association 
with the philosopher Areus and his sons Dionysius 
and Nicanor. Yet he never acquired the ability 
to speak Greek fluently or to compose anything 
in it; for if he had occasion to use the language, 


257 


VOL. I. S 


bo 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


exigeret, Latine formabat vertendumque alii dabat. 
Sed plane poematum quoque non imperitus, delecta- 
batur etiam comoedia veteri et saepe eam exhibuit 
spectaculis publicis. In evolvendis utriusque linguae 
auctoribus nihil aeque sectabatur, quam praecepta et 
exempla publice vel privatim salubria, eaque ad ver- 
bum excerpta aut ad domesticos aut ad exercituum 
provinciarumque rectores aut ad urbis magistratus 
plerumque mittebat, prout quique monitione indi- 
gerent. Etiam libros totos et senatui recitavit et 
populo notos per edictum saepe fecit, ut orationes 
Q. Metelli * de Prole Augenda” et Rutili “de Modo 
Aedificiorum," quo magis persuaderet utramque rem 
non. a se primo animadversam, sed antiquis iam tunc 
curae fuisse. 

Ingenia saeculi sui omnibus modis fovit. Recit- 
antis et benigne et patienter audiit, nec tantum 
carmina et historias, sed et orationes et dialogos. 
Componi tamen aliquid de se nisi et serio et a 
praestantissimis offendebatur, admonebatque prae- 
tores ne paterentur nomen suum commissionibus 
obsolefieri. 

XC, Circa religiones talem accepimus. Tonitrua 
et fulgura paulo infirmius expavescebat, ut semper et . 
ubique pellem vituli marini circumferret pro remedio 
atque ad omnem maioris tempestatis suspicionem in 


a Religiones includes both religious belief and regard for 
omens and portents. 


258 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


he wrote what he had to say in Latin and gave 
it to someone else to translate. Still he was far 
from being ignorant of Greek poetry, even taking 
great pleasure in the Old Comedy and frequently 
staging it at his public entertainments. In reading 
the writers of both tongues there was nothing 
for which he looked so carefully as precepts and 
examples instructive to the public or to individuals ; 
these he would often copy word for word, and send 
to the members of his household, or to his generals 
and provincial governors, whenever any of them 
required admonition. He even read entire volumes 
to the senate and called the attention of the people 
to them by proclamations ; for example, the speeches 
of Quintus Metellus “On Increasing the Family," 
and of Rutilius “On the Height of Buildings”; to 
convince them that he was not the first to give 
attention to such matters, but that they had aroused 
the interest even of their forefathers. 

He gave every encouragement to the men of 
talent of his own age, listening with courtesy and 
patience to their readings, not only of poetry and 
history, but of speeches and dialogues as well. 
But he took offence at being made the subject 
of any composition except in serious earnest and 
by the most eminent writers, often charging the 
praetors not to let his name be cheapened in prize 
declamations. 

XC. This is what we are told of his attitude 
towards matters of religion He was somewhat 
weak in his fear of thunder and lightning, for 
he always carried a seal-skin about with him 
everywhere as a protection, and at any sign of 
a violent storm took refuge in an underground 


259 
s 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


abditum et concamaratum locum se reciperet, con- 
sternatus olim per nocturnum iter transcursu fulguris, 
ut praediximus. 

XCI. Somnia neque sua neque aliena de se negle- 
gebat.  Philippensi acie quamvis statuisset non 
egredi tabernaculo propter valitudinem, egressus est 
tamen amici somnio monitus ; cessitque res prospere, 
quando captis castris lectica eius, quasi ibi cubans 
remansisset, concursu hostium confossa atque lacerata 
est. Ipse per omne ver plurima et formidulosissima 
et vana et irrita videbat, reliquo tempore rariora et 
minus vana. Cum dedicatam in Capitolio aedem 
Tonanti lovi assidue frequentaret, somniavit queri 
Capitolinum Iovem cultores sibi abduci seque res- 
pondisse Tonantem pro ianitore ei appositum ; ideo- 
que mox tintinnabulis fastigium aedis redimiit, quod 
ea fere ianuis dependebant. Ex nocturno visu etiam 
stipem quotannis die certo emendicabat a populo 
cavam manum asses porrigentibus praebens. 

XCII. Auspicia et omina quaedam pro certissimis 
observabat: si mane sibi calceus perperam ac sinister 
pro dextro induceretur, ut dirum ; si terra marive 
ingrediente se longinquam profectionem forte rorasset, 


^ Pliny, N. H. 2. 55, says that the laurel tree (cf. Tib. Ixix.) 
and the seal are never struck by lightning; and also that 
lightning never goes more than five feet below the ground. 

* Chap. xxix. 3. | | 

* This is not in accordance with the emperor’s character 
(cf. chap. lvii), and Suetonius may have confused him with 
Caligula; see Calig. xlii. Yet there are records of many 
such acts of humility to propitiate Nemesis ; see Casaubon - 
ad loc. 


260 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


vaulted room; for as I have said, he was once 
badly frightened by a narrow escape from lightning 
during a journey by night. 

XCI. He was not indifferent to his own dreams 
or to those which others dreamed about him. 
At the battle of Philippi, though he had made 
up his mind not to leave his tent because of illness, 
he did so after all when warned by a friend's 
dream ; fortunately, as it turned out, for his camp 
was taken and when the enemy rushed in, his 
litter was stabbed through and through and torn 
to pieces, in the belief that he was still lying there ill. 
All through the spring his own dreams were very 
numerous and fearful, but idle and unfulfilled ; 
during the rest of the year they were less frequent 
and more reliable. Being in the habit of making 
constant visits to the temple of Jupiter the 
Thunderer, which he had founded on the Capitol, 
he dreamed that Jupiter Capitolinus complained 
that his worshippers were being taken from him, 
and that he answered that he had placed the 
Thunderer hard by to be his doorkeeper; and ac- 
cordingly he presently festooned the gable of the 
temple with bells, because these commonly hung at 
house-doors. It was likewise because of a dream 
that every year on an appointed day he begged 
alms of the people, holding out his open hand to 
have pennies dropped in it.* 

XCII. Certain auspices and omens he regarded 
as infallible. If his shoes were put on in the wrong 
order in the morning, the left before the right, he 
considered it a bad sign. If there chanced to be 
a drizzle of rain when he was starting on a long journey 
by land or sea, he thought it a good omen, betoken- 


261 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


ut laetum maturique et prosperi reditus. Sed 
et ostentis praecipue movebatur.  Enatam inter 
iuncturas lapidum ante domum suam palmam in con- 
pluvium deorum Penatium transtulit, utque coales- 
ceret magno opere curavit. Apud insulam Capreas 
veterrimae ilicis demissos iam ad terram languentis- 
que ramos convaluisse adventu suo, adeo laetatus 
est, ut eas cum re p. Neapolitanorum permutaverit 
Aenaria data. Observabat et dies quosdam, ne aut 
postridie nundinas quoquam proficisceretur aut 
Nonis quicquam rei seriae incoharet; nihil in hoc 
quidem aliud devitans, ut ad Tiberium scribit, quam 
dSucdypiav nominis. 

XCIII. Peregrinarum caerimoniarum sicut veteres 
ac praeceptas reverentissime coluit, ita ceteras con- 
temptui habuit. | Namque Athenis initiatus, cum 
postea Romae pro tribunali de privilegio sacerdotum 
Atticae Cereris cognosceret et quaedam secretiora 
proponerentur, dimisso consilio et corona circum- 
stantium solus audiit disceptantes. At contra non 
modo in peragranda Aegypto paulo deflectere ad 
visendum Apin supersedit, sed et Gaium nepotem, 
quod Iudaeam praetervehens apud Hierosolyma! non 
supplicasset, conlaudavit. 

XCIV. Et quoniam ad haec ventum est, non ab 
re fuerit subtexere, quae ei prius quam nasceretur et 
ipso natali die ac deinceps evenerint, quibus futura 
: Hierosolyma, Burmann ; Hierosolymam, mss. 


^ The Roman month was divided into periods of eight days, 
lettered in the Calendar from A to H. The last of these, 
every ninth day (nwndinae) according to the Roman reckoning, 
was a market day. 

^ Because of its resemblance to non is (from eo); cf. Cic. 
de Div. 284; or perhaps merely because it contained non. 

* Into the Eleusinian mysteries of Ceres, 


262 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


ing a speedy and prosperous return. But he was 
especially affected by prodigies. When a palm tree 
sprang up between the crevices of the pavement 
before his house, he transplanted it to the inner court 
beside his household gods and took great pains 
to make it grow. He was so pleased that the 
branches of an old oak, which had already drooped 
to the ground and were withering, became vigorous 
again on his arrival in the island of Capreae, that he 
arranged with the city of Naples to give him the island 
in exchange for Aenaria. He also had regard to 
certain days, refusing ever to begin a journey on the | 
day after a market day," or to take up any important 
business on the Nones ; though in the latter case, as 
he writes Tiberius, he merely dreaded the unlucky 
sound ? of the name. 

XCIII. He treated with great respect such foreign 
rites as were ancient and well established, but held 
the rest in contempt. For example, having been 
initiated at Athens^ and afterwards sitting in judg- 
ment of a case at Rome involving the privileges 
of the priests of Ceres, in which certain matters 
of secrecy were brought up, he dismissed his coun- 
cillors and the throng of bystanders and heard 
the disputants in private. But on the other hand 
he not only refused to make a slight detour to 
visit Apis, when he was travelling through Egypt, 
but highly commended his grandson Gaius for not 
offering prayers at Jerusalem as he passed by 
Judaea. | 

XCIV. Having reached this point, it will not 
be out of place to add an account of the omens 
which occurred before he was born, on the very day 
of his birth, and afterwards, from which it was 


263 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


magnitudo eius et perpetua felicitas sperari animad- 
vertique posset. 

Velitris antiquitus tacta de caelo parte muri re- 
sponsum est eius oppidi civem quandoque rerum 
potiturum ; qua fiducia Veliterni et tunc statim et 
postea saepius paene ad exitium sui cum populo R. 
belligeraverant ; sero tandem documentis apparuit 
ostentum illud Augusti potentiam portendisse. 

Auctor est Iulius Marathus, ante paucos quam nas- 
ceretur menses prodigium Romae factum publice, 
quo denuntiabatur, regem populo Romano naturam 
parturire ; senatum exterritum censuisse, ne quis illo 
anno genitus educaretur; eos qui gravidas uxores 
haberent, quod ad se quisque spem traheret, curasse 
ne senatus consultum ad aerarium deferretur. 

In Asclepiadis Mendetis Theologumenon libris 
lego, Atiam, cum ad sollemne Apollinis sacrum 
media nocte venisset, posita in templo lectica, dum 
ceterae matronae dormirent,! obdormisse ; draconem 
repente irrepsisse ad eam pauloque post egressum ; 
illam expergefactam quasi a concubitu mariti puri- 
ficasse se; et statim in corpore eius exstitisse 
maculam velut picti draconis nec potuisse umquam 


1 Dormirent, mss.; domum irent, Gaevius ; convenirent, 
Bentley ; <domi> dormirent, Wissowa ; etc., ec. 


s The decree was not complete until this was done; cf. 
Jul. xxviii. 3. 

> 4e, '* Discourses about the Gods.” Aristotle wrote a 
work with the same title. 

c The genius, or familiar spirit (see note on chap. 1x.), was 


264 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


possible to anticipate and perceive his future great- 
ness and uninterrupted good fortune. 

In ancient days, when a part of the wall of 
Velitrae had been struck by lightning, the prediction 
was made that a citizen of that town would one day 
rule the world. Through their confidence in this 
the people of Velitrae had at once made war on the 
Roman people and fought with them many times 
after that almost to their utter destruction ; but 
at last long afterward the event proved that the 
omen had foretold the rule of Augustus. 

According to Julius Marathus, a few months 
before Augustus was born a portent was generally 
observed at Rome, which gave warning that nature 
was pregnant with a king for the Roman people ; 
thereupon the senate in consternation decreed that 
no male child born that year should be reared ; but 
those whose wives were with child saw to it that the 
decree was not filed in the treasury,^ since each one 
appropriated the prediction to his own family. 

I have read the following story in the books of 
Asclepias of Mendes entitled 7Aeologunena. When 
Atia had come in the middle of the night to the 
solemn service of Apollo, she had her litter set down 
in the temple and fell asleep, while the rest of the 
matrons also slept. On asudden a serpent glided up 
to her and shortly went away. When she awoke, 
she purified herself,? as if after the embraces of her 
husband, and at once there appeared on her body 
a mark in colours like a serpent, and she could 
never get rid of it; so that presently she ceased 


often represented by a serpent, and those of husband and wife 
by two serpents; e.g. in Pompeian frescoes. 
4 To avoid profanation of the sacred rites, 


265 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


exigi, adeo ut mox publicis balineis perpetuo 
abstinuerit; Áugustum natum mense decimo et ob 
hoc Apollinis filium  existimatum. Eadem Atia, 
prius quam pareret, somniavit intestina sua ferri ad 
sidera explicarique per omnem terrarum et caeli 
ambitum. Somniavit et pater Octavius utero Atiae 
iubar solis exortum. 

Quo natus est die, cum de Catilinae coniuratione 
ageretur in curia et Octavius ob uxoris puerperium 
serius affuisset, nota ac vulgata res est P. Nigidium 
comperta morae causa, ut horam quoque partus ac- 
ceperit, affirmasse dominum terrarum orbi natum. 
Octavio postea, cum per secreta Thraciae exercitum 
duceret, in Liberi patris luco barbara caerimonia de 
filio consulenti, idem affirmatum est a sacerdotibus, 
quod infuso super altaria mero tantum flammae! 
emicuisset, ut supergressa fastigium templi ad caelum 
usque ferretur, unique omnino Magno Alexandro 
apud easdem aras sacrificanti simile provenisset 
ostentum. Atque etiam sequenti statim nocte videre 
visus est filium mortali specie ampliorem, cum ful- 
mine et sceptro exuviisque Iovis Optimi Maximi ac 
radiata corona, super laureatum currum, bis senis 
equis candore eximio trahentibus. Infans adhuc, ut 
scriptum apud C. Drusum exstat, repositus vespere 
in cunas a nutricula loco plano, postera luce non 


! flammae, mss. ; flumma, Modderman. 


* Otherwise unknown; Müller would read Caesarem 
Drusum. Stahr believes that the reference is to the Eulogy 
in chap. c. 3. 


266 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


ever to go to the public baths. In the tenth month 
after that Augustus was born and was therefore 
regarded as the son of Apollo. Atia too, before she 
gave him birth, dreamed that her vitals were borne 
up to the stars and spread over the whole extent of 
land and sea, while Octavius dreamed that the sun 
rose from Atia’s womb. 

The day he was born the conspiracy of Catiline 
was before the House, and Octavius came late 
because of his wife's confinement; then Publius 
Nigidius, as everyone knows, learning the reason for 
his tardiness and being informed also of the hour of 
the birth, declared that the ruler of the world had 
been born. Later, when Octavius was leading an 
army through remote parts of Thrace, and in the 
grove of Father Liber consulted the priests about his 
son with barbarian rites, they made the same pre- 
diction ; since such a pillar of flame sprang forth 
from the wine that was poured over the altar, that it 
rose above the temple roof and mounted to the very 
sky, and such an omen had befallen no one save 
Alexander the Great, when he offered sacrifice at 
the same altar. Moreover, the very next night he 
dreamt that his son appeared to him in a guise more 
majestic than that of mortal man, with the thunder- 
bolt, sceptre, and insignia of Jupiter Optimus Maxi- 
mus, wearing a crown begirt with rays and mounted 
upon a laurel-wreathed chariot drawn by twelve 
horses of surpassing whiteness. When Augustus was 
still an infant, as is recorded by the hand of Gaius 
Drusus,* he was placed by his nurse at evening in 
his cradle on the ground floor and the next morning 
had disappeared ; but after long search he was at 


267 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


comparuit diuque quaesitus tandem in altissima 
turri repertus est iacens contra solis exortum. 

Cum primum fari coepisset, in avito suburbano 
obstrepentis forte ranas silere iussit, atque ex eo ne- 
gantur ibi ranae coaxare. Ad quartum lapidem Cam- 
panae viae in nemore prandenti ex inproviso aquila 
panem ei e manu rapuit et, cum altissime evolasset, 
rursus ex inproviso leniter delapsa reddidit. 

Q. Catulus post dedicatum Capitolium duabus con- 
tinuis noctibus somniavit : prima, Iovem Optimum 
Maximum e praetextatis compluribus circum aram 
ludentibus unum secrevisse atque in eius sinum 
signum rei p. quod manu gestaret reposuisse; at 
insequenti, animadvertisse se in gremio Capitolini 
lovis eundem puerum, quem cum detrahi iussisset, 
prohibitum monitu dei, tamquam is ad tutelam rei . 
p. educaretur ; ac die proximo obvium sibi Augustum, 
cum incognitum alias haberet, non sine admiratione 
contuitus simillimum dixit puero, de quo somniasset. 
Quidam prius somnium Catuli aliter exponunt, quasi 
luppiter compluribus praetextatis tutorem a se 
poscentibus unum ex eis demonstrasset, ad quem 
omnia desideria sua referrent, eiusque osculum 
delibatum digitis ad os suum rettulisset. 

M. Cicero C. Caesarem in Capitolium prosecutus 
somnium pristinae noctis familiaribus forte narrabat : 


Si Appirsnily another name for the via re see C.I. L. i. 


^ Instead of kissing him directly. © See note on Jul, xv, 
268 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


last found lying on a lofty tower with his face towards 
the rising sun. 

As soon as he began to talk, it chanced that the 
frogs were making a great noise at his grandfather's 
country place ; he bade them be silent, and they say 
that since then no frog has ever croaked there. As 
he was breakfasting in a grove at the fourth mile- 
stone on the Campanian road,“ an eagle surprised 
him by snatching his bread from his hand, and after 
flying to a great height, equally to his surprise 
dropped gently down again and gave it back to him. 

After Quintus Catulus had dedicated the Capitol, 
he had dreams on two nights in succession : first, 
that Jupiter Optimus Maximus called aside one of a 
number of boys of good family, who were playing 
around his altar, and put in the lap of his toga 
an image of Roma, which he was carrying in his 
hand; the next night he dreamt that he saw this 
same boy in the lap of Jupiter of the Capitol, and 
that when he had ordered that he be removed, the 
god warned him to desist, declaring that the boy was 
being reared to be the saviour of his country. When 
Catulus next day met Augustus, whom he had never 
seen before, he looked at him in great surprise and 
said that he was very like the boy of whom he 
had dreamed. 

Some give a different account of Catulus’s first 
dream : when a large group of well-born children 
asked Jupiter for a guardian, he pointed out one of 
their number, to whom they were to refer all their 
wishes, and then, after lightly touching the boy's 
mouth with his fingers, laid them on his own lips.^ 

As Marcus Cicero was attending Gaius Caesar 
to the Capitol? he happened to tell his friends a 


269 


10 


11 


12 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK 1l 


puerum facie liberali demissum e caelo catena aurea 
ad fores Capitoli constitisse eique Iovem flagellum 
tradidisse ; deinde repente Augusto viso, quem 
ignotum plerisque adhuc avunculus Caesar ad sacri- 
ficandum  acciverat, affirmavit ipsum esse, cuius 
imago secundum quietem sibi obversata sit. 

Sumenti virilem togam tunica lati clavi resuta ex 
utraque parte ad pedes decidit. Fuerunt qui inter- 
pretarentur, non aliud significare, quam ut is ordo 
cuius insigne id esset quandoque ei subiceretur. 

Apud Mundam Divus Iulius castris locum capiens 
cum silvam caederet, arborem palmae repertam con- 
servari ut omen victoriae iussit ; ex ea continuo 
enata suboles adeo in paucis diebus adolevit, ut non 
aequiperaret modo matricem, verum et obtegeret 
frequentareturque columbarum nidis, quamvis id 
avium genus duram et asperam frondem maxime 
vitet. Illo et praecipue ostento motum Caesarem 
ferunt, ne quem alium sibi succedere quam sororis 
nepotem vellet. | 

In secessu Apolloniae Theogenis mathematici per- 
gulam comite Agrippa ascenderat; cum Agrippae, 
qui prior consulebat, magna et paene incredibilia 
praedicerentur, reticere ipse genituram suam nec 
velle edere perseverabat, metu ac pudore ne minor 
inveniretur. Qua tamen post multas adhortationes 


@ Marked by the broad purple stripe (latus clavua). 
Augustus was not yet a senator, but the privilege of wearing 
the laticlave was doubtless one of the honours conferred on 
him by Caesar. 


270 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


dream of the night before; that a boy of noble 
countenance was let down from heaven on a golden 
chain and, standing at the door of the temple, was 
given a whip by Jupiter. Just then suddenly 
catching sight of Augustus, who was still unknown 
to the greater number of those present and had been 
brought to the ceremony by his uncle Caesar, he 
declared that he was the very one whose form had 
appeared to him in his dream. | 

When Augustus was assuming the gown of man- 
hood, his senatorial tunic was ripped apart on both 
sides and fell at his feet, which some interpreted as 
a sure sign that the order of which the tunic was the 
badge would one day be brought to his feet. 

As the Deified Julius was cutting down a wood at 
Munda and preparing a place for his camp, coming 
across a palm tree, he caused it to be spared as an omen 
of victory. From this ashoot at once sprang forth and 
in a few days grew so great that it not only equalled 
the parent tree, but even overshadowed it ; moreover 
many doves built their nests there, although that 
kind of bird especially avoids hard and rough foliage. 
Indeed, it was that omen in particular, they say, that 
led Caesar to wish that none other than his sister's 
grandson should be his successor 

While in retirement at Apollonia, Augustus 
mounted with Agrippa to the studio of the 
astrologer Theogenes, Agrippa was the first to 
try his fortune, and when a great and almost in- 
credible career was predicted for him, Augustus 
persisted in concealing the time of his birth and 
in refusing to disclose it, through diffidence and fear 
that he might be found to be less eminent. When 
he at last gave it unwillingly and hesitatingly, and 


271 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


vix et cunctanter edita exsilivit Theogenes adoravit- 
que eum. Tantam mox fiduciam fati Augustus 
habuit, ut thema suum vulgaverit nummumque 
argenteum nota sideris Capricorni, quo natus est, 
percusserit. 

XCV. Post necem Caesaris reverso ab Apollonia 
et ingrediente eo urbem repente liquido ac puro 
sereno circulus ad speciem caelestis arcus orbem solis 
ambiit ac subinde Iuliae Caesaris filiae monimentum 
fulmine ictum est. Primo autem consulatu et 
augurium capienti duodecim se vultures ut Romulo 
ostenderunt et  immolanti omnium victimarum 
iocinera replicata intrinsecus ab ima fibra paruerunt, 
nemine peritorum aliter coniectante quam laeta per 
haec et magna portendi. 

XCVI. Quin et bellorum omnium eventus ante 
praesensit. Contractis ad Bononiam triumvirorum 
copiis aquila tentorio eius supersedens duos corvos 
hinc et inde infestantis afflixit et ad terram dedit, 
notante omni exercitu futuram quandoque inter 
collegas discordiam talem qualis secuta est, atque! 
exitum praesagiente.  Eunti? Philippos? Thessalus 
quidam de futura victoria nuntiavit auctore Divo 
Caesare, cuius sibi species itinere avio occurrisset. 

Circa Perusiam sacrificio non litanti cum augeri 
hostias imperasset ac subita eruptione hostes omnem 
rei divinae apparatum abstulissent, constitit inter 
haruspices, quae periculosa et adversa sacrificanti 

1 atque exitum, Torrentius ; at exitum, Q. 


2 Eunti, supplied by Boot. 
3 Philippos, Boot; Philippo, 2. 


272 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


only after many urgent requests, Theogenes sprang 
up and threw himself at his feet. From that time 
on Augustus had such faith in his destiny, that he 
made his horoscope public and issued a silver coin 
.stamped with the constellation Capricornus, under 
which he was born. 

XCV. As he was entering the city on his return 
from Apollonia after Caesar's death, though the 
heaven was clear and cloudless, a circle like a rainbow 
suddenly formed around the sun’s disc, and straight- 
way the tomb of Caesar's daughter Julia was struck 
by lightning. Again, as he was taking the auspices 
in his first consulship, twelve vultures appeared to 
him, as to Romulus, and when he slew the victims, 
the livers within all of them were found to be 
double at the lower end, which all those who were 
skilled in such matters unanimously declared to be 
an omen of a great and happy future. 

XCVI. He even divined beforehand the outcome 
of all his wars. When the forces of the triumvirs 
were assembled at Bononia, an eagle that had 
perched upon his tent made a dash at two ravens, 
which attacked it on either side, and struck them to 
the ground. From this the whole army inferred 
that there would one day be discord among the 
colleagues, as actually came to pass, and divined its 
result. As he was on his way to Philippi, a 
Thessalian gave him notice of his coming victory 
on the authority of the deified Caesar, whose shade 
had met him on a lonely road. When he was 
sacrificing at Perusia without getting a favourable 
omen, and so had ordered more victims to be 
brought, the enemy made a sudden sally and carried 
off all the equipment of the sacrifice ; whereupon the 


273 


VOL. I. T 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


denuntiata essent, cuncta in ipsos recasura qui exta 
haberent; neque aliter evenit. Pridie quam Sicilien- 
sem pugnam classe committeret, deambulanti in litore 
piscis e mari exsilivit et ad pedes iacuit. Apud 
Actium descendenti in aciem asellus cum asinario : 
occurrit: homini Eutychus, bestiae Nicon erat no- 
men; utriusque simulacrum aeneum victor posuit in 
templo, in quod castrorum suorum locum vertit. 
XCVII. Mors quoque eius, de qua dehinc dicam, 
divinitasque post mortem evidentissimis ostentis 
praecognita est. Cum lustrum in campo Martio 
magna populi frequentia conderet, aquila eum 
Saepius circumvolavit transgressaque in vicinam 
aedem super nomen Agrippae ad primam litteram 
sedit ; quo animadverso vota, quae in proximum 
lustrum suscipi mos est, collegam suum Tiberium 
nuncupare iussit; nam se, quamquam conscriptis 
paratisque iam tabulis, negavit suscepturum quae 
non esset soluturus. Sub idem tempus ictu fulminis 
ex inscriptione statuae eius prima nominis littera 
effluxit ; responsum est, centum solos dies posthac 
victurum, quem numerum C littera notaret, futur- 
umque ut inter deos referretur, quod aesar, id est 
reliqua pars e Caesaris nomine, Etrusca lingua deus 
vocaretur. | 
Tiberium igitur in Illyricum dimissurus et Bene- 


a Prosper (eiruxhs, **fortunate?). |. è Victor (rgy). 

* The /ustrum was a sacrifice of purification, made every 
five years by one of the censors, after the completion of the 
census, or enumeration of the Roman people. The sacrifice 
consisted of the suovetauriia, the offering of a pig, a sheep, 
and a bull. Lustrum was also applied to the five-year period. 


274 


THE DEIFIED:AUGUSTUS 


soothsayers agreed that all the dangers and disasters 
with which the sacrificer had been threatened would 
recoil on the heads of those who were in possession of 
the entrails; and so it turned out. As he was walk- 
ing on the shore the day before the sea-fight off Sicily, 
a fish sprang from the sea and fell at his feet. At 
Actium, as he was going down to begin the battle, he 
met an ass with his driver, the man having the name 
Eutychus * and the beast that of Nicon^; and after 
the victory he set up bronze images of the two in the 
sacred enclosure into which he converted the site of 
his camp. 

XCVII. His death, too, of which I shall speak next, 
and his deification after death, were known in 
advance by unmistakable signs. As he was bringing 
the lustrum* to an end in the Campus Martius before 
a great throng of people, an eagle flew several times 
about him and then going across to the temple hard 
by, perched above the first letter of Agrippa’s name. 
On noticing this, Augustus bade his colleague 
Tiberius recite the vows which it is usual to offer for 
the next five years; for although he had them 
prepared and written out on a tablet, he declared 
that he would not be responsible for vows which 
he should never pay. At about the same time 
the first letter of his name was melted from the 
inscription on one of his statues by a flash of light- 
ning; this was interpreted to mean that he would 
live only a hundred days from that time, the number 
indicated by the letter C, and that he would be 
numbered with the gods, since aesar (that is, the 
part of the name Caesar which was left) is the word 
for god in the Etruscan tongue. 

Then, too, when he was on the point of sending 


275 
T 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


ventum usque prosecuturus, cum interpellatores aliis 
atque aliis causis in iure dicendo detinerent, excla- 
mavit, quod et ipsum mox inter omina relatum est: 
non, si omnia morarentur, amplius se posthac 
Romae futurum; atque itinere incohato Asturam 
perrexit et inde praeter consuetudinem de nocte ad 
occasionem aurae evectus causam valitudinis con- 
traxit ex profluvio alvi. 

XCVIII. Tunc Campaniae ora proximisque insulis 
circuitis Caprearum quoque secessui quadriduum 
impendit remississimo ad otium et ad omnem com- 
itatem animo, 

Forte Puteolanum sinum praetervehenti vectores 
nautaeque de navi Alexandrina, quae tantum quod 
appulerat, candidati coronatique et tura libantes 
fausta omina et eximias laudes congesserant: per 
illum se vivere, per illum navigare, libertate atque 
fortunis per illum frui. Qua re admodum exhilara- 
tus quadragenos aureos comitibus divisit iusque 
iurandum et cautionem exegit a singulis, non alio 
datam summam quam in emptionem Alexandrinarum 
mercium absumpturos. Sed et ceteros continuos 
dies inter varia munuscula togas insuper ac pallia 
distribuit, lege proposita ut Romani Graeco, Graeci 
Romano habitu et sermone uterentur.  Spectavit 
assidue exercentes ephebos, quorum aliqua adhuc 


a The pallium was the distinctive dress of the Greeks, as 
the toga was of the Romans. 

è Greek youths between the ages of eighteen and that of 
full citizenship, who had regular gymnastic training as a part 
of their education. The Greek training survived in Capreae, 
which until recently (see chap. xcii. 2) had belonged to 
Naples. | 


276 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


Tiberius to Illyricum and was proposing to escort him 
as far as Beneventum, and litigants detained him on 
judgment seat by bringing forward case after case, 
he cried out that he would stay no longer in Rome, 
even if everything conspired to delay him—and 
this too was afterwards looked upon as one of the 
omens of his death. When he had begun the 
journey, he went on as far as Astura and from 
there, contrary to his custom, took ship by night 
since it chanced that there was a favourable breeze, 
and thus contracted an illness beginning with a 
diarrhoea. 

XCVIII. Then after skirting the coast of Campania 
and the neighbouring islands, he spent four more 
days at his villa in Capreae, where he gave himself 
up wholly to rest and social diversions. As he sailed 
by the gulf of Puteoli, it happened that from an 
Alexandrian ship which had just arrived there, the 
passengers and crew, clad in white, crowned with gar- 
lands, and burning incense, lavished upon him good 
wishes and the highest praise, saying that it was 
through him they lived, through him that they sailed 
the seas, and through him that they enjoyed their 
liberty and their fortunes.  Exceedingly pleased at 
this, he gave forty gold pieces to each of his com- 
panions, exacting from every one of them a pledge 
under oath not to spend the sum that had been given 
them in any other way than in buying wares from 
Alexandria. More than that, for the several remain- 
ing days of his stay, among little presents of various 
kinds, he distributed togas and cloaks^ as well, stipu- 
lating that the Romans should use the Greek dress 
and language and the Greeks the Roman. He contin- 
ually watched the exercises of the ephebi,! of whom 


277 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


copia ex vetere instituto Capreis erat; isdem etiam 
epulum in conspectu suo praebuit permissa, immo 
exacta iocandi licentia diripiendique pomorum et 
obsoniorum rerumque omnium! missilia. ^ Nullo 
denique genere hilaritatis abstinuit. 

Vicinam Capreis insulam Apragopolim appellabat 
a desidia secedentium illuc e comitatu suo. Sed ex 
dilectis unum, Masgaban nomine, quasi conditorem 
insulae xrioryy vocare consueverat. Huius Masgabae 
ante annum defuncti tumulum cum e triclinio anim- 
advertisset magna turba multisque luminibus fre- 
quentari, versum compositum ex tempore clare 
pronuntiavit : 


Kríorov 0€ ripBov cloopó mvpoúpevov" 
conversusque ad Thrasyllum Tiberi comitem contra 


accubantem et ignarum rei interrogavit, cuiusnam 
poetae putaret? esse ; quo haesitante subiecit alium : 
"'Opas hdeoot Maoyáßar rquopevov; 

ac de hoc quoque consuluit. Cum ille nihil aliud re- 
sponderet quam, cuiuscumque essent optimos esse, 
cachinnum sustulit atque in iocos effusus est. 

Mox Neapolim traiecit quanquam etiam tum in- 
firmis intestinis morbo variante; tamen et quin- 
quennale certamen gymnicum honori suo institutum 


1 omnium, added by C. F. W. Müller ; missilium, X’. 
4 putaret, T; the other mes. have putarit (putaverit, S). 


s The City of Do-nothings. There is no island ** near 
Capreae," and '*the neighbouring island of Capreae” is 
meaningless ; if the text is sound, Suetonius is careless, or we 
must take Capreis as a locative, and regard vicinam as used in 
a partitive sense like reliquus, primus, etc. 

b Kría rns, the Greek name for the founder of a city or colony. 


278 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


there was still a goodly number at Capreae according 
to the ancient usage. He also gave these youths a 
banquet at which he himself was present, and not 
only allowed, but even required perfect freedom 
in jesting and in scrambling for tickets for fruit, 
dainties and all kinds of things, which he threw to 
them. In short, there was no form of gaiety in 
which he did not indulge. 

He called the neighbouring part of the island of 
Capreae Apragopolis ^ from the laziness of some of his 
company who sojourned there. Besides he used to 
call one of his favourites, Masgaba by name, Ktistes,? 
as if he were the founder of the island. Noticing from 
his dining-room that the tomb of this Masgaba, who 
had died the year before, was visited by a large 
crowd with many torches, he uttered aloud this 
verse, composed offhand : 


* [ see the founder's tomb alight with fire " ; 


and turning to Thrasyllus, one of the suite of Tiberius 
who was reclining opposite him and knew nothing 
about the matter, he asked of what poet he thought 
it was the work. When Thrasyllus hesitated, he 
added another verse: ` 


“See you with lights Masgaba honoured now ? " 


and asked his opinion of this one also When 
Thrasyllus could say nothing except that they were 
very good, whoever made them, he burst into a laugh 
and fell a joking about it. 

Presently he crossed over to Naples, although his 
bowels were still weak from intermittent attacks. In 
spite of this he witnessed a quinquennial gymnastic 
contest which had been established in his honour, 


219 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


perspectavit et cum Tiberio ad destinatum locum 
contendit. Sed in redeundo adgravata valitudine 
tandem Nolae succubuit revocatumque ex itinere 
Tiberium diu secreto sermone detinuit, neque post 
ulli maiori negotio animum accommodavit. 

XCIX. Supremo die identidem exquirens, an iam 
de se tumultus foris esset, petito speculo capillum sibi 
comi ac malas labantes! corrigi praecepit et admissos 
amicos percontatus, ecquid iis videretur mimum? vitae 
commode transegisse, adiecit et clausulam : 

Emel 06 wavy Kad@s mératoTat, Sdre kpórov 

Kat mávres Huds perà xapüs wpoméeuware. 
Omnibus deinde dimissis, dum advenientes ab urbe? de 
Drusi filia aegra interrogat, repente in osculis Liviae 
et in hac voce defecit : * Livia, nostri coniugii memor 
vive, ac vale!" sortitus exitum facilem et qualem 
semper optaverat. Nam fere quotiens audisset cito 
ac nullo cruciatu defunctum quempiam, sibi et suis 
eiGavaciav similem—hoc enim et verbo uti solebat— 
precabatur. Unum omnino ante efflatam animam sig- 
num alienatae mentis ostendit, quod subito pavefactus . 
a quadraginta se iuvenibus abripi questus est. Id 
quoque magis praesagium quam mentis deminutio 
fuit, siquidem totidem milites praetoriani extulerunt 
eum in publicum. 

C. Obiit in cubiculo eodem, quo pater Octavius, 


! labantes, the mas. except GP (corr. by first hand), which 
have labentes. 

2 mimum, P? (Beroaldus) ; the other mas. have minimum. 
? ab urbe, LÈ 8? ç; ad urbem, 2. 


^ Beneventum; chap. xcvii. 3. 
^*4.e. open through}weakness. * Or closed. 
280 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


and then started with Tiberius for his destination." 
But as he was returning his illness increased and he 
at last took to his bed at Nola, calling back Tiberius, 
who was on his way to Illyricum, and keeping him 
for along time in private conversation, after which 
he gave attention to no business of importance. 

XCIX. On the last day of his life he asked every 
now and then whether there was any disturbance 
without on his account ; then calling for a mirror, he 
had his hair combed and his falling? jaws set straight.¢ 
After that, calling in his friends and asking whether. 
it seemed to them that he had played the comedy of 
life fitly, he added the tag : 


* Since well I've played my part, all clap your hands 
And from the stage dismiss me with applause." 


Then he sent them all off, and while he was asking 
some newcomers from the city about the daughter of 
Drusus, who was ill, he suddenly passed away as he 
was kissing Livia, uttering these last words: * Live 
mindful of our wedlock, Livia, and farewell," thus 
blessed with an easy death and such a one as he had 
always longed for. For almost always on hearing that 
anyone had died swiftly and painlessly, he prayed 
that he and his might have a like euthanasia, for that 
was the term he was wont to use. He gave but one 
single sign of wandering before he breathed his last, 
calling out in sudden terror that forty young men 
were carrying him off. And even this was rather a 
premonition than a delusion, since it was that very 
number of soldiers of the pretorian guard that 
carried him forth to lie in state. 

C. He died in the same room as his father Octavius, 
in the consulship of two Sextuses, Pompeius and 


281 


3 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


duobus Sextis, Pompeio et Appuleio,! cons. XIII. Kal. 
Septemb. hora diei nona, septuagesimo et sexto aetatis 
anno, diebus V et XXX minus. 

Corpus decuriones municipiorum et coloniarum a 
Nola Bovillas usque deportarunt noctibus propter 
anni tempus, cum interdiu in basilica cuiusque oppidi 
vel in aedium sacrarum maxima reponeretur. A 
Bovillis equester ordo suscepit urbique intulit atque in 
vestibulo domus conlocavit. Senatus et in funere 
ornando et in memoria honoranda eo studio certatim 
progressus est, ut inter alia complura censuerint 
quidam, funus triumphali porta ducendum, prae- 
cedente Victoria quae est in curia, canentibus neniam 
principum liberis utriusque sexus ; alii, exsequiarum 
die ponendos anulos aureos ferreosque sumendos ; 
nonnulli, ossa legenda per sacerdotes summorum 
collegiorum. Fuit et qui suaderet, appellationem 
mensis Augusti in Septembrem transferendam, quod 
hoc genitus Augustus, illo defunctus esset; alius, ut 
omne tempus a primo die natali ad exitum eius 
saeculum Augustum appellaretur et ita in fastos 
referretur. Verum adhibito honoribus modo bifariam 
laudatus est : pro aede Divi Iuli a Tiberio et pro rostris 
veteribus a Druso Tiberi filio, ac senatorum umeris 
delatus in Campum crematusque. Nec defuit vir 
praetorius, qui se effigiem cremati euntem in caelum 


1 Appuleio, Monumentum Ancyranum ; Apuleio, D. 


a See Claud. vi, 1. 
283 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


Appuleius, on the fourteenth day before the Kalends 
of September at the ninth hour, just thirty-five days 
before his seventy-sixth birthday. 

His body was carried by the senators of the 
municipalities and colonies from Nola all the way to 
Bovillae, in the night time because of the season of 


Aug. 19 
14 A.D. 


the year, being placed by day in the basilica of the ' 


town at which they arrived or in its principal temple. 
At Bovillae the members of the equestrian order * 
met it and bore it to the city, where they placed it 
in the vestibule of his house. 

In their desire to give him a splendid funeral and 
honour his memory the senators so vied with one 
another that among many other suggestions some 
proposed that his cortege pass through the triumphal 
gate, preceded by the statue of Victory which stands 
in the House, while a dirge was sung by children of 
both sexes belonging to the leading families; others, 
that on the day of the obsequies golden rings be laid 
aside and iron ones worn; and some, that his ashes 
be collected by the priests of the highest colleges. 
One man proposed that the ‘name of the month 
of August be transferred to September, because 
Augustus was born in the latter, but died in the 
former ; another, that all the period from the day of 
his birth until his demise be called the Augustan Age, 
and so entered in the Calendar. But though a limit 
was set to the honours paid him, his eulogy was twice 
delivered: before the temple of the Deified Julius 
by Tiberius, and from the old rostra by Drusus, son 
of Tiberius; and he was carried on the shoulders of 
senators to the Campus Martius and there cremated. 
There was even an ex-praetor who took oath that he 
had seen the form of the Emperor, after he had been 


283 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


vidisse iuraret. Reliquias legerunt primores equestris 
ordinis tunicati et discincti pedibusque nudis ac 
Mausoleo condiderunt. Id opus inter Flaminiam viam 
ripamque Tiberis sexto suo consulatu exstruxerat cir- 
cumiectasque silvas et ambulationes in usum populi 
iam tum publicarat. 

CI. Testamentum L. Planco C. Silio cons. III. Non. 
Apriles, ante annum et quattuor menses quam de- 
cederet, factum ab eo ac duobus codicibus partim 
ipsius partim libertorum Polybi et Hilarionis manu 
scriptum depositumque apud se virgines Vestales cum 
tribus signatis aeque voluminibus protulerunt. Quae 
omnia in senatu aperta atque recitata sunt. Heredes 
instituit primos: Tiberium ex parte dimidia et sex- 
tante, Liviam ex parte tertia, quos et ferre nomen 
suum iussit; secundos: Drusum Tiberi filium ex 
triente, ex partibus reliquis Germanicum liberosque 
eius tres sexus virilis; tertio gradu propinquos, 
amicosque compluris. Legavit populo R. quad- 
ringenties, tribubus tricies quinquies sestertium, prae- 
torianis militibus singula milia nummorum, cohortibus 
urbanis quingenos, legionaris trecenos nummos ; quam 
summam repraesentari iussit, nam et confiscatam 
semper repositamque habuerat. Reliqua legata varie 
dedit perduxitque quaedam ad vicena sestertia, qui- 
bus solvendis annuum diem finiit, excusata rei fami- 
liaris mediocritate nec plus perventurum ad heredes 


^ Augustus and Augusta, but Tiberius did not assume the 
title until it was conferred on him by the senate; Dio 57. 
2-3. è See note on Jul, lxxxiii. 2. ¢ See chap. lxiv. 1. 

4 Probably those with which he was connected (see chap 
xl. 2); Lipsius suggested tribultbus, . 


234 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


reduced to ashes, on its way to heaven. His remains 
were gathered up by the leading men of the 
equestrian order, bare-footed and in ungirt tunics, 
and placed in the Mausoleum. This structure he 
had built in his sixth consulship between the Via 28»c. 
Flaminia and the bank of the Tiber, and at the same 
time opened to the public the groves and walks by 
which it was surrounded. 
CI. He had made a will in the consulship of Aprils, 
Lucius Plancus and Gaius Silius on the third day 75^» 
before the Nones of April, a year and four months 
before he died, in two note-books, written in part in his 
own hand and in part in that of his freedmen Polybius 
and Hilarion. These the Vestal virgins, with whom 
they had been deposited, now produced, together 
with three rolls, which were sealed in the same way. 
All these were opened and read in the senate. He 
appointed as his chief heirs Tiberius, to receive two- 
thirds of the estate, and Livia, one-third ; these he 
also bade assume his name.^ His heirs in the second 
degree ? were Drusus, son of Tiberius, for one-third, 
nd for the rest Germanicus and his three male 
[chile In the third grade he mentioned many 
f his relatives and friends. He left to the Roman 
people forty million sesterces; to the tribes? three 
million five hundred thousand ; to the soldiers of the 
pretorian guard a thousand each ; and to the legion- 
aries three hundred. J} This sum he ordered to be 
paid at once, for he had always kept the amount 
at hand and ready for the purpose. He gave other 
legacies to various individuals, some amounting to 
as much as twenty thousand sesterces, and pro- 
vided for the payment of these a year later, giving 
as his excuse for the delay the small amount of 


285 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK Ii 


suos quam milies et quingenties professus, quamvis 
viginti proximis annis quaterdecies milies ex testa- 
mentis amicorum percepisset, quod paene omne cum 
duobus paternis patrimoniis ceterisque hereditatibus 
in rem p. absumpsisset. Iulias filiam neptemque, si 
quid iis accidisset, vetuit sepulcro suo inferri. Tribus 
voluminibus, uno mandata de funere suo complexus 
est, altero indicem rerum a se gestarum, quem 
vellet incidi in aeneis tabulis, quae ante Mausoleum 
statuerentur, tertio breviarium totius imperii, quantum 
militum sub signis ubique esset, quantum pecuniae 
in aerario et fiscis et vectigaliorum residuis.  Adiecit 
et libertorum servorumque nomina, a quibus ratio 
exigi posset. 


* That is, on their death ; à common euphemism. 

ò The original of this inscription is lost, but the greater 
part of a copy inscribed in Greek and Latin on marble is 
preserved at Ancyra in Asia Minor and is known as the 
Monumentum Ancyranum. 


286 


THE DEIFIED AUGUSTUS 


his property, and declaring that not more than a 
hundred and fifty millions would come to his heirs; 
for though he had received fourteen hundred mil- 
lions during the last twenty years from the wills 
of his friends, he said that he had spent nearly all of 
it, as well as the estates left him by his natural and 
his adoptive father, for the benefit of the State. He 
gave orders that his daughter and his granddaughter 
Julia should not be put in his Mausoleum, if anything 
befell them.” In one of the three rolls he included 
directions for his funeral; in the second, an account 
of what he had accomplished, which he desired to 
have cut upon bronze tablets and set up at the 
entrance to the Mausoleum?; in the third, a summary 
of the condition of the whole empire; how many 
soldiers there were in active service in all parts of it, 
how much money there was in the public treasury 
and in the privy-purse, and what revenues were in 
arrears. He added, besides, the names of the freed- 
men and slaves from whom the details could be 
demanded. 


287 


Hosted by Google 


BOOK III 


TIBERIUS 


VOL. I. 


LIBER IJI 


TIBERIUS 
I. Patricia gens Claudia — fuit enim et alia 
plebeia, nec potentia minor nec dignitate — orta 


est ex Regillis oppido Sabinorum. Inde Romam 
recens conditam cum magna clientium manu 
conmigravit auctore Tito Tatio consorte Romuli, 
vel, quod magis «constat, Atta Claudio gentis 
principe, post reges exactos sexto fere anno; atque 
in patricias cooptata! agrum insuper trans Ánienem 
clientibus locumque sibi ad sepulturam sub Capitolio 
publice accepit. | Deinceps procedente tempore 
duodetriginta consulatus, dictaturas quinque, cen- 
suras septem, triumphos sex, duas ovationes adepta 
est. Cum praenominibus cognominibusque variis 
distingueretur, Luci praenomen consensu repudiavit, 
postquam e duobus gentilibus praeditis eo alter 
latrocinii, caedis alter convictus est. Inter. co- 
gnomina autem et Neronis assumpsit, quo? significatur 
lingua Sabina fortis ac strenuus. 


1 cooptata, 7; coaptata, D. 2 quo, ç; quod, Q. 


^ 504 B.c. in the traditional chronology. 
> See note on Aug. xxii. 


290 


iran 


BOOK III 


f TIBERIUS 

I. Tue patrician branch of the Claudian family 
(for there was, besides, a plebeian branch of no less 
influence and prestige) originated at Regilli, a town 
of the Sabines. From there it moved to Rome 
shortly after the founding of the city with a large 
band of dependents, through the influence of Titus 
Tatius, who shared the kingly power with Romulus 
(or, according to the generally accepted view, of 
Atta Claudius, the head of the family) about six 
years after the expulsion of the kings." It was 
admitted among the patrician families, receiving, 
besides, from the State a piece of land on the 
farther side of the Anio for its dependents, and 
a burial-site for the family at the foot of the 
Capitoline hill Then as time went on it was 
honoured with twenty-eight consulships, five dictator- 
ships, seven censorships, six triumphs, and two ova- 
tions. While the members of the family were. 
known by.various forenames and surnames, they 
discarded the forename Lucius by common consent 
after two of the family who bore it had been found 
guilty, the one of highway robbery, and the other of 
murder. To their surnames, on the other hand, 
they added that of Nero, which in the Sabine tongue 
means “strong and valiant.” 


29I 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


IIl. Multa multorum Claudiorum egregia merita, 
multa etiam sequius admissa in rem p. exstant. Sed 
ut praecipua commemorem, Appius Caecus societa- 
tem cum rege Pyrrho ut parum salubrem iniri 
dissuasit. Claudius Caudex primus freto classe 
traiecto Poenos Sicilia expulit. Tiberius! Nero 
advenientem ex Hispania cum ingentibus copiis 
Hasdrubalem, prius quam Hannibali fratri coniun- 
geretur, oppressit. Contra Claudius Regillianus, 
decemvir legibus scribendis, virginem ingenuam 
per vim libidinis gratia in servitutem asserere 
conatus causa plebi fuit secedendi rursus a patribus. 
Claudius Russus? statua sibi diademata ad Appi 
Forum posita Italiam per clientelas occupare tem- 
ptavit. Claudius Pulcher apud Siciliam non pas- 
centibus in auspicando pullis ac per contemptum 
religionis mari demersis, quasi ut biberent quando 
esse nollent, proelium navale iniit; superatusque, 
cum dictatorem dicere a senatu iuberetur, velut 
iterum inludens discrimini publico Glycian? viatorem 
suum dixit. 

Exstant et feminarum exempla diversa aeque, 
siquidem gentis eiusdem utraque Claudia fuit, et 


. quae. navem cum sacris Matris deum Idaeae obhae- 


rentem Tiberino vado extraxit, precata propalam, 
ut ita demum se sequeretur, si sibi pudicitia 

1 Tiberius] Tibus, M ; tybus, G? ; tybus, G?; Tibi, V; 
the other mss. have Tibius or Tiberius. 


2 Russus, conjecture of Ihm, Hermes, 36,303 ; Drusus, mss. 
3 Glycian, Salmasius ; ilycian, n. 


. * 449 8.0, in the traditional chronology. 
? Cybele, a Phrygian goddess worshipped near Mount 


292 


TIBERIUS 


II. There are on record many distinguished 
services of the Claudii to their country, as well 
as many deeds of the opposite character. But to 
mention only the principal instances, Appius Claudius 
advised against forming an alliance with king Pyrrhus 
as not at all expedient. Claudius Caudex was the 
first to cross the straits with a fleet, and drove the 
Carthaginians from Sicily. Tiberius Nero crushed 
Hasdrubal, on his arrival from Spain with a vast army, 
before he could unite with his brother Hannibal. On 
the other hand, Claudius Regillianus, decemvir for codi- 
fying the laws, through his lawless attempt to enslave 
a freeborn maid, to gratify his passion for her, was the 
cause of the second secession of the plebeians from the 
patricians.* Claudius Russus, having set up his statue 
at Forum Appi with a crown upon its head, tried 
to take possession of Italy through his dependents. 
Claudius Pulcher began a sea-fight off Sicily, though 
the sacred chickens would not eat when he took the 
auspices, throwing them into the sea in defiance 
of the omen, and saying that they might drink, 
since they would not eat. He was defeated, and 
on being bidden by the senate to appoint a dictator, 
he appointed his messenger Glycias, as if again 
making a jest of his country’s peril. 

The women also have records equally diverse, since 
both the famous Claudias belonged to that family: 
the one who drew the ship with the sacred proper- 
ties of the Idaean Mother of the Gods? from the 
shoal in the Tiber on which it was stranded, after 
first publicly praying that it might yield to her 
efforts only if her chastity were beyond question ; and 


Ida. In the year 204 5.c. her cult was introduced into 
Rome, where she was worshipped as the Magna, Mater. 


293 


230 B.C. 


264 B.C. 


207 B.C. 


249 B.C. 


204 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


constaret ; et quae novo more iudicium maiestatis 
apud populum mulier subiit, quod in conferta 
multitudine aegre procedente carpento palam opta- 
verat, ut frater suus Pulcher revivisceret atque 
iterum classem amitteret, quo minor turba Romae 
foret. Praeterea notatissimum est, Claudios omnis, 
excepto dum taxat P. Clodio, qui ob expellendum 
urbe Ciceronem plebeio homini atque etiam natu 
minori in adoptionem se dedit, optimates adserto- 
resque unicos dignitatis ac potentiae patriciorum 
semper fuisse atque adversus plebem adeo violentos 
et contumaces, ut ne capitis quidem quisquam 
reus apud populum mutare vestem aut deprecari 
sustinuerit; nonnulli in altercatione et iurgio tri- 
bunos plebi pulsaverint. Etiam virgo Vestalis 
fratrem! iniussu populi triumphantem ascenso simul 
curru usque in Capitolium prosecuta est, ne vetare 
aut intercedere fas cuiquam tribunorum esset. 

III. Ex hac stirpe Tiberius Caesar genus trahit, 
et quidem ? utrumque: paternum a Tiberio Nerone, 
maternum ab Appio Pulchro, qui ambo Appi Caeci 
filii fuerunt. Insertus est et  Liviorum familiae 
adoptato in eam materno avo. Quae familia 
quanquam plebeia, tamen et ipsa admodum floruit 
octo consulatibus, censuris duabus, triumphis tribus, 


1 fratrem, mss. ; patrem, Cic. Cael. 34. 
2 et quidem, TIQ ; the other mss. have equidem. 


@ Of, Jul. xx. 4. 


TIBERIUS 


the one who was convicted by the people of treason, 
an unprecedented thing in the case of a woman, 
because when her carriage made but slow progress 
through the throng, she openly gave vent to the 
wish that her brother Pulcher might come to life 
and lose another fleet, to make less of a crowd in 
Rome. It is notorious besides that all the Claudii 
were aristocrats and staunch upholders of the prestige 
and influence of thé patricians, with the sole excep- 
tion of Publius Clodius, who for the sake of driving 
Cicero from the city had himself adopted by a 
plebeian and one too who was younger than himself. 
Their attitude towards the commons was so head- 
strong and stubborn that not even when on trial for 
his life before the people did any one of them deign 
to put on mourning or beg for mercy ; and some of 
them during bickerings and disputes struck the 
tribunes of the commons. Even a Vestal virgin 
mounted her brothers chariot with him, when he 
was celebrating a triumph without the sanction of 
the people, and attended him all the way to the 
Capitol, in order to make it an act of sacrilege for 
any one of the tribunes to forbid him or interpose his 
veto. 

III. Such was the stock from which Tiberius 
Caesar derived his origin, and that too on both sides : 


246 B.c. 


60 B.C. 


143 B.C, 


on his father's from Tiberius Nero; on his mother’s : 


from Appius Pulcher, both of whom were sons of 
Appius Caecus. He was a member also of the family 
of the Livii, through the adoption into it of his 
maternal grandmother. This family too, though of 
plebeian origin, was yet of great prominence and had 
been honoured with eight consulships, two censor- 
ships, and three triumphs, as well as with the 


295 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


dictatura etiam ac magisterio equitum honorata ; 
clara et insignibus viris ac maxime Salinatore 
Drusisque. Salinator universas tribus in censura 
notavit levitatis nomine, quod, cum se post priorem 
consulatum multa inrogata condemnassent, consulem 
iterum censoremque fecissent. Drusus hostium duce 
Drauso comminus trucidato sibi posterisque suis 
cognomen invenit. Traditur etiam pro praetore ex 
provincia Gallia rettulisse aurum Senonibus olim 
in obsidione Capitolii datum nec, ut fama est, 
extortum a Camillo. Eius abnepos ob eximiam 
adversus Gracchos operam patronus senatus dictus 
filium reliquit, quem in simili dissensione multa 
varie molientem diversa factio per fraudem interemit. 

IV. Pater Tiberi, Nero, quaestor C. Caesaris 
Alexandrino bello classi praepositus, plurimum ad 
victoriam contulit Quare et pontifex in locum 
P. Scipionis substitutus et ad deducendas in Galliam 
colonias, in quis Narbo et Arelate erant, missus 
est. Tamen Caesare occiso, cunctis turbarum metu 
abolitionem facti decernentibus, etiam de praemiis 
tyrannicidarum referendum censuit. Praetura deinde 
functus, cum exitu anni discordia inter triumviros 
orta esset, retentis ultra iustum tempus insignibus 
L. Antonium consulem triumviri fratrem ad Perusiam 


a That is, affixed the mark of ignominy (nota) to their 
names on the census roll. 


296 


TIBERIUS 


offices of dictator and master of the horse. It was 
made illustrious too by distinguished members, in 
particular Salinator and the Drusi. The former in 
his censorship put the brand on all the tribes * on 
the charge of fickleness, because having convicted 
and fined him after a previous consulship, they made 
him consul a second time and censor as well Drusus 
gained a surname for himself and his descendants by 
slaying Drausus, leader of the enemy, in single 
combat. It is also said that when propraetor he 
brought back from his province of Gaul the gold 
which was paid long before to the Senones, when 
they beleaguered the Capitol, and that this had not 
been wrested from them by Camillus, as tradition 
has it. His grandson's grandson, called “ Patron of 
the Senate” because of his distinguished services 
against the Gracchi, left a son who was treacher- 
ously slain by the party of his opponents, while he 
was busily agitating many plans during a similar 
dissension. 

IV. Nero, the father of Tiberius, as a quaestor of 
Julius Caesar during the Alexandrian war and com- 
mander of a fleet, contributed materially to the 
victory. For this he was made pontiff in place of 
Publius Scipio and sent to conduct colonies to Gaul, 
among them Narbo and Arelate. Yet after the 
murder of Caesar, when all the others voted for an 
amnesty through fear of mob violence, he even 
favoured a proposal for rewarding the tyrannicides. 
Later on, having held the praetorship, since a dispute 
arose among the triumvirs at the close of his term, 
he retained the badges of his rank beyond the 
legitimate time and followed Lucius Antonius, consul 
and brother of the triumvir, to Perusia. When the 


297 


204 B.C 


990 B.C. 


122 B.C. 


91 wo. 


48-47 
B. C. 


41 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


secutus, deditione a ceteris facta, solus permansit 
in partibus ac primo Praeneste, inde Neapolim 
evasit servisque ad pilleum frustra vocatis in Siciliam 
profugit. Sed indigne ferens nec statim se in 
conspectum Sexti Pompei admissum et fascium 
usu prohibitum, ad M. Antonium traiecit in Achaiam. 
Cum quo brevi reconciliata inter omnis pace Romam 
redit uxoremque Liviam Drusillam et tunc gravidam 
et ante iam apud se filium enixam petenti Augusto 
concessit. Nec multo post diem obiit, utroque 
liberorum superstite, Tiberio Drusoque Neronibus. 

V. Tiberium quidam Fundis natum existimaverunt 
secuti levem coniecturam, quod materna eius avia 
Fundana fuerit et quod mox simulacrum Felicitatis 
ex s. c. publicatum ibi sit, Sed ut plures certioresque 
tradunt, natus est Romae in Palatio XVI. Kal. Dec. 
M. Aemilio Lepido iterum L. Munatio Planco conss. 
per bellum Philippense. Sic enim in fastos actaque 
in publica relatum est. Nec tamen desunt, qui 
partim antecedente anno, Hirti ac Pansae, partim 
insequenti, Servili Isaurici L.! que Antoni consulatu, 
genitum eum scribant. 

VI. Infantiam pueritiamque habuit laboriosam ? et 
exercitatam, comes usque quaque parentum fugae; 
quos quidem apud Neapolim sub inruptionem hostis 
navigium clam petentis vagitu suo paene bis prodidit, 


1 L., added by Bentley and Roth. 
* laboriosam, Pithoeus; luxoriosam, MG; the other mss. 
have luxuriosam, 


a Ad pileum : the pilleus, a close-fitting felt cap, was Bee 
to slaves on manumission, as a token of freedom. 
.. * See Aug. lxii. 2. 


298 


TIBERIUS 


others capitulated, he alone held to his allegiance 
and got away first to Praeneste and then to Naples; 
and after vainly trying to enlist the slaves by a 
promise of freedom,” he took refuge in Sicily. Piqued 
however because he was not at once given an audience 
with Sextus Pompeius, and was denied the use of the 
fasces, he crossed to Achaia and joined Mark Antony. 
With him he shortly returned to Rome, on the con- 
clusion of a general peace, and gave up to Augustus 
at his request his wife Livia Drusilla, who was 
pregnant at the time and had already borne him 
a son? Not long afterward he died, survived by 
both his sons, Tiberius Nero and Drusus Nero, 

V. Some have supposed that Tiberius was born at 
Fundi, on no better evidence than that his maternal 
grandmother was a native of that place, and that 
later a statue of Good Fortune was set up there by 
decree of the senate. But according to the most 
numerous and trustworthy authorities, he was born at 
Rome, on the Palatine, the sixteenth day before the 
Kalends of December, in the consulship of Marcus 
Aemilius Lepidus and Lucius Munatius Plancus (the 
former for the second time) while the war of Philippi 
was going on. In fact it is so recorded both in the 
calendar and in the public gazette. Yet in spite 
of this some write that he was born in the preceding 
year, that of Hirtius and Pansa, and others in the 
following year, in the consulate of Servilius Isauricus 
and Lucius Antonius. 

VI. He passed his infancy and his youth amid 
hardship and tribulation, since he was everywhere 
the companion of his parents in their flight; at 
Naples indeed he all but betrayed them twice by his 
crying, as they were secretly on their way to a ship 


299 


Nov. 16 
42 BAC 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


semel cum a nutricis ubere, iterum! cum a sinu 
matris raptim auferretur ab iis, qui pro necessitate 
temporis mulierculas levare onere temptabant. Per 
Siciliam quoque et per Achaiam circumductus ac 
Lacedaemoniis publice, quod in tutela Claudiorum 
erant, demandatus, digrediens inde itinere nocturno 
discrimen vitae adiit flamma repente e silvis undique 
exorta adeoque omnem comitatum circumplexa, ut 
Liviae pars vestis et capilli amburerentur. Munera, 
quibus a Pompeia Sex. Pompei sorore in Sicilia donatus 
est, chlamys et fibula, item bullae aureae, durant 
ostendunturque adhuc Baiis. Post reditum in urbem 
a M. Gallio senatore testamento adoptatus hereditate 
adita mox nomine abstinuit, quod Gallius adversarum 
Augusto partium fuerat. 

Novem natus annos defunctum patrem pro rostris 
laudavit. Dehinc pubescens Actiaco triumpho currum 
Augusti comitatus est sinisteriore funali equo, cum 
Marcellus Octaviae filius dexteriore veheretur. Prae- 
sedit et asticis? ludis et Troiam circensibus lusit ? 
ductor turmae puerorum maiorum. 

VII. Virili toga sumpta adulescentiam omnem 
spatiumque insequentis aetatis usque ad principatus 
initia per haec fere transegit. Munus gladiatorium 
in memoriam patris et alterum in avi Drusi dedit, 
diversis temporibus ac locis, primum in Foro, se- 

1 iterum, Ursinus ; item, 0. . 

2 Atticis, Y and V in the margin ; atricis, LPS (attricis, 
L); acticis, T.  Theastici (rom korv) were originally cele- 


brated at Athens, in honour of Dionysus. 

3 lusit, supplied by Bentley and after Troiam by Roth. 
li ^ See Aug. xxii. > Cf. Jul. xxxix. 2. | 
300 


LI 


TIBERIUS 


just as the enemy burst into the town, being suddenly 
torn from his nurse’s breast and again from his 
mother’s arms by those who tried to relieve the poor 
women of their burden because of the imminent 
danger. After being taken all over Sicily also and 
Achaia, and consigned to the public care of the 
Lacedaemonians, because they were dependents of 
the Claudii, he almost lost his life as he was leaving 
there by night, when the woods suddenly took fire 
all about them, and the flames so encircled the whole 
company that part of Livia’s robe and her hair were 
scorched. The gifts which were given him in Sicily 
by Pompeia, sister of Sextus Pompeius, a cloak and 
clasp, as well as studs of gold, are still kept and 
exhibited at Baiae. Being adopted, after his return 
to the city, in the will of Marcus Gallius, a senator, 
he accepted the inheritance, but soon gave up the 
name, because Gallius had been a member of the 
party opposed to Augustus. 

At the age of nine he delivered a eulogy of his 
dead father from the rostra. Then, just as he was 
arriving at puberty, he accompanied the chariot ot 
Augustus in his triumph after Actium,” riding the 
left trace-horse, while Marcellus, son of Octavia, 
rode the one on the right. He presided, too, at the 
city festival, and took part in the game of Troy 
during the performances in the circus, leading the 
band of older boys.5 : 

VII. The principal events of his youth and later 
life, from the assumption of the gown of manhood 
to the beginning of his reign, were these. He gave 
a gladiatorial show in memory of his father, and a 
second in honour of his grandfather Drusus, at differ- 
- ent times and in different places, the former in the 


501 


t3 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


cundum in amphitheatro, rudiariis quoque quibusdam: 
revocatis auctoramento centenum milium ; dedit et 
ludos, sed absens; cuncta magnifice, inpensa matris 
ac vitrici. 

Agrippinam, Marco Agrippa genitam, neptem Cae- 
cili Attici equitis R., ad quem sunt Ciceronis epistulae, 
duxit uxorem ; sublatoque ex ea filio Druso, quanquam 
bene convenientem rursusque gravidam dimittere ac 
Iuliam Augusti filiam confestim coactus est ducere 
non sine magno angore animi, cum et Agrippinae 
consuetudine teneretur et Iuliae mores improbaret, 
ut quam sensisset sui quoque sub priore marito 
appetentem, quod sane etiam vulgo existimabatur. 
Sed Agrippinam et abegisse post divortium doluit et 
semel omnino ex occursu visam adeo contentis et 
umentibus! oculis prosecutus est, ut custoditum sit 
ne umquam in conspectum ei posthac veniret. Cum 
Iulia primo concorditer et amore mutuo vixit, mox 
dissedit et aliquanto gravius, ut etiam perpetuo 
secubaret, intercepto communis fili pignore, qui 
Aquileiae natus infans exstinctus est. Drusum fratrem 
in Germania amisit, cuius corpus pedibus toto itinere 
praegrediens Roman usque pervexit. 

VIII. Civilium officiorum rudimentis regem Arche- 
laum Trallianos et Thessalos, varia quosque de causa, 


1 umentibus, Lipsius; tumentibus, n. 


a The one built by Statilius Taurus ; see Aug. xxix. 5. 

òè Rudiarius: presented with the rudis, or wooden sword, 
a symbol of honourable discharge ; cf. Hor. Epist. 1. 1. 2. 

* A child at birth was laid at his father's feet. He then 
acknowledged him by taking him in his arms (tollere), or the 
child was disowned and cast out (expositus). 

4 Of, Aug. lxiii. 2, 


302 


TIBERIUS 


Forum and the latter in the amphitheatre,® inducing 
some retired gladiators® to appear with the rest by 
the payment of a hundred thousand sesterces to each. 
He also gave stage-plays, but without being present 
in person. All these were on a grand scale, at the 
expense of his mother and his stepfather. 

He married Agrippina, daughter of Marcus Agrippa, 
and granddaughter of Caecilius Atticus, a Roman 
knight, to whom Cicero's letters are addressed ; but 
after he had acknowledged ° a son from her, Drusus, 
although she was thoroughly congenial and was a 
second time with child, he was forced to divorce her 1 xc. 
and to contract a hurried marriage with Julia? 
daughter of Augustus. This caused him no little dis- 
tress of mind, for he was living happily with Agrippina, 
and disapproved of Julia’s character, having per- 
ceived that she had a passion for him even during 
the lifetime of her former husband, as was in fact 
the general opinion. But even after the divorce 
he regretted his separation from Agrippina, and the 
only time that he chanced to see her, he followed 
- her with such an intent and tearful gaze that care 
was taken that she should never again come before 
his eyes. With Julia he lived in harmony at first, 
and returned her love; but he soon grew cold, and 
went so far as to cease to live with her at all, after 
the severing of the tie formed by a child which was 
born to them, but died at Aquileia in infancy. He 
lost his brother Drusus in Germany and conveyed his 9 s.c. 
body to Rome, going before it on foot all the way. 

VIII. He began his civil career by a defence of king 
Archelaus, the people of Tralles, and thoseof Thessaly, 
before the judgment seat of Augustus, the charge 
in each case being different. He made a plea to the 


393 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


Augusto cognoscente defendit ; pro Laodicenis Thyati- 
renis Chiis terrae motu afflictis opemque implorantibus 
senatum deprecatus est; Fannium Caepionem, qui 
cum Varrone Murena in Augustum conspiraverat, 
reum maiestatis apud iudices fecit et : condemnavit. 
Interque haec duplicem curam administravit, annonae 
quae artior inciderat, et repurgandorum tota Italia 
ergastulorum, quorum domini in invidiam venerant 
quasi exceptos supprimerent non solum viatores sed 
et quos sacramenti metus ad eius modi latebras com- 
pulisset. 

IX. Stipendia prima expeditione Cantabrica tri- 
bunus militum fecit, dein ducto ad Orientem exercitu 
regnum Armeniae Tigrani restituit ac pro tribunali 
diadema imposuit. Recepit et signa, quae M. Crasso 
ademerant Parthi. Post hoc Comatam Galliam anno 
fere rexit et barbarorum incursionibus et principum 
discordia inquietam. Exin Raeticum Vindelicumque 
bellum, inde Pannonicum, inde Germanicum gessit. 
Raetico atque Vindelico gentis Alpinas, Pannonico 
Breucos et Dalmatas subegit, Germanico quadraginta ' 
milia dediticiorum traiecit in Galliam iuxtaque ripam 
Rheni sedibus adsignatis conlocavit. Quas ob res et 
ovans et curru urbem ingressus est, prius, ut quidam 
putant, triumphalibus omamentis honoratus, novo 
nec antea cuiquam tributo genere honoris. 


- — Ll MÀ M ry —— 


a See note on Aug. xxxii. 1. .* Of. Aug. xxi. 3. 

c Transalpine Gaul was called Comata, “long-haired.” 
The southern part was called Braccata, ‘‘ breeches- wearing," 
and Cisalpine (aul, Togata. 

4 i.e. celebrating a ?ustum triumphum ; see note on Aug. 
xxii., and cf. Vell. 2. 121. For a different version see Dio, 54. 
31. 


304 


TIBERIUS 


senate in behalf of the citizens of Laodicea, Thy- 
atira and Chios, who had suffered loss from an earth- 
quake and begged for help. Fannius Caepio, who 
had conspired with Varro Murena against Augustus, 
he arraigned for high treason and secured his con- 
demnation. In the meantime he undertook two 
public charges: that of the grain supply, which, as it 
happened, was deficient ; and the investigation of the 
slave-prisons * throughout Italy, the owners of which 
had gained a bad reputation; for they were charged 
with holding in durance not only travellers, but also 
those whom dread of military service had driven to 
such places of concealment. 

IX. His first military service was as tribune of the 
soldiers in the campaign against the Cantabrians ; 
then he led an army to the Orient and restored the 
throne of Armenia to Tigranes, crowning him on the 
tribunal. He besides recovered the standards which 
the Parthians had taken from Marcus Crassus.^ 
Then for about a year he was governor of Gallia 
Comata, which was in a state of unrest through 
the inroads of the barbarians and the dissensions of 
its chiefs. Next he carried on war with the Raeti 
and Vindelici, then in Pannonia, and finally in 
Germany. In the first of these wars he subdued 
the Alpine tribes, in the second the Breuci and 


23 B.U. 


25 B.C, 


Dalmatians, and in the third he brought forty | 


thousand prisoners of war over into Gaul and assigned 
them homes near the bank of the Rhine. Because 
of these exploits he entered the city both in an 
ovation and riding in a chariot,? having previously, 
as some think, been honoured with the triumphal 
regalia, a new kind of distinction never before 
conferred upon anyone. 


VOL. I. 30 5 


7 and 
A.D. 


3 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


Magistratus et maturius incohavit et paene 
iunctim percucurrit, quaesturam praeturam consula- 
tum; interpositoque tempore consul iterum etiam 
tribuniciam potestatem in quinquennium accepit. 

X. Tot prosperis confluentibus integra aetate ac 
valitudine statuit repente secedere seque e medio 
quam longissime amovere ; dubium uxorisne taedio, 
quam neque criminari aut dimittere auderet neque 
ultra perferre posset, an ut vitato assiduitatis fastidio 
auctoritatem absentia tueretur atque etiam augeret, 
si quando indiguisset sui res p. Quidam existimant, 
adultis iam Augusti liberis, loco et quasi possessione 
usurpati a se diu secundi gradus sponte cessisse 
exemplo M. Agrippae, qui M. Marcello ad munera 
publica admoto Mytilenas abierit, ne aut obstare 
aut obtrectare praesens videretur. Quam causam et 
ipse, sed postea, reddidit. Tunc autem honorum 
satietatem ac requiem laborum praetendens com- 
meatum petit; neque aut matri suppliciter precanti 
aut vitrico deseri se etiam in senatu conquerenti 
veniam dedit. Quin et pertinacius retinentibus, 
cibo per quadriduum! abstinuit, Facta tandem 
abeundi potestate, relictis Romae uxore et filio con- 
festim Ostiam descendit, ne verbo quidem cuiquam 
prosequentium reddito paucosque admodum in di- 
gressu exosculatus. 


1 quadriduum] quatriduum, 2. 


a Since he was quaestor in 23 B.C. and consul for the first 
time in 18 B.C., paene iunctim is used loosely, to indicate a 
general disregard of the ages required for the various offices 
and the prescribed intervals. è Cf. Aug. lxvi. 3. 


306 


TIBERIUS 


He entered upon the offices of quaestor, praetor, 
and consul before the usual age, and held them 
almost without an interval; then after a time he 
wasemade consul again, at the same time receiving 
the tribunicial power for five years. 

X. At the flood-tide of success, though in the 
prime of life and health, he suddenly decided to go 
into retirement and to withdraw as far as possible 
from the centre of the stage ; perhaps from disgust at 
his wife, whom he dared neither accuse nor put away, 
though he could no longer endute her; or perhaps, 
avoiding the contempt born of familiarity, to keep 
up his prestige by absence, or even add to it, in case 
his country should ever need him. Some think that, 
since the children of Augustus were now of age, he 
voluntarily gave up the position and the virtual 
assumption of the second rank which he had long 
held, thus following the example of Marcus Agrippa, 
who withdrew to Mytilene when Marcellus began 
his publie career, so that he might not seem either to 
oppose or belittle him by his presence. This was, 
in fact, the reason which Tiberius himself gave, but 
afterwards. At the time he asked for leave of 
absence on the ground of weariness of office and 
a desire to rest; and he would not give way either 
to his mother’s urgent entreaties or to the complaint 
which his step-father openly made in the senate, 
that he was being forsaken. On the contrary, when 
they made more strenuous efforts to detain him, he 
refused to take food for four days. Being at last 
allowed to depart, he left his wife and son in Rome 
and went down to Ostia in haste, without saying a 
single word to any of those who saw him off, and 
kissing only a very few when he left. | 

. 307 
x à 


6 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


XI. Ab Ostia oram Campaniae legens inbecillitate 
Augusti nuntiata paulum substitit. Sed incre- 
brescente rumore quasi ad occasionem maioris spei 
commoraretur, tantum non adversis tempestatibus ' 
Rhodum enavigavit, amoenitate et salubritate insulae 
iam inde captus cum ad eam ab Armenia rediens 
appulisset. Hic modicis contentus aedibus nec 
multo laxiore suburbano genus vitae civile admodum 
instituit, sine lictore aut viatore gymnasio interdum 
obambulans mutuaque cum Graeculis officia usurpans 
prope ex aequo. 

Forte quondam in disponendo die mane prae- 
dixerat, quidquid aegrorum in civitate esset visitare 
se velle; id a proximis aliter exceptum iussique sunt 
omnes aegri in publicam porticum deferri ac per 
valitudinum genera disponi. Perculsus ergo inopinata 
re diuque quid ageret incertus, tandem singulos 
circuit excusans faetum etiam tenuissimo cuique et 
ignoto. | 

Unum hoc modo neque praeterea quicquam 
notatum est, in quo exseruisse ius tribuniciae potes- 
tatis visus sit: cum circa scholas et auditoria pro- 
fessorum assiduus esset, moto inter antisophistas 
graviore iurgio, non defuit qui eum intervenientem 
et quasi studiosiorem partis alterius convicio inces- 
seret. Sensim itaque regressus domum repente cum. 
308 


TIBERIUS 


XI. From Ostia he coasted along the shore of 
Campania, and learning of an indisposition of 
Augustus, he stopped for a while. But since gossip 
was rife that he was lingering on the chance of 
realising his highest hopes, although the wind was all 
but dead ahead, he sailed directly to Rhodes, for he 
had been attracted by the charm and healthfulness 
of that island ever since the time when he put 
in there on his return from Armenia. ontent 
there with a modest house and a villa in the suburbs 
not much more spacious, he adopted a most un- 
assuming manner of life, at times walking in the 
gymnasium without .a lictor or a messenger, and 
exchanging courtesies with the good people of Greece 
with almost the air of an equal. i 

It chanced one morning in arranging his pro- 
gramme for the day, that he had announced his wish 
to visit whatever sick folk there were in the city. 
This was misunderstood by his attendants, and orders 
were given that all the sick should be taken to a 
public colonnade and arranged according to the 
nature of their complaints. Whereupon Tiberius, 
shocked at this unexpected sight, and in doubt for 
some time what to do, at last went about to each 
one, apologizing for what had happened even to 
the humblest and most obscure of them. 

Only one single instance was noticed of a visible 
exercise of the rights of the tribunicial authority. 
He was a constant attendant at the schools and 
lecture-rooms of the professors of philosophy, and 
once when a hot dispute had arisen among rival 
sophists, a fellow had the audacity to ply him with 
abuse when he took part and appeared to favour one 
side. Thereupon he gradually backed away to his 


309 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


apparitoribus prodiit citatumque pro tribunali voce 
praeconis conviciatorem rapi iussit in carcerem. 

Comperit deinde Iuliam uxorem ob libidines atque 
adulteria damnatam repudiumque ei suo nomine ex 
auctoritate Augusti remissum ; et quamquam laetus 
nuntio, tamen officii duxit, quantum in se esset, exo- 
rare filiae patrem frequentibus litteris et vel ut- 
cumque meritae, quidquid umquam dono dedisset, 
concedere. Transacto autem tribuniciae potestatis 
tempore, confessus tandem, nihil aliud secessu 
devitasse se quam aemulationis cum C. Lucioque 
suspicionem, petit ut sibi securo iam ab hac parte, 
conroboratis his et secundum locum facile tutantibus 
permitteretur revisere necessitudines, quarum de- 
siderio teneretur. Sed neque impetravit ultroque 
etiam admonitus est, dimitteret omnem curam 
suorum, quos tam cupide reliquisset. 

XII. Remansit igitur Rhodi contra voluntatem, 
vix per matrem consecutus, ut ad velandam igno- 
miniam quasi legatus Augusto abesset. 

Enimvero tunc non privatum modo, sed etiam 
obnoxium et trepidum egit, mediterraneis agris 
abditus vitansque praeternavigantium officia, quibus 
frequentabatur assidue, nemine cum imperio aut 


a The title of legatus gave him an official position and con- 
cealed the fact that his absence was a forced one. 


310 


TIBERIUS 


house, and then suddenly coming out with his lictors 
and attendants, and bidding his crier to summon the 
foul-mouthed fellow before his tribunal, he had him 
taken off to prison. 

Shortly after this he learned that his wife Julia 
had been banished because of her immorality and 
adulteries, and that a bill of divorce had been sent 
her in his name by authority of Augustus; but 
welcome as this news was, he yet considered it 
his duty to make every possible effort in numerous 
letters to reconcile the father to his daughter; and 
regardless of her deserts, to allow her to keep any 
gifts which he had himself made her at any time. 
Moreover, when the term of his tribunicial power 
was at an end, at last admitting that the sole object 
of his retirement had been to avoid the suspicion of 
rivalry with Gaius and Lucius, he asked that inasmuch 
as he was free from care in that regard, since they 
were now grown up and had an undisputed claim 
on the succession, he be allowed to visit his relatives, 
whom he sorely missed. But his request was denied 
and he was besides admonished to give up all 
thought of his kindred, whom he had so eagerly 
abandoned. 

XII. Accordingly he remained in Rhodes against 
his will, having with difficulty through his mother’s 
aid secured permission that, while away from Rome, 
he should have the title of envoy* of Augustus, so 
as to conceal his disgrace. 

Then in very truth he lived not only in private, 
but even in danger and fear, secluded in the 
country away from the sea, and shunning the 
attentions of those that sailed that way; these, 
however, were constantly thrust on him, since 


311 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


magistratu tendente quoquam quin deverteret 
Rhodum. Et accesserunt maioris sollicitudinis 
causae. Namque privignum Gaium Orienti prae- 
positum, cum visendi gratia traiecisset Samum, 
alieniorem sibi sensit ex criminationibus M. Lolli 
comitis et rectoris eius. Venit etiam in suspicionem 
per quosdam beneficii sui centuriones a commeatu 
castra repetentis mandata ad complures dedisse 
ambigua et quae temptare singulorum animos ad 
novas res viderentur. De qua suspicione certior ab 
Augusto factus non cessavit efflagitare aliquem 
cuiuslibet ordinis custodem factis atque dictis suis. 
XIII. Equi quoque et armorum solitas exercita- 
tiones omisit redegitque se deposito patrio habitu ad 
pallium et crepidas atque in tali statu biennio fere 
permansit, contemptior in dies et invisior, adeo ut 
imagines eius et statuas Nemausenses! subverterint 
ac familiari quondam convivio mentione eius orta 
exstiterit qui Gaio polliceretur, confestim se, si 
iuberet, Rhodum navigaturum caputque exsulis—sic 
enim appellabatur—relaturum. Quo praecipue non 
iam metu sed discrimine coactus est, tam suis quam - 
matris inpensissimis precibus reditum expostulare, 
impetravitque adiutus aliquantum etiam casu. Desti- 
natum Augusto erat, nihil super ea re nisi ex 


1 Nemausenses, Q?7- ; Remausenses, N. 


a The Greek dress; see note on Aug. xeviii. 3. 
* In Gallia Comata, where Tiberius had been governor ; 
see chap. ix. 1. 


312 


TIBERIUS 


no general or magistrate who was on his way to 
any province failed to put in at Rhodes. He 
had besides reasons for still greater anxiety; for 
when he had crossed to Samos to visit his stepson 
Gaius, who had been made governor of the Orient, 
he found him somewhat estranged through the 
slanders of Marcus Lollius, a member of Gaius’ staff 
and his guardian. He also incurred the suspicion of 
having through some centurions of his appointment, 
who were returning to camp after a furlough, sent 
messages to several persons which were of an 
ambiguous character and apparently designed to 
incite them to revolution. On being informed by 
Augustus of this suspicion, he unceasingly demanded 
the appointment of someone, of any rank whatsoever, 
to keep watch over his actions and words. 

XIII. He also gave up his usual exercises with 
horses and arms, and laying aside the garb of his . 
country, took to the cloak and slippers ^; and in this 
state he continued for upwards of two years, becom- 
ing daily an object of greater contempt and aversion. 
This went so far that the citizens of Nemausus ? 
threw down his statues and busts, and when mention 
was once made of him at a private dinner party, a man 
got up and assured Gaius that if he would say the 
word, he would at once take ship for Rhodes and bring 
back the head of *the exile," as he was commonly 
called. It was this act especially, which made his 
position no longer one of mere fear but of actual 
peril, that drove Tiberius to sue for his recall with 
most urgent prayers, in which his mother joined ; 
ànd he obtained it, although partly owing to a 
fortunate chance. Augustus had resolved to come 
to no decision of the question which was not agree- 


313 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


voluntate maioris fili statuere ; is forte tunc M. Lollio 
offensior, facilis, exorabilisque in vitricum fuit. Per- 
mittente ergo Gaio revocatus est, verum sub con- 
dicione ne quam partem curamve rei p. attingeret. 
XIV. Rediit octavo post secessum anno, magna 
nec incerta spe futurorum, quam et ostentis et 
praedictionibus ab initio aetatis conceperat. 
Praegnans eo ! Livia cum an marem editura esset, 
variis captaret ominibus, ovum incubanti gallinae 
subductum nunc sua nunc ministrarum manu per 
vices usque fovit, quoad pullus insigniter cristatus 
exclusus est. Ac de infante Scribonius mathemati- 
cus praeclara spopondit, etiam regnaturum . quando- 
que, sed sine regio insigni, ignota scilicet tunc 
adhuc Caesarum potestate. Et ingresso primam 
expeditionem ac per Macedoniam ducente exercitum 
in Syriam, accidit ut apud Philippos sacratae olim 
victricium legionum arae sponte subitis conlucerent 
ignibus; et mox, cum [Illyricum petens iuxta 
Patavium adisset Geryonis oraculum, sorte tracta, 
qua monebatur ut de consultationibus in Aponi 
fontem talos aureos iaceret, evenit ut summum 
numerum iacti ab eo ostenderent; hodieque sub 
aqua visuntur hi tali. Ante paucos vero quam 
revocaretur dies aquila numquam antea Rhodi 
conspecta in culmine domus eius assedit; et pridie 


1 eo, Bentley ; eum, n. 
a Gaius Caesar. | 


314 


TIBERIUS 


able to his elder son,* who, as it happened, was at the 
time somewhat at odds with Marcus Lollius, and 
accordingly ready to lend an ear to his stepfather's 
prayers. With his consent therefore Tiberius was 
recalled, but on the understanding that he should 
take no part or active interest in public affairs. 

XIV. So he returned in the eighth year after his 
retirement, with that strong and unwavering con- 
fidence in his destiny, which he had conceived from 
his early years because of omens and predictions. 

When Livia was with child with him, and was 
trying to divine by various omens whether she would 
bring forth a male, she took an egg from under a 
setting-hen, and when she had warmed it in her own 
hand and those of her attendants in turn, a cock with 
a fine crest was hatched. In his infancy the astrologer 
Scribonius promised him an illustrious career and 
even that he would one day be king, but without the 
crown of royalty ; for at that time of course the rule 
of the Caesars was as yet unheard of. Again, on his 
first campaign, when he was leading an army through 
Macedonia into Syria, it chanced that at Philippi the 
altars consecrated in bygone days by the victorious 
legions gleamed of their own accord with sudden 
fires. When later, on his way to Illyricum, he 
visited the oracle of Geryon near Patavium, and 
drew a lot which advised him to seek an answer to 
his inquiries by throwing golden dice into the fount 
of Aponus, it. came to pass that the dice which 
he threw showed the highest posssible number; 
and those dice may be seen to-day under the water. 
À few days before his recall an eagle, a bird never 
before seen in Rhodes, perched upon the roof of his 
house ; and the day before he was notified that he 


315 


42 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


quam de reditu certior fieret, vestimenta mutanti 
tunica ardere visa est. Thrasyllum quoque mathe- 
maticum, quem ut. sapientiae professorem contubernio 
admoverat, tum maxime expertus est affirmantem 
nave provisa gaudium afferri; cum quidem illum 
durius et contra praedicta cadentibus rebus ut falsum 
et secretorum temere conscium, eo ipso momento, 
dum spatiatur una, praecipitare in mare destinasset. 

XV. Romam reversus deducto in Forum filio 
Druso statim e Carinis ac Pompeiana domo Esquilias 
in hortos Maecenatianos .transmigravit totumque 
se ad quietem contulit, privata modo officia obiens 
ac publicorum munerum expers. 

Gaio et Lucio intra triennium defunctis adoptatur 
ab Augusto simul cum fratre eorum M. Agrippa, 
coactus prius ipse Germanicum fratris sui filium 
adoptare Nec quicquam postea pro patre familias 
egit aut ius, quod amiserat, ex ulla parte retinuit. 
Nam neque donavit neque manumisit, ne hereditatem 
quidem aut legata percepit ulla aliter quam ut 
peculio referret. accepta. Nihil ex eo tempore 
praetermissum est ad maiestatem eius augendam 
ac multo magis, postquam Agrippa abdicato atque 
seposito certum erat, uni spem successionis ineum- 
bere. 

XVI. Data rursus potestas tribunicia in quin- 
quennium, delegatus pacandae Germaniae dins. 


a Of. Aug. xxvi. 2. 

P ** The Keels,” so-called from its shape, on the western 
slope of the Esquiline Hill, where the church of 8. Pietro in 
Vincoli now stands. 

* Peculiwm was the term applied to the savings of a slave 
or of a son under his father’s control, which they wereallowed 
to hold as their own property, though technically belonging 
to the master or father. 


316 


TIBERIUS 


might return, his tunic seemed to blaze as he was 
changing his clothes. It was just at this. time that 
he was convinced of the powers of the astrologer 
Thrasyllus, whom he had attached to his household 
as an adept in the art; for as soon as he caught sight 
of the ship, Thrasyllus declared that it brought good 
news—this too at the very moment when Tiberius 
had made up his mind to push the man off into the 
sea as they were strolling together, believing him a 
false prophet and too hastily made the confidant of 
his secrets, because things were turning out adversely 
and contrary to his predictions. 

XV. On his return to Rome, after introducing his 
son Drusus to public life,* he at once moved from 
the Carinae ? and the house of the Pompeys to the 
gardens of Maecenas on the Esquiline, where he led 
. a very retired life, merely attending to his personal 
affairs and exercising no public functions. 

When Gaius and Lucius died within three years, 
he was adopted by Augustus along with their brother 
Marcus Agrippa, being himself first compelled to adopt 
his nephew Germanicus. And from that time on he 
ceased to act as the head of a family, or to retain in 
any particular the privileges which he had given up. 
For he neither made gifts nor freed slaves, and he 
did not even accept an inheritance or any legacies, 
except to enter them as an addition to his personal 
property.^ From this time on nothing was left 
undone which could add to his prestige, especially 
after the disowning and banishment of Agrippa made 
it clear that the hope of the succession lay in him 
alone. 

XVI. He was given the tribunicial power for a 
second term of three years, the duty of subjugating 


317 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


Parthorum legati mandatis Augusto Romae. redditis 
eum quoque adire in provincia iussi. Sed nuntiata 
Illyrici defectione transiit ad curam novi belli, 
quod gravissimum omnium externorum bellorum 
post Punica, per quindecim legiones paremque 
auxiliorum copiam triennio gessit in magnis omnium 
rerum difficultatibus summaque frugum inopia. Et 
quanquam saepius revocaretur, tamen perseveravit, 
metuens ne vicinus et praevalens hostis instaret 
ultro cedentibus, Ac perseverantiae grande pretium 
tulit, toto Illyrico, quod inter Italiam regnumque 
Noricum et Thraciam et Macedoniam interque 
Danuvium ! flumen et sinum maris Hadriatici patet, 
perdomito et in dicionem redacto. 

XVII. Cui gloriae amplior adhuc ex opportunitate 
cumulus accessit. Nam sub id fere tempus Quintilius 
Varus eum tribus legionibus in Germania periit, 
nemine dubitante quin victores Germani iuncturi 
se Pannoniis fuerint, nisi debellatum prius Illyricum 
esset. Quas ob res triumphus ei decretus est 
multique? et magni honores. Censuerunt etiam 
quidam ut Pannonicus, alii ut Invictus, nonnulli 
ut Pius cognominaretur. Sed de cognomine inter- 
cessit Augustus, eo contentum repromittens, quod 
se defuncto suscepturus esset. Triumphum ipse 
distulit maesta civitate clade Variana ; nihilo minus 
urbem praetextatus et laurea coronatus intravit 

1 Danuvium] Danubium, Q2. 


? est, multique, 16th century editions ; et multi, Stephanus ; 
multi, Q. 4 DULL 


318 


TIBERIUS 


Germany was assigned him, and the envoys of the 
Parthians, after presenting their instructions to 
Augustus in Rome, were bidden to appear also before 
him in his province. But when the revolt of Il- 
lyricum was reported, he was transferred to the 
charge of a new war, the most serious of all foreign 
wars since those with Carthage, which he carried on 
for three years with fifteen legions and a correspond- 
ing force of auxiliaries, amid great difficulties of every 
kind and the utmost scarcity of supplies. But though 
he was often recalled, he none the less kept on, for 
fear that the enemy, who were close at hand and very 
strong, might assume the offensive if the Romans 
gave ground. He reaped an ample reward for his 
perseverance, for he completely subdued and reduced 
to submission the whole of Illyricum, which is bounded 
by Italy and the kingdom of Noricum, by Thrace and 
Macedonia, by the Danube, and by the Adriatic sea. 
XVII. Circumstances gave this exploit a Jarger and 
crowning glory; for it was at just about that time 
that Quintilius Varus perished with three legions in 
Germany, and no one doubted that the victorious 
Germans would have united with the Pannonians, 
had not Illyricum been subdued first. Consequently 
a triumph was voted him and many high honours. 
Some also recommended that he be given the sur- 
name of Pannonicus, others of Invictus, others of Pius. 
Augustus however vetoed the surname, reiterating 
the promise that Tiberius would be satisfied with the 
one which he would receive at his father's death. 
Tiberius himself put off the triumph, because the 
country was in mourning for the disaster to Varus ; 
but he entered the city clad in the purple-bordered 
toga and crowned with laurel, and mounting a 


319 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


positumque in Saeptis tribunal senatu astante | 
conscendit ac medius inter duos consules cum 
Augusto simul sedit; unde populo consalutato 
circum templa deductus est. 

XVIII. Proximo anno repetita Germania cum 
animadverteret Varianam cladem temeritate et 
neglegentia ducis accidisse, nihil non de consilii 
serftentia egit ; semper alias sui arbitrii contentusque 
se uno, tunc praeter consuetudinem cum compluribus 
de ratione belli communicavit. Curam quoque solito 
exactiorem praestitit. Traiecturus Rhenum com- 
meatum omnem ad certam formulam adstrictum 
non ante transmisit, quam consistens apud ripam 
explorasset vehiculorum onera, ne qua deportarentur 
nisi concessa aut necessaria. Trans Rhenum vero 
eum vitae ordinem tenuit, ut sedens in caespite 
nudo cibum caperet, saepe sine tentorio pernoctaret, 
praecepta sequentis diei omnia, et si quid subiti 
muneris iniungendum esset, per libellos daret; 
addita monitione ut, de quo quisque dubitaret, 
se nee alio interprete quacumque vel noctis hora 
uteretur. | 

XIX. Disciplinam acerrime exegit animad- 
versionum et ignominiarum generibus ex antiquitate 
repetitis atque etiam legato legionis, quod paucos 
milites cum liberto suo trans ripam venatum misisset, 
ignominia notato. Proelia, quamvis minimum 
fortunae casibusque permitteret, aliquanto con- 


320 5 


TIBERIUS 


tribunal which had been set up in the Saepta, while 
the senate stood alongside, he took his seat beside 
Augustus between the two consuls. Having greeted 
the people from this position, he was escorted to the 
various temples. 

XVIII. The next year he returned to Germany, 
and realising that the disaster to Varus was due to 
that general’s rashness and lack of care, he took no 
step without the approval of a council; while he 
had always before been a man of independent judg- 
ment and self reliance, then contrary to his habit he 
consulted with many advisers about the conduct of 
the campaign. He also observed more scrupulous 
care than usual. When on the point of crossing the 
Rhine, he reduced all the baggage to a prescribed 
limit, and would not start without standing on the 
bank and inspecting the loads of the wagons, to 
make sure that nothing was taken except what was 
allowed or necessary. Once on the other side, he 
adopted the following manner of life: he took his 
meals sitting on the bare turf, often passed the night 
without a tent, and gave all his orders for the follow- 
ing day, as well as notice of any sudden emergency, 
in writing ; adding the injunction that if anyone was 
in doubt about any matter, he was to consult him 
personally at any hour whatsoever, even of the 
night. 

XIX. He required the strictest discipline, reviving 
bygone methods of punishment and ignominy, and 
even degrading the commander of a legion for 
sending a few soldiers across the river to accompany 
one of his freedmen on a hunting expedition. Al- 
though he left very little to fortune and chance, he 
entered battles with considerably greater confidence 


321 
VOL. I. Y 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


stantius inibat, quotiens lucubrante se subito ac nullo 
propellente decideret lumen et  exstingueretur, 
confidens, ut aiebat, ostento sibi a maioribus suis in 
omni ducatu expertissimo. Sed re prospere gesta 
non multum afuit quin a Bructero quodam occide- 
retur, cui inter proximos versanti et trepidatione 
detecto tormentis expressa confessio est cogitati 
facinoris. 

XX. A Germania in urbem post biennium 
regressus triumphum, quem distulerat, egit prose- 
quentibus etiam legatis, quibus triumphalia or- 
namenta impetrarat. Ac prius quam in Capitolium 
flecteret, descendit e curru seque praesidenti patri 
ad genua summisit. Batonem Pannonium ducem 
ingentibus donatum praemiis Ravennam transtulit, 
gratiam referens, quod se quondam cum exercitu 
iniquitate loci circumclusum passus esset! evadere. 
Prandium dehinc populo mille mensis et congiarium 
trecenos nummos viritim dedit. ^ Dedicavit et 
Concordiae aedem, item Pollucis et Castoris suo 
fratrisque nomine de manubiis. 

XXI. Ac non multo post lege per consules lata, ut 
provincias cum Augusto communiter administraret 
simulque censum ageret,? condito lustro in Illyricum 
profectus est. Et statim ex itinere revocatus iam 
quidem adfectum, sed tamen spirantem adhuc 
Augustum repperit fuitque. una secreto per totum 
diem. 
! esset, Stephanus; est, Q. 

2 ageret, Tc ; the other mss. have augeret. 


^ At the Porta Triumphalis, at the head of thesenate, who 
met the triumphing general there, and joined in the procession. 

^ Ordinarily the leaders of the enemy were strangled in 
the carcer, or dungeon, at the foot of the Capitoline Hill. 

* See Aug. xcvii. 1. 


322 


TIBERIUS 


whenever it happened that, as he was working at 
night, his lamp suddenly and without human agency 
died down and went out ; trusting, as he used to say, 
to an omen in which he had great confidence, since 
both he and his ancestors had found it trustworthy 
in all of their campaigns. Yet in the very hour of 
victory he narrowly escaped assassination by one of 
the Bructeri, who got access to him among his 
attendants, but was detected through his nervous- 
ness; whereupon a confession of his intended crime 
was wrung from him by torture. 

XX. After two years he returned to the city from 
Germany and celebrated the triumph which he had 
postponed, accompanied also by his generals, for whom 
he had obtained the triumphal regalia. And before 
turning to enter the Capitol, he dismounted from his 
chariot and fell at the knees of his father, who was pre- 
siding over the ceremonies.” He sent Bato, the leader 
of the Pannonians, to Ravenna, after presenting him 
with rich gifts ; thus showing his gratitude to him for 
allowing him to escape when he was trapped with his 
army in a dangerous place. Then he gave a banquet 
to the people at a thousand tables, and a largess of 
three hundred sesterces to every man. With the 
proceeds of his spoils he restored and dedicated the 
temple of Concord, as well as that of Pollux and 
Castor, in his own name and that of his brother. 

XXI. Since the consuls caused a law to be passed 
soon after this that he should govern the provinces 
jointly with Augustus and hold the census with him, 
he set out for Illyricum on the conclusion of the 


lustral ceremonies’; but he was at once recalled,, 


and finding Augustus in his last illness but still alive, 
he spent an entire day with him in private. 


323 
v 2 


12 A.D. 


9 


a 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


Scio vulgo persuasum quasi egresso post secretum 
sermonem Tiberio vox Augusti per cubicularios 
excepta sit: * Miserun populum R., qui sub tam 
lentis maxillis erit!" Ne illud quidem ignoro aliquos 
tradidisse, Augustum palam nec dissimulanter morum 
eius diritatem adeo improbasse, ut nonnumquam 
remissiores hilarioresque sermones superveniente eo 
abrumperet; sed  expugnatum precibus uxoris 
adoptionem non abnuisse, vel etiam ambitione 
tractum, ut tali successore desiderabilior ipse quan- 
doque fieret. | Adduci tamen nequeo quin existimem, 
circumspectissimum et prudentissimum principem in 
tanto praesertim negotio nihil temere fecisse; sed 
vitiis Tiberi virtutibusque perpensis potiores duxisse 
virtutes, praesertim cum et rei p. causa adoptare se 
eum pro contione iuraverit et epistulis aliquot ut 
peritissimum rei militaris utque unicum p. R. 
praesidium prosequatur. Ex quibus in exemplum 
pauca hinc inde subieci. 

* Vale, iucundissime Tiberi, et feliciter rem gere, 
pot kai rats povocas! orparyyov. lucundissime et ita 
sim felix, vir fortissime et dux vopipdrare, vale." 

* Ordinem aestivorum tuorum ego vero laudo,? mi 
Tiberi, et inter tot rerum difficultates xai rooavryy 
droOupiav Tov arparevouévov non potuisse quemquam - 
prudentius gerere se quam tu gesseris, existimo. — li 


1 uobcoas] 4ovicacaucr, mss. 7 laudo, inserted by Stephanus. 


a If the text is correct, the reference is to Tiberius’ 
literary tastes; cf. Horace, Odes, 3. 4. 37 ff. ; Epist. 1. 3. 


324 


TIBERIUS 


I know that it is commonly believed, that when 
Tiberius left the room after this confidential talk, 
Augustus was overheard by his chamberlains to say: 
* Alas for the Roman people, to be ground by jaws 
that crunch so slowly!” I also am aware that some 
have written that Augustus so openly and unre- 
servedly disapproved of his austere manners, that he 
sometimes broke off his freer and lighter conversation 
when Tiberius appeared ; but that overcome by his 
wife's entreaties he did not reject his adoption, or 
perhaps was even led by selfish considerations, that 
with such a successor he himself might one day be 
more regretted. But arter all I cannot be led to 
believe that an emperor of the utmost prudence and 
foresight acted without consideration, especially in a 
matter of so great moment. It is my opinion that 
after weighing the faults and the merits of Tiberius, 
he decided that the latter preponderated, especially 
since he took oath before the people that he was 
adopting Tiberius for the good of the country, and 
alludes to him in several letters as a most able 
general and the sole defence of the Roman people. 
In illustration of both these points, I append a few 
extracts from these letters. 

* Fare thee well, Tiberius, most charming of men, 
and success go with you, as you war for me and 
for the Muses.” Fare thee well, most charming and 
valiant of men and most conscientious of generals, 
or may I never know happiness." 

* [ have only praise for the conduct of your summer 
campaigns, dear Tiberius, and I am sure that no one 
could have acted with better judgment than you did 
amid so many difficulties and such apathy of your army. 


325 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


quoque qui tecum fuerunt omnes confitentur, versum 
illum in te posse dici: 


Unus homo nobis vigilando restituit rem." 


* Sive quid incidit de quo sit cogitandum dili- 
gentius, sive quid stomachor, valde medius Fidius 
Tiberium meum desidero succurritque versus ille 
Homericus : 

Tovrov y écrouévow xol èx mvpós aiÂopévoro 
“A ppw voorja aure, éme wepiowe vorat. 

* Attenuatum te esse continuatione laborum cum 
audio et lego, di me perdant nisi cohorrescit corpus 
meum; teque oro ut parcas tibi,ne si te languere 
audierimus, et ego et mater tua expiremus et summa 
imperi sui populus R. periclitetur." 

* Nihil interest valeam ipse necne, si tu non 
valebis.”’ 

* Deos obsecro, ut te nobis conservent et valere 
nunc et semper patiantur, si non p. R. perosi sunt." 

XXII. Excessum Augusti non prius palam fecit, 
quam Agrippa iuvene interempto. Hunc tribunus 
militum custos appositus occidit lectis codicillis, quibus 
ut id faceret iubebatur; quos codicillos dubium 
fuit, Augustusne moriens reliquisset, quo materiain 


a Cf. Enn. Ann. 370 V?; where cunctando takes the place 
of vigilando. 
6 Literally, by the god of Truth"; Fidius was one of 
the surnames of Jupiter. © Iliad, 10. 246 f. 


326 


TIBERIUS 


All who were with you agree that the well-known 
line could be applied to you: 


* € One man alone by his foresight has saved our dear 
country from ruin.^ ' " 


“If anything comes up that calls for careful 
thought, or if I am vexed at anything, I long 
mightily, so help me Heaven,’ for my dear Tiberius, 
and the lines of Homer come to my mind : 


“c Let him but follow and we too, though flames 
round about us be raging, 
Both may return to our homes, since great are his 
wisdom and knowledge.* ' ” 


“When I hear and read that you are worn out 
by constant hardships, may the Gods confound me if 
my own body does not wince in sympathy; and 
I beseech you to spare yourself, that the news of 
your illness may not kill your mother and me, and 
endanger the Roman people in the person of their 
future ruler." 

“It matters not whether I am well or not, if you 
are not well" 

“I pray the Gods to preserve you to us and to 
grant you good health now and forever, if they do 
not utterly hate the people of Rome." 

XXII. Tiberius did not make the death of Augustus 
public until the young Agrippa had been disposed 
of. The latter was slain by a tribune of the soldiers 
appointed to guard him, who received a letter in 
which he was bidden to do the deed; but it is not 
known whether Augustus left this letter when he 
died, to remove a future source of discord, or 
whether Livia had it written in the name of her 


327 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


tumultus post se subduceret; an nomine Augusti Livia 
et ea conscio Tiberio an ignaro, dictasset. Tiberius 
renuntianti tribuno, factum esse quod imperasset, 
neque imperasse se et redditurum eum senatui 
rationem respondit, invidiam scilicet in praesentia 
vitans. Nam mox silentio rem obliteravit. 

XXIII. Iure autem tribuniciae potestatis coacto 
senatu incohataque adlocutione derepente velut impar 
dolori congemuit, utque non solum vox sed et spiritus 
deficeret optavit ac perlegendum librum Druso filio 
- tradidit. Inlatum deinde Augusti testamentum, non 
admissis signatoribus nisi senatorii ordinis, ceteris 
extra curiam signa agnoscentibus, recitavit per li- 
bertum. Testamenti initium fuit: ‘ Quoniam atrox 
fortuna Gaium et Lucium, filios mihi eripuit, Tiberius 
Caesar mihi ex parte dimidia et sextante heres esto." 
Quo et ipso aucta suspicio est opinantium successorem 
ascitum eum necessitate magis quam iudicio, quando 
ita praefari non abstinuerit. 

XXIV. Principatum, quamvis neque occupare con- 
festim neque agere dubitasset, et statione militum, 
hoc est vi et specie dominationis assumpta, diu tamen 
recusavit, impudentissimo mimo! nunc adhortantis 
amicos increpans ut ignaros, quanta belua esset 
imperium, nune precantem senatum et procum- 

1 mimo, J.F. Gronovius; animo, 2. 


328 


TIBERIUS 


husband ; and in the latter case, whether it was with 
or without the connivance of Tiberius. At all events, 
when the tribune reported that he had done his 
bidding, Tiberius replied that he had given no such 
order, and that the man must render an account to 
the senate ; apparently trying to avoid odium at the 
time, for later his silence consigned the matter 
to oblivion. | 

XXIII. When, however, by virtue of his tribu- 
nicial power, he had convened the senate and had 
begun to address it, he suddenly groaned aloud, 
as if overcome by grief, and with the wish that not 
only his voice, but his life as well might leave him, 
handed the written speech to his son Drusus to 
finish. Then bringing in the will of Augustus, he 
had it read by a freedman, admitting of the signers 
only such as were of the senatorial order, while the 
others acknowledged their seals outside the House. 
The will began thus: * Since a cruel fate has bereft 
me of my sons Gaius and Lucius, be Tiberius Caesar 
heir to two-thirds of my estate." "These words in 
themselves added to the suspicion of those who 
believed that he had named Tiberius his successor 
from necessity rather than from choice, since he 
allowed himself to write such a preamble. 

XXIV. Though Tiberius did not hesitate at once 
to assume and to exercise the imperial authority, 
surrounding himself with a guard of soldiers, that is, 
with the actual power and the outward sign of 
sovereignty, yet he refused the title for a long time, 
with barefaced hypocrisy now upbraiding his friends 
who urged him to accept it, saying that they did 
not realise what a monster the empire was, and now 
by evasive answers and calculating hesitancy keeping 


329 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


bentem sibi ad genua ambiguis responsis et callida 
cunctatione suspendens, ut quidam patientiam rum- 
perent atque unus in tumultu proclamaret: “ Aut 
agat aut desistat!" Alter coram exprobraret ceteros, 
quod polliciti sint tarde praestare, sed! ipsum, quod 
praestet tarde polliceri. Tandem quasi coactus et 
querens miseram et onérosam iniungi sibi servitutem, 
recepit imperium ; nec tamen aliter, quam ut deposi- 
turum se quandoque spem faceret. Ipsius verba sunt : 
* Dum veniam ad id tempus, quo vobis aequum possit 
videri dare vos aliquam senectuti meae requiem." 
XXV. Cunctandi causa erat metus undique im- 
minentium discriminum, ut saepe lupum se auribus 
tenere diceret. Nam et servus Agrippae Clemens 
nomine non contemnendam manum in ultionem 
domini compararat et L. Scribonius Libo vir nobilis 
res novas clam moliebatur et duplex seditio militum 
in Illyrico et in Germania exorta est. Flagitabant 
ambo exercitus multa extra ordinem, ante omnia ut 
aequarentur stipendio praetorianis? Germaniciani 
quidem etiam principem detractabant non a se datum 
summaque vi Germanicum, qui tum iis praeerat, ad 
capessendam rem p. urgebant, quanquam obfirmate 
resistentem. Quem maxime casum timens, partes . 
sibi quas senatui liberet, tuendas in re p. depoposcit, 
quando universae sufficere solus nemo posset nisi cum 
altero vel etiam cum pluribus. Simulavit et valitu- 


1 sed, TIQR P^? ; the other mss. have se (seet, O); omitted by 
Lipsius. 2 praetorianis] praetoriani, mss. 


aA Greek proverb; ef. Ter. Phorm, 506 and Donatus, 
ad loc. i f 


439 


TIBERIUS 


the senators in suspense when they implored him 
to yield, and fell at his feet. Finally, some lost 
patience, and one man cried out in the confusion: 
* Let him take it or leave it." Another openly 
voiced the taunt that others were slow in doing what 
they. promised, but that he was slow to promise what 
he was already doing. At last, as though on 
compulsion, and complaining that a wretched and 
burdensome slavery was being forced upon him, 
he accepted the empire, but in such fashion as to 
suggest the hope that he would one day lay it down. 
His own words are: “ Until I come to the time 
when it may seem right to you to grant an old man 
some repose." 

XXV. The cause of his hesitation was fear of the 
dangers which threatened him on every hand, and 
often led him to say that he was “ holding a wolf by 
the ears.*”’ For a slave of Agrippa, Clemens by name, 
had collected a band of no mean size to avenge his 
master; Lucius Scribonius Libo, one of the nobles, 
was secretly plotting a revolution; and a mutiny of 
the soldiers broke out in two places, Illyricum and 
Germany. Both armies demanded numerous special 
privileges—above all, that they should receive the 
same pay as the praetorians. The army in Germany 
was, besides, reluctant to accept an emperor who was 
not its own choice, and with the greatest urgency 
besought Germanicus, their commander at the time, 
to assume the purple, in spite of his positive refusal. 
Fear of this possibility in particular led Tiberius 
to ask the senate for any part in the administration 
that it might please them to assign him, saying that 
no one man could bear the whole burden without a 
colleague, or even several colleagues. e also 


331 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


dinem, quo aequiore animo Germanicus celerem suc- 
cessionem vel certe societatem principatus opperiretur. 
Compositis seditionibus Clementem quoque fraude 
deceptum redegit in potestatem. Libonem, ne quid 
in novitate acerbius fieret, secundo demum anno in 
senatu coarguit, medio temporis spatio tantum cavere 
contentus; nam et inter pontifices sacrificanti simul 
pro secespita plumbeum cultrum subiciendum curavit 
et secretum petenti non nisi adhibito Druso filio dedit 
dextramque obambulantis veluti incumbens, quoad 
perageretur sermo, continuit. 

XXVI. Verum liberatus metu civilem admodum 
inter initia ac paulo minus quam privatum egit. Ex 
plurimis maximisque honoribus praeter paucos et 
modicos non recepit. Natalem suum plebeis in- 
currentem circensibus vix unius bigae adiectione 
honorari passus est. Templa, flamines, sacerdotes 
decerni sibi prohibuit, etiam statuas atque imagines 
nisi permittente se poni; permisitque ea sola con- 
dicione, ne inter simulacra deorum sed inter ornamenta 
aedium ponerentur. Intercessit et quo minus in acta 
sua iuraretur, et ne mensis September Tiberius, 
October Livius vocarentur.  Praenomen quoque 
imperatoris cognomenque patris patriae et civicam 


a The secespita, or sacrificial knife, had a long, sharp 
point and a double edge, with an ivory handle ornamented 
with gold and silver. 

> Civilis means **suited to a citizen” (of the days of the 
Republic). His conduct was that of a magistrate of the 
olden time, who had regard to the laws and the rights of his 
fellow-citizens. 

* The reference is to an oath taken by all the citizens to 
support what the emperor. had done in the past and might do 
in the future; see Dio, 57. 8. 8 Of. Jul. Ixxvi. 1. 

e See note on Jul. ii. This had been conferred on Augustus 
honoris causa, as the saviour of all the citizens, 


332 4 


TIBERIUS 


feigned ill-health, to induce Germanicus to wait with 
more patience for a speedy succession, or at least for 
a share in the sovereignty. The mutinies were put 
down, and he also got Clemens into his power, out- 
witting him by stratagem. Not until his second year 
did he finally arraign Libo in the senate, fearing to 
take any severe measures before his power was secure, 
and satisfied in the meantime merely to be on his 
guard, Thus when Libo was offering sacrifice with 
him among the pontiffs, he had a leaden knife 
substituted for the usual one,* and when he asked 
for a private interview, Tiberius would not grant it 
except with his son Drusus present, and as long as 
the conference lasted he held fast to Libo’s right 
arm, under pretence of leaning on it as they walked 
together. 

XXVI. Once relieved of fear, he at first played a 
most unassuming è part, almost humbler than that of 
a private citizen. Of many high honours he accepted 
only a few of the more modest. He barely con- 
sented to allow his birthday, which came at the time 
of the Plebeian games in the Circus, to be recognized 
by the addition of a single two-horse chariot. He 
forbade the voting of temples, flamens, and priests in 
his honour, and even the setting up of statues and 
busts without his permission ; and this he gave only 
with the understanding that they were not to be 
placed among the likenesses of the gods, but among 
the adornments of the temples. He would not 
allow an oath to be taken ratifying his acts,° nor the 
name Tiberius to be given to the month of September, 
or that of Livia to October. He also declined the 
forename Imperator,?? the surname of Father of his 
Country, and the placing of the civic crown at his 


333 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


in vestibulo coronam recusavit ; ac ne Augusti qui- 
dem nomen, quanquam hereditarium, ullis! nisi ad 
reges ac dynastas epistulis addidit. Nec amplius 
quam mox tres consulatus, unum paucis diebus, 
alterum tribus mensibus, tertium absens usque in Idus 
Maias gessit. 

XXVII. Adulationes adeo aversatus est, ut nemi- 
nem senatorum aut officii aut negotii causa ad lecti- 
cam suam admiserit, consularem vero satisfacientem 
sibi ac per genua orare conantem ita suffugerit, ut 
caderet supinus; atque etiam, si quid in sermone 
vel in continua oratione blandius de se diceretur, 
non dubitaret interpellare ac reprehendere et com- 
mutare continuo. Dominus appellatus a. quodam 
denuntiavit, ne se amplius contumeliae causa nomin- 
aret. Alium dicentem sacras eius occupationes 
et rursus alium, auctore eo senatum se adisse,? 
verba mutare et pro auctore suasorem, pro sacris 
laboriosas dicere coegit. 

XXVIII. Sed et adversus convicia malosque ru- 
mores et famosa de se ac suis carmina firmus ac 
patiens, subinde iactabat in civitate libera linguam 
mentemque liberas esse debere ; et quondam senatu 
cognitionem de eius modi criminibus ae reis flagi- 
tante: “Non tantum," inquit, «otii habemus, ut impli- 
care nos pluribus negotiis debeamus; si hanc 
fenestram aperueritis, nihil aliud agi sinetis ; omnium 
inimicitiae hoc praetexto ad vos deferentur." Exstat 


1 ullis] nullus, M ; the other mas. have nullis. 
2 adi(i)sse, c; audisse, 9. 


. * See Aug. ci. 2. v See Aug. liii. 1. 


334 


TIBERIUS 


door ; and he did not even use the title of Augustus 
in any letters except those to kings and potentates, 
although it was his by inheritance. He held but 
three consulships after becoming emperor—one for a 
few days, a second for three months, and a third, 
during his absence from the city, until the Ides 
of May. 

XXVII. He so loathed flattery that he would not 
allow any senator to approach his litter, either to pay 
his respects or on business, and when an ex-consul in 
apologizing to him attempted to embrace his knees, 
he drew back in such haste that he fell over back- 
ward. In fact, if anyone in conversation or in a set 
speech spoke of him in too flattering terms, he did 
not hesitate to interrupt him, to take him to task, 
and to correct his language on the spot. Being once 
called “Lord,” č he warned the speaker not to address 
him again in an insulting fashion. When another 
spoke of his * sacred duties," and still another said 
that he appeared before the senate *by the em- 
peror's authority," he forced them to change their 
language, substituting “advice” for “ authority " 
and “ laborious " for * sacred." 

XXVIII. More than that, he was self-contained 
and patient in the face of abuse and slander, and of 
lampoons on himself and his family, often asserting 
that in a free country there should be free speech 
and free thought. When the senate on one occa- 
sion demanded that cognizance be taken of such 
offences and those guilty of them, he said: “ We 
have not enough spare time to warrant involving 
vurselves in more affairs; if you open this loophole 
you will find no time for any other business ; it will 
be an excuse for laying everybody's quarrels before 


335 


18, 21, and 
91 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


et sermo eius in senatu percivilis: “Siquidem locutus 
aliter fuerit, dabo operam ut rationem factorum 
meorum dictorumque reddam; si perseveraverit, 
in vicem eum odero." 

XXIX. Atque haec eo notabiliora erant, quod 
ipse in appellandis venerandisque et singulis et 
universis prope excesserat humanitatis modum. 
Dissentiens in curia a Q. Haterio: “Ignoscas,” inquit, 
“rogo, si quid adversus te liberius sicut senator 
dixero." Et deinde omnis adloquens: * Dixi et 
nunc et saepe alias, p. c., bonum et salutarem 
principem, quem vos tanta et tam libera potestate 
instruxistis, senatui servire debere et universis 
civibus saepe et plerumque etiam singulis; neque 
id dixise me paenitet, et bonos et aequos et 
faventes vos habui dominos et adhuc habeo." 

XXX. Quin etiam speciem libertatis quandam 
induxit conservatis senatui ac magistratibus et 
maiestate pristina et potestate. Neque tam parvum 
quicquam neque tam magnum publici privatique 
negolii fuit, de quo non ad patres conscriptos 
referretur : de vectigalibus ac monopoliis, de exstru- 
endis reficiendisve operibus, etiam de legendo vel 
exauctorando milite ac legionum et auxiliorum 
discriptione, denique quibus imperium prorogari aut 
extraordinaria bella mandari, quid et qua forma! 
regum ? litteris rescribi placeret. Praefectum alae 


! et qua forma, c; ad quam formam, Salmasius; et quam 
formam, n. 2 regum, c; legum, Q. l 


' . * See note on chap. xxvi. 1. 

> The flattery of the term dominos is the more marked 
because Tiberius himself shrank from it ; cf. xxvii. 

¢ That is, the granting to an individual or a company of the 
exclusive right to sell certain commodities. Forbidden in 
Cod. Just. 4, 59. 1. 


336 


TIBERIUS 


you." A most unassumming ^ remark of his in the 
senate is also a matter of record: “If so and so 
criticizes me I shall take care to render an account 
of my acts and words ; if he persists, our enmity will 
be mutual." 

XXIX. All this was the more noteworthy, because 
in addressing and in paying his respects to the 
senators individually and as a body he himself 
almost exceeded the requirements of courtesy. In. 
a disagreement with Quintus Haterius in the House, 
he said: “I crave your pardon, if in my capacity as 
senator I nse too free language in opposing you." 
Then addressing the whole body: * I say now and 
have often said before, Fathers of the Senate, that a 
well-disposed and helpful prince, to whom you have 
given such great and unrestrained power, ought to 
be the servant of the senate, often of the citizens as 
a whole, and sometimes even of individuals. I do 
not regret my words, but [ have looked upon you as 
kind, just, and indulgent masters, and still so regard 

ou." 

XXX. He even introduced a semblance of free 
government by maintaining the ancient dignity and 
powers of the senate and the magistrates ; for there 
was no matter of public or private business so small 
or so great that he did not lay it before the senators, 
consulting them about revenues and monopolies,* 
constructing and restoring public buildings, and 
even about levying and disbanding the soldiers, and 
the disposal of the legionaries and auxiliaries ; finally 
about the extension of military commands and 
appointments to the conduct of wars, and the form 
and content of his replies to the letters of kings. 
He forced the commander of a troop of horse, when 


337 


VOL. [.. FA 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


de vi et rapinis reum causam in senatu dicere coegit. 
Numquam curiam nisi solus intravit; lectica quon- 
dam intro latus aeger comites a se removit. 

XXXI. Quaedam adversus sententiam suam de- 
cerni ne questus quidem est. Negante eo destinatos 
magistratus abesse! oportere, ut praesentes honori 
adquiescerent, praetor designatus liberam legationem 
impetravit. Iterum censente, ut Trebianis legatam 
in opus novi theatri pecuniam ad munitionem viae 
transferre concederetur, optinere non potuit quin 
rata voluntas legatoris esset. Cum senatus consultum 
per discessionem forte fieret, transeuntem eum 
in alteram partem, in qua pauciores erant, secutus 
est nemo. 

Cetera quoque non nisi per magistratus et iure 
ordinario agebantur, tanta consulum auctoritate, 
ut legati ex Africa adierint eos querentes, trahi 
se a Caesare ad quem missi forent. Nec mirum, 
cum palam esset, ipsum quoque eisdem et assurgere 
et decedere via. 

XXXII. Corripuit consulares exercitibus prae- 
positos, quod non de rebus gestis senatui scriberent 
quodque de tribuendis quibusdam militaribus donis 
ad se referrent, quasi non omnium tribuendorum. 
ipsi ius haberent. Praetorem conlaudavit, quod 


1 abesse, c; adesse, N. 


a That is, to make use of the public post ; see Aug. xlix. 3, 
and Cic. de Leg. 3. 18. b See Aug. xxv. 3. 


338 


TIBERIUS 


charged with violence and robbery, to plead his 
cause before the senate. He always entered the 
House alone; and when he was brought in once 
in a litter because of illness, he dismissed his 
attendants. 

XXXI. When certain decrees were passed con- 
trary to his expressed opinion, he did not even re- 
monstrate. Although he declared that those who 
were elected to office ought to remain in the city 
and give personal attention to their duties, a praetor 
elect obtained permission to travel abroad with the 
privileges of an ambassador. On another occasion 
when he recommended that the people of Trebia 
be allowed to use, in making a road, a sum of 
money which had been left them for the construc- 
tion of a new theatre, he could not prevent the 
wish of the testator from being carried out. When 
it happened that the senate passed a decree by 
division and he went over to the side of the minority, 
not a man followed him. 

Other business as well was done solely through 
the magistrates and the ordinary process of law, 
while the importance of the consuls was such that 
certain envoys from Africa presented themselves 
before them with the complaint that their time was 
being wasted by Caesar, to whom they had been 
sent. And this was’ not surprising, for it was plain 
to all that he himself actually arose in- the presence 
of the consuls,and made way for them on the street. 

XXXII. He rebuked some ex-consuls in command 
of armies, because they did not write their reports to 
the senate, and for referring to him the award of 
some military prizes, as if they had not themselves 
the right to bestow everything of the kind. He 


339 
z2 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


honore inito consuetudinem antiquam rettulisset 
de maioribus suis pro contione memorandi. Quo- 
rundam illustrium exsequias usque ad rogum fre- 
quentavit. 

Parem moderationem minoribus quoque et personis 
et rebus exhibuit. Cum Rhodiorum magistratus, 
quod litteras publicas sine subscriptione ad se 
dederant, evocasset, ne verbo quidem insectatus 
ac tantum modo iussos subscribere remisit. Diogenes 
grammaticus, disputare sabbatis Rhodi solitus, veni- 
entem eum, ut se extra ordinem audiret, non 
admiserat ac per servolum suum in septimum 
diem distulerat; hunc Romae salutandi sui causa 
pro foribus adstantem nihil amplius quam ut post 
septimum annum rediret admonuit. Praesidibus 
onerandas tributo provincias suadentibus rescripsit 
boni pastoris esse tondere pecus, non deglubere. 

XXXIII. Paulatim principem exseruit praestititque 
etsi varium diu, commodiorem tamen saepius et 
ad utilitates publicas proniorem. Ac primo eatenus 
interveniebat, ne quid perperam fieret. Itaque 
et constitutiones senatus quasdam rescidit et magis- 
tratibus pro tribunali cognoscentibus plerumque 
se offerebat consiliarium assidebatque iuxtim vel 
exadversum in parte primori; et si quem reorum 
elabi gratia rumor esset, subitus aderat iudicesque 


a Consisting of prayers for the emperor’s welfare ; see Dio, 
57. 11, and cf. Plin. Epist. 10. 1, Fortem te et hilarem, Im- . 
perator optime, et privaten et publice. opto. 

^ The designation of theseventh day of the week (Saturday) 
by the Jewish term “Sabbath” seems to have been common; 
cf, Aug. lxxvi. 2. 

¢ That is, at one end of the curved platform, to leave room 
for the praetor in the middle; cf. Tac. Ann 1. 75, iudiciis 
adsidebat in cornu tribunalis, ne praetorem curuli depelleret. 


340 


TIBERIUS 


highly complimented a praetor, because on entering 
upon his office he had revived the custom of eulogiz- 
ing his ancestors before the people. He attended 
the obsequies of certain distinguished men, even 
going to the funeral-pyre. 

He showed equal modesty towards persons of 
lower rank and in matters of less moment. When 
he had summoned the magistrates of Rhodes, because 
they had written him letters on public business 
without the concluding formula," he uttered not a 
word of censure, but merely dismissed them with 
/orders to supply the omission. The grammarian 
Diogenes, who used to lecture every Sabbath ® at 
Rhodes, would not admit Tiberius when he came to 
hear him on a different day, but sent a message by a 
common slave of his, putting him off to the seventh 
day. When this man waited before the Emperor's door 
at Rome to pay his respects, Tiberius took no further 
revenge than to bid him return seven years later. 
To the governors who recommended burdensome 
taxes for his provinces, he wrote in answer that it 
was the part of a good shepherd to shear his flock, 
not skin it. 

XXXIII. Little by little he unmasked the ruler, 
and although for some time his conduct was variable, 
yet he more often showed himself kindly and devoted 
to the public weal. His intervention too was at first 
limited to the prevention of abuses. Thus he revoked 
some regulations of the senate and sometimes offered 
the magistrates his services as adviser, when they 
sat in judgment on the tribunal, taking his place beside 
them or opposite them at one end of the platform °; 
and if it was rumoured that any of the accused were 
being acquitted through influence, he would suddenly 


341 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK II 


aut e plano aut e quaesitoris tribunali legum et 
religionis et noxae, de qua cognoscerent, admonebat; 
atque etiam, si qua in publicis moribus desidia 
aut mala consuetudine labarent, corrigenda suscepit. 

XXXIV. Ludorum ac munerum impensas corripuit 
mercedibus scaenicorum recisis paribusque gladia- 
torum ad certum numerum redactis. Corinthiorum 
vasorum pretia in immensum exarsisse tresque mullos 
triginta milibus nummum venisse graviter conquestus, 
adhibendum supellectili modum censuit annonamque 
macelli senatus arbitratu quotannis temperandam, 
dato aedilibus negotio popinas ganeasque usque eo 
inhibendi, ut. ne opera quidem  pistoria proponi 
venalia sinerent. Et ut parsimoniam publicam 
exemplo quoque iuvaret, sollemnibus ipse cenis 
pridiana saepe ac semesa obsonia apposuit dimidia- 
tumque aprum, affirmans omnia eadem habere, 
quae totum. | 

Cotidiana oscula edicto prohibuit, item strenarum 
commercium ne ultra Kal. Ian. exerceretur. Con- 
suerat quadriplam strenam, et de manu, reddere ; sed 
offensus interpellari se toto mense ab iis qui potesta- 
tem sui die festo non habuissent, ultra non tulit. 

XXXV. Matronas prostratae pudicitiae, quibus ac- 
cusator publicus deesset, ut propinqui more maiorum 


1 mullos, c; the other mss. have mulos. 


4 See note on Jul. xvii. 1. b Cf. Aug. lxx. 2, 

¢ Both an hygienic and a moral measure, see Plin. N. H. 26. 
1 ff., and Mart. xi. 99. 

4 Strena, Fr. étrenne, literally ** an omen,” meant strictly 
gifts given for good luck. 

* That is, of four times the value of the one which he 
received. 


342 


TIBERIUS 


appear, and either from the floor or from the 
judge’s* tribunal remind the jurors of the laws 
and of their oath, as well as of the nature of the 
crime on which they were sitting in judgment. 
Moreover, if the public morals were in any way 
affected by laziness or bad habits he undertook to 
reform them. 

XXXIV. He reduced the cost of the games and 
shows by cutting down the pay of the actors and 
limiting the pairs of gladiators to a fixed number. 
Complaining bitterly that the prices of Corinthian 
bronzes® had risen to an immense figure and that 
three mullets had been sold for thirty thousand 
sesterces, he proposed that a limit be set to house- 
hold furniture and that the prices in the market 
should be regulated each year at the discretion of 
the senate; while the aediles were instructed to put 
such restrictions on cook-shops and eating-houses as 
not to allow even pastry to be exposed for sale. 
Furthermore, to encourage general frugality by his 
personal example, he often served at formal dinners 
meats left over from the day before and partly 
consumed, or the half of a boar, declaring that it 
had all the qualities of a whole one. 

He issued an edict forbidding general kissing, as 
well as the exchange of New Year's gifts? after the 
Kalends of January. It was his custom to return a 
gift of four-fold value,’ and in person; but annoyed 
at being interrupted all through the month by those 
who did not have access to him on the holiday, he 
did not continue it. 

XXXV. He revived the custom of our forefathers, 
that in the absence of a public prosecutor matrons of 
ill-repute be punished according to the decision of a 


343 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


de communi sententia coercerent auctor fuit. Equiti 
Romano iuris iurandi gratiam fecit, uxorem in stupro 
generi compertam dimitteret, quam se numquam 
repudiaturum ante iuraverat. Feminae famosae, ut 
ad evitandas legum poenas iure ac dignitate matronali 
exsolverentur, lenocinium profiteri coeperant, et ex 
iuventute utriusque ordinis profligatissimus quisque, 
quominus in opera scaenae harenaeque edenda 
senatus consulto teneretur, famosi iudicii notam 
sponte subibant; eos easque omnes, ne quod. 
refugium in tali fraude cuiquam esset, exsilio adfecit. 
Senatori latum clavum ademit, cum cognosset sub 
Kal. Iul. demigrasse in hortos, quo vilius post diem 
aedes in urbe conduceret. Alium e quaestura re- 
amovit, quod uxorem pridie sortitionem ductam 
postridie repudiasset. 

XXXVI. Externas caerimonias, Aegyptios Iudai- 
cosque ritus compescuit, coactis qui superstitione ea 
tenebantur religiosas vestes cum instrumento omni 
comburere. Iudaeorum iuventutem per speciem 
sacramenti in provincias gravioris caeli distribuit, 
reliquos gentis eiusdem vel similia sectantes urbe 
summovit, sub poena perpetuae servitutis nisi 
obtemperassent. Expulit et mathematicos, sed de- 


a The punishments for adultery had been made very severe 
by Augustus (cf. Aug. xxxiv.) To escape these some 
matrons registered with the aediles as prostitutes, thereby 
sacrificing their rights as matrons, as well as their responsi- 
bilities; cf. Tac. Ann. 2. 85. 

> The first of July was the date for renting and hiring 
houses and rooms ; hence it was ‘‘moving-day.” See Mart. 
12. 32. 

* To determine his province or the spbere of his duty. The 


344 


—À9 —Á ‘a 


TIBERIUS 


council of their relatives. He absolved a Roman 

. knight from his oath and allowed him to put away 
his wife, who was taken in adultery with her son-in- 
law, even though he had previously sworn that he 
would never divorce her. Notorious women had 
begun to make an open profession of prostitution, 
to avoid the punishment of the laws by giving up 
the privileges and rank of matrons,* while the most 
profligate young men of both orders voluntarily 
incurred degradation from their rank, so as not to be 
prevented by the decree of the senate from appear- 
ing on the stage and in the arena. All such men 
and women he punished with exile, to prevent any- . 
one from shielding himself by such a device. He 
deprived a senator of his broad stripe on learning 
that he had moved to his gardens just before the 
Kalends of July, with the design of renting a house 

-in the city at a lower figure after that date. He 
deposed another from his quaestorship, because he 
had taken a wife the day before casting lots* and 
divorced her the day after. 

XXXVI. He abolished foreign cults, especially the 
the Egyptian and the Jewish rites, compelling all 
who were addicted to such superstitions to burn 
their religious vestments and all their paraphernalia. 
Those of the Jews who were of military age he 
assigned to provinces of unhealthy climate, ostensibly 
to serve in the army; the others of that same race 
or of similar beliefs he banished from the city, on 
pain of slavery for life if they did not obey. He 
banished the astrologers as well, but pardoned such 


reason for his divorcing his wife is problematical. Evidently 
his marriage brought him some advantage which no longer 
existed after his province was determined. 


345 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


precantibus. ac se artem desituros promittentibus 
veniam dedit. 

XXXVII. In primis tuendae pacis a grassaturis ac 
latrociniis seditionumque licentia curam habuit. 
Stationes militum per Italiam solito frequentiores 
disposuit. Romae castra constituit, quibus praetoria- 
nae cohortes vagae ante id tempus et per hospitia 
dispersae continerentur. 

Populares tumultus et ortos gravissime coercuit et 
ne orerentur sedulo cavit. Caede in theatro per 
discordiam admissa capita factionum et histriones, 
propter quos dissidebatur, relegavit, nec ut revocaret 
umquam ullis populi precibus potuit evinci. Cum 
Pollentina plebs funus cuiusdam  primipilaris non 
prius ex foro misisset quam extorta pecunia per vim 
heredibus ad gladiatorium munus, cohortem ab urbe 
et aliam a Cotti regno dissimulata itineris causa 
detectis repente armis concinentibusque signis per 
diversas portas in oppidum immisit ac partem maiorem 
plebei ac decurionum in perpetua vincula coniecit. 
Abolevit et ius moremque asylorum, quae usquam 
erant. Cyzicenis in cives R. violentius quaedam 
ausis publice libertatem ademit, quam Mithridatico. 
bello meruerant.! 

Hostiles motus nulla postea expeditione suscepta 
per legatos compescuit, ne per eos quidem nisi 
cunctanter et necessario. Reges infestos suspec- 


1 merueraut, z (Beroaldus); meruerunt, 0. 


a That is, the supporters and partisans of the rival actors ; 
see Tac. Ann. 1. 77. 

+ The members of the local senate. 

¢ Taking refuge in temples and holy places. to avoid 
punishment for crimes ; for its abuse see Tac. Ann. 3. 60. 


346 


TIBERIUS 


as begged for indulgence and promised to give up 
their art. | 

XXXVII. He gave special attention to securing 
safety from prowling brigands and lawless outbreaks, 
He stationed garrisons of soldiers nearer together 
than before throughout Italy, while at Rome he 
established a camp for the barracks of the praetorian 
cohorts, which before that time had been quartered 
in isolated groups in divers lodging houses. 

He took great pains to prevent outbreaks of the 
populace and punished such as occurred with the . 
utmost severity. When a quarrel in the theatre 
ended in bloodshed, he banished the leaders of the 
factions,“ as well as the actors who were the cause of 
the dissension ; and no entreaties of the people could 
ever induce him to recall them. -When the populace 
of Pollentia would not allow the body of a chief- 
centurion to be taken from the forum until their 
violence had extorted money from his heirs for a 
gladiatorial show, he dispatched one cohort from the 
city and another from the kingdom of Cottius, con- 
cealing the reason for the move, sent them into the 
city by different gates, suddenly revealing their arms 
and sounding their trumpets, and consigned the 
greater part of the populace and of the decurions ^ 
to life imprisonment. He abolished the customary 
right of asylum in all parts of the empire. Because 
the people of Cyzicus ventured to commit acts of 
special lawlessness against Roman citizens, he took 
from them the freedom which they had earned in the 
war with Mithridates. 

He undertook no campaign after his accession, but 
quelled outbreaks of the enemy through his generals ; 
and even this he did only reluctantly and of necessity. 


347 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


tosque comminationibus magis et querelis quam vi 
.repressit; quosdam per blanditias atque promissa 
extractos ad se non remisit, ut Marobodum Ger- 
manum, Rhascuporim! Thracem, Archelaum Cappa- 
docem, cuius etiam regnum in formam provinciae 
redegit. 

XXXVIII Biennio continuo post adeptum 
imperium pedem porta non extulit; sequenti tem- 
pore praeterquam in propinqua oppida et, cum 
. longissime, Antio tenus nusquam afuit, idque perraro 
et paucos dies; quamvis provincias quoque et 
exercitus revisurum se saepe pronuntiasset et prope 
quotannis profectionem praepararet, vehiculis com- 
prehensis, commeatibus per municipia et colonias 
dispositis, ad extremum vota pro itu et reditu suo 
suscipi passus, ut vulgo iam per iocum “ Callippides ''? 
vocaretur, quem cursitare ac ne cubiti quidem 
mensuram progredi proverbio Graeco notatum est. 

XXXIX. Sed orbatus utroque filio, quorum Ger- 
manicus in Syria, Drusus Romae obierat, secessum 
Campaniae petit; constanti et opinione et sermone 
paene omnium quasi neque rediturus umquam et cito 
mortem etiam obiturus. Quod paulo minus utrum- 
que evenit; nam neque Romam amplius rediit et ? 
paucos post dies iuxta Tarracinam in praetorio, cui 
Speluncae nomen est, incenante eo complura et 
ingentia saxa fortuito superne dilapsa sunt, multisque 

1 Rhascuporim, Ihm; Thrascipolim, A. 


2 Callippides, Basle ed. of 1533; Gallipidis (Gallipedes), 
mss. 3 et, Erasmus ; sed, MGX’; sed et, T. 


^ The same proverb is mentioned by Cic. ad Att. 13. 12. 
The reference is to an Athenian actor of mimes, who imitated 


348 


TIBERIUS 


Such kings as were disaffected and objects of his sus- 
picion he held in check rather by threats and re- 
monstrances than by force; some he lured to Rome 
by flattering promises and detained there, such as 
Marobodus the German, Rhascuporis the Thracian, 
and Archelaus of Cappadocia, whose realm he also 
reduced to the form of a province. 

XXXVIII. For two whole years after becoming 
emperor he did not set foot outside the gates; 
after that he went nowhere except to the neighbour- 
ing towns, at farthest to Antium, and even that very 
seldom and for a few days at a time. Yet he often 
gave out that he would visit the provinces too and 
the armies, and nearly every year he made prepara- 
tions for a journey by chartering carriages and 
arranging for supplies in the free towns and colonies. 
Finally he allowed vows to be put up for his voyage 
and return, so that at last everybody jokingly gave 
him the name of Callippides, who was proverbial 
among the Greeks for running without getting ahead 
a cubit's length.” 

XXXIX. But after being bereft of both his sons, 
of whom Germanicus had died in Syria and Drusus 
at Rome, he retired to Campania, and almost every- 
one firmly believed and openly declared that he 
would never come back, but would soon die there. 
And both predictions were all but fulfilled ; for he 
did not return again to Rome, and it chanced a few 
days later that as he was dining near Tarracina in a 
villa called the Grotto, many huge rocks fell from 
the ceiling and crushed a number of the guests and 


the movements of running but remained in the same spot ; 
cf. Xen. Symp. 3. 11 ; Plut. Agis, 21. 


349 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


convivarum et ministrorum elisis praeter spem 
evasit. 

XL. Peragrata Campania, cum Capuae Capitolium, 
Nolae templum Augusti, quam causam profectionis 
praetenderat, dedicasset, Capreas se contulit, prae- 
cipue delectatus insula, quod uno parvoque litore 
adiretur, saepta undique praeruptis immensae alti- 
tudinis rupibus et profundo mari. Statimque revo- 
cante assidua obtestatione populo propter cladem, 
qua apud Fidenas supra viginti hominum milia 
gladiatorio munere amphitheatri ruina perierant, 
transiit in continentem  potestatemque omnibus 
adeundi sui fecit; tanto magis, quod urbe egrediens 
ne quis se interpellaret edixerat ac toto itinere adeuntis 
submoverat. 

XLI. Regressus in insulam rei p. quidem curam 
usque adeo abiecit, ut postea non decurias equitum 
umquam supplerit, non tribunos militum praefectos- 
que, non provinciarum praesides ullos mutaverit, 
Hispaniam et Syriam per aliquot annos sine con- 
sularibus legatis habuerit, Armeniam a Parthis oc- 
cupari, Moesiam a Dacis Sarmatisque, Gallias a 
Germanis vastari neglexerit; magno dedecore im- 
perii nec minore discrimine. 


XLII. Ceterum secreti licentiam nanctus et quasi 


civitatis oculis remotis, cuncta simul vitia male diu 
dissimulata tandem profudit; de quibus singillatim 


1 mari, Stephanus; maris, mss. 


@ That is, to make some amends for his conduct. 
è The divisions selected for jury duty. 


35° 


TIBERIUS 


servants, while the emperor himself had a narrow 
escape. 

XL. After traversing Campania and dedicating the 
Capitolium at Capua and a temple to Augustus at 
Nola, which was the pretext he had given for his 
journey, he went to Capreae, particularly attracted 
to that island because it was accessible by only one 
small beach, being everywhere else girt with sheer 
cliffs of great height and by deep water. But he was 
at once recalled by the constant entreaties of the 
people, because of a disaster at Fidenae, where more 
than twenty thousand spectators had perished through 
the collapse of the amphitheatre during a gladiatorial 
show. So he crossed to the mainland and made 
himself accessible to all, the more willingly because 
he had given orders on leaving the city that no one 
was to disturb him, and during the whole trip had 
repulsed those who tried to approach him. 

XLI. Then returning to the island, he utterly 
neglected the conduct of state affairs, frem that time 
on never filling the vacancies in the decuries? of the 
knights, nor changing the tribunes of the soldiers 
and prefects or the governors of any of his provinces. 
He left ‘Spain and Syria without consular governors 
for several years, suffered Armenia to be overrun by 
the Parthians, Moesia to be laid waste by the Dacians 
and Sarmatians, and the Gallic provinces by the 
Germans, to the great dishonour of the empire and 
no less to its danger. 

XLII. Moreover, having gained the licence of 
privacy, and being as it were out of sight of the 
citizens, he at last gave free rein at once to all 
the vices which he had for a long time. ill concealed ; 
and of these I shall give a detailed account from the 


357 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


ab exordio referam. In castris tiro etiam tum propter 
nimiam vini aviditatem pro Tiberio “ Biberius," pro 
Claudio * Caldius," pro Nerone * Mero" vocabatur. 
Postea princeps in ipsa publicorum morum correctione 
cum Pomponio Flacco et L. Pisone noctem continuum- 
que biduum epulando potandoque consumpsit, quorum 
alteri Syriam provinciam, alteri praefecturam urbis 
confestim detulit, codicillis quoque iucundissimos et 
omnium horarum amicos professus. Cestio Gallo! 
libidinoso ac prodigo seni, olim ab Augusto ig- 
nominia notato et a se ante paucos dies apud 
senatum increpito cenam ea lege condixit, ne quid 
ex consuetudine immutaret aut demeret, utque nudis 
puellis ministrantibus cenaretur. Ignotissimum quae- 
sturae candidatum nobilissimis anteposuit ob epotam 
in convivio propinante se vini amphoram.  Asellio 
Sabino sestertia ducenta donavit pro dialogo, in 
quo boleti et ficedulae et ostreae et turdi cer- 
tamen induxerat. Novum denique officium instituit 
a> voluptatibus, praeposito equite R. T. Caesonio 
Prisco. ! 

XLIII. Secessu vero Caprensi etiam sellaria ex- 
cogitavit, sedem arcanarum libidinum, in quam un- 
dique conquisiti puellarum et exoletorum greges 
monstrosique concubitus repertores, quos spintrias 
appellabat, triplici serie conexi, in vicem incestarent 
coram ipso, ut aspectu deficientis libidines excitaret. 


1 Cestio, Roth; Sestio, Q. iui V? (Torrentius). 


a See Index s.v. Biberius. 

* Probably the emperor took a sip from the huge vessel and 
passed it to the man, who drained it to the dregs ; cf. Verg. 
Aen. l. 738. Since the amphora as a measure contained 
about seven gallons, the word is here probably used of a 
large tankard of that shape. 


352 


TIBERIUS 


beginning. Even at the outset of his military 
career his excessive love of wine gave him the name 
of Biberius, instead of Tiberius, Caldius for Claudius, 
and Mero for Nero. Later, when emperor and at 
the very time that he was busy correcting the public 
morals, he spent a night and two whole days feasting 
and drinking with Pomponius Flaccus and Lucius Piso, 
immediately afterward making the one governor 
of the province of Syria and the other prefect 
of the city, and even declaring in their commissions 
that they were the most agreeable of friends, who 
could always be counted on. He had a dinner given 
him by Cestius Gallus, a lustful and prodigal old 
man, who had once been degraded by Augustus 
and whom he had himself rebuked a few days 
before in the senate, making the condition that 
Cestius should change or omit none of his usual 
customs, and that nude girls should wait upon 
them at table. He gave a very obscure candi- 
date for the quaestorship preference over men of 
the noblest families, because at the emperor's chal- 
lenge he had drained an amphora of wine at a 
banquet. He paid Asellius Sabinus two hundred 
thousand sesterces for a dialogue, in which he had 
introduced a contest of a mushroom, a fig-pecker, 
an oyster and a thrush. He established a new 
office, master of the imperial pleasures, assigning it 
to Titus Caesonius Priscus, a Roman knight. 

XLIII. Secessu vero Caprensi etiam sellaria ex- 
cogitavit, sedem arcanarum libidinum, in quam un- 
dique conquisiti puellarum et exoletorum greges 
monstrosique concubitus repertores, quos spintrias 
appellabat, triplici serie conexi, in vicem incestarent 
coram ipso, ut aspectu deficientis libidines excitaret. 


353 
VOL. I. A A 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


2 Cubicula plurifariam disposita tabellis ac sigillis 
lascivissimarum picturarum et figurarum adornavit 
librisque Elephantidis instruxit, ne cui in opera 
edenda exemplar imperatae! schemae deesset. In 
silvis quoque ae nemoribus passim Venerios locos 
commentus est prostantisque ? per antra et cavas rupes 
ex utriusque sexus pube Paniscorum et Nympharum 
habitu, quae palam? iam et vulgo nomine insulae 
abutentes “ Caprinéum " dictitabant. 

XLIV. Maiore adhuc ac turpiore infamia flagravit, 
vix ut referri audirive, nedum credi fas sit, quasi 
pueros primae teneritudinis, quos pisciculos vocabat, 
institueret, ut natanti sibi inter femina versarentur 
ac luderent lingua morsuque sensim adpetentes ; atque 
etiam quasi infantes firmiores, necdum tamen lacte 
depulsos, inguini ceu papillae admoveret, pronior sane 

2 ad id genus libidinis et natura et aetate. Quare Par- 
rasi quoque tabulam, in qua Meleagro Atalanta ore 
morigeratur, legatam sibi sub condicione, ut si argu- 
mento offenderetur decies pro ea sestertium acciperet, 
non modo praetulit, sed et in cubiculo dedicavit. 
Fertur.etiam in sacrificando quondam captus facie 
ministri acerram praeferentis nequisse abstinere, quin 
paene vixdum re divina peracta ibidem statim se- 
ductum constupraret simulque fratrem eius tibicinem ; 
atque utrique mox, quod mutuo flagitium exprobrarant, 
crura fregisse. 

XLV. Feminarum quoque, et quidem illustrium, 

capitibus quanto opere solitus sit inludere, evidentis- 
sime apparuit Malloniae cuiusdam exitu, quam per- 
ductam nec quicquam amplius pati constantissime 


! imperatae, c; impetratae, Q. 
? prostantesque, TIQ ; the other mss. have prostrantesque or 
prostrantisque. — ? habitu, quae palam] habituque palam, 2 


354 


TIBERIUS 


Cubicula plurifariam disposita tabellis ac sigillis 
lascivissimarum picturarum et figurarum adornavit 
librisque Elephantidis instruxit, ne cui in opera 
edenda exemplar imperatae schemae deesset. In 
silvis quoque ac nemoribus passim Venerios locos 
commentus est prostantisque per antra et cavas rupes 
ex utriusque sexus pube Paniscorum et Nympharum 
habitu, quae palam iam et vulgo nomine insulae 
abutentes ** Caprineum ” dictitabant. 

XLIV. Maiore adhuc ac turpiore infamia flagravit, 
vix ut referri audirive, nedum credi fas sit, quasi 
pueros primae teneritudinis, quos pisciculos vocabat, 
institueret, ut natanti sibi inter femina versarentur 
ac luderent lingua morsuque sensim adpetentes ; atque 
etiam quasi infantes firmiores, necdum tamen lacte 
depulsos, inguini ceu papillae admoveret, pronior sane 
ad id genus libidinis et natura et aetate. Quare Par- 
rasi quoque tabulam, in qua Meleagro Atalanta ore 
morigeratur, legatam sibi sub condicione, ut si argu- 
mento offenderetur decies pro ea sestertium acciperet, 
non modo praetulit, sed et in cubiculo dedicavit. 
Fertur etiam in sacrificando quondam captus facie 
ministri acerram praeferentis nequisse abstinere, quin 
paene vixdum re divina peracta ibidem statim se- 
ductum constupraret simulque fratrem eius tibicinem ; 
atque utrique mox,quod mutuo flagitium exprobrarant, 
crura fregisse. 

XLV. How grossly he was in the habit of 
abusing women even of high birth is very clearly 
shown by the death of a certain Mallonia. When 
she was brought to his bed and refused most 
vigorously to submit to his lust, he turned her 


355 
A A2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


recusantem delatoribus obiecit ac ne ream quidem 
interpellare desiit, * ecquid paeniteret" ; donec ea 
relicto iudicio domum se abripuit ferroque transegit, 
 Oobscaenitate oris hirsuto atque olido seni clare ex- 
probrata. Unde nota! in Atellanico exhodio proximis 
ludis adsensu maximo excepta percrebruit, “ hircum 
vetulum capreis naturam ligurire."' 

XLVI. Pecuniae parcus ac tenax comites peregrina- 
tionum expeditionumque numquam salario, cibariis 
tantum sustentavit, una modo liberalitate ex indul- 
gentia vitrici prosecutus, cum tribus classibus factis 
pro dignitate cuiusque, primae sescenta sestertia, 
secundae quadringenta distribuit, ducenta tertiae, 
quam non amicorum sed Graecorum ? appellabat. 

XLVII. Princeps neque opera ulla magnifica fecit — 
nam et quae sola susceperat, Augusti templum re- 
stitutionemque Pompeiani theatri, imperfecta post tot 
annos reliquit—neque spectacula omnino edidit; et 
iis, quae ab aliquo ederentur, rarissime interfuit, 
ne quid exposceretur, utique postquam  comoedum 
Actium coactus est manumittere. Paucorum sena- 
torum inopia sustentata, ne pluribus opem ferret, 
negavit se aliis subventurum, nisi senatui iustas 
necessitatium causas probassent. Quo pacto pleros- 


que modestia et pudore deterruit, in quibus 


Hortalum, Quinti Hortensi oratoris nepotem, qui 


1 nota, P?T'c— ; the other mss. have mora. 
? Graecorum] gratorum, Turnebus. 


a See chap. lvi. 
356 


TIBERIUS 


over to the informers, and even when she was 
on trial he did not cease to call out and ask her 
“whether she was sorry”; so that finally she left 
the court and went home, where she stabbed 
herself, openly upbraiding the ugly old man for 
his obscenity. Hence a stigma put upon him at the 
next plays in an Atellan farce was received with 
great applause and became current, that “the old 
goat was licking the does.” 

XLV]. In money matters he was frugal and 
close, never allowing the companions of his foreign 
tours and campaigns a salary, but merely their 
keep. Only once did he treat them liberally, and 
then through the generosity of his stepfather, when 
he formed three classes according to each man’s 
rank and gave to the first six hundred thousand 
sesterces, to the second four hundred thousand, 
and to the third, which he called one, not of his 
friends, but of his Greeks," two hundred thousand. 

XLVII. While emperor he constructed no mag- 
nificent public works, for the only ones which he 
undertook, the temple of Augustus and the restora- 
tion of Pompey's theatre, he left unfinished after so 
many years. He gave no public shows at all, and 
very seldom attended those given by others, for fear 
that some request would be made of him, especially 
after he was forced to buy the freedom of a comic 
actor named Actius. Having relieved the neediness 
of a few senators, he avoided the necessity of further 
aid by declaring that he would help no others unless 
they proved to the senate that there were legitimate 
causes for their condition. Therefore diffidence and 
a sense of shame kept many from applying, among 
them Hortalus, grandson of Quintus Hortensius the 


357 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


permodica re familiari auctore Augusto quattuor 
liberos tulerat. 

XLVIII. Publice munificentiam bis omnino ex- 
hibuit, proposito milies sestertium gratuito in trienni 
tempus et rursus quibusdam dominis insularum, quae 
in monte Caelio deflagrarant, pretio restituto. 
Quorum alterum magna difficultate nummaria populo 
auxilium flagitante coactus est facere, cum per 
senatus consultum sanxisset, ut faeneratores duas 
patrimonii partes in solo collocarent, debitores toti- 
dem aeris alieni statim solverent, nec res expedire- 
tur; alterum ad mitigandam temporum atrocitatem. 
Quod tamen beneficium tanti aestimavit, ut montem 
Caelium appellatione mutata vocari Augustum 
iusserit. Militi post duplicata ex Augusti testamento 
legata nihil umquam largitus est, praeterquam singula 
milia denariorum praetorianis, quod Seiano se non 
accommodassent, et quaedam munera  Syriacis 
legionibus, quod solae nullam Seiani imaginem inter 
signa coluissent. Atque etiam missiones veterano- 
rum rarissimas fecit, ex senio mortem, ex morte 
compendium captans. Ne provincias quidem liberali- 


@ Cf. Aug. xli. 1; Tac. Ann. 2. 37. 

ò This occurred twice, in 27 and 36; see Tac. Ann. 4. 64 
and 6. 45. The second fire was on and near the Aventine. 

¢ The decree is quoted by Tac. Ann. 6.17. The purpose 
was to put the money into circulation and at the same time 
to allow the debtors to pay in land. 

4 According to Tacitus (Ann. 4. 64) this was done by the 
senate, because the statue of Tiberius remained uninjured 
in the midst of the burned district. 

* The standards had a sacred character; see, for example, 


358 


TIBERIUS 


orator, who though of very limited means had 
begotten four children with the encouragement of 
Augustus. 

XLVIII. He showed generosity to the public in 
but two instances, once when he offered to lend a 
hundred million sesterces without interest for a 
period of three years, and again when he made good 
the losses of some owners of blocks of houses on 
the Caelian Mount, which had burned down.2 The 
former was forced upon him by the clamour of the 
people for help in a time of great financial stress, 
after he had failed to relieve the situation by a 
decree of the senate,’ providing that the money- 
lenders should invest two-thirds of their property in 
land, and that the debtors should at once pay the 
same proportion of their indebtedness; and the 
latter also was to relieve a condition of great hard- 
ship. - Yet he made so much of his liberality in the 
latter case, that he had the name of the Caelian 
changed to the Augustan Mount? After he had 
doubled the legacies provided for in the will of 
Augustus, he never gave largess to the soldiers, with 
the exception of a hundred denarii to each of the 
praetorians, for not taking sides with Sejanus, and 
some presents to the legions in Syria, because they 
alone had consecrated no image of Sejanus among 
their standards.¢ He also very rarely allowed veteran 
soldiers their discharge, having an eye to their death 
from years, and a saving of money through their 
death/ He did not relieve the provinces either by 


Tae. Ann. 1. 39. 7 ; and the head of the reigning emperor 
was often placed under the eagle or other emblem. 

4 Since he would save the rewards to be paid on the com- 
pletion of their term of service. 


359 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


tate ulla sublevavit, excepta Asia, disiectis terrae 
motu civitatibus. 

XLIX. Procedente mox tempore etiam ad rapinas 
convertit animum. Satis constat, Cn. Lentulum Augu- 
rem, cui census maximus fuerit, metu et angore ad 
fastidium vitae ab eo actum et ut ne quo nisi ipso 
herede moreretur ; condemnatam et generosissimam 
feminam Lepidam in gratiam Quirini consularis 
praedivitis et orbi, qui dimissam eam e matrimonio 
post vicensimum annum veneni olim in se com- 
parati arguebat ; praeterea Galliarum et Hispaniarum 
Syriaeque et Graeciae principes confiscatos ob tam 
leve ac tam impudens calumniarum genus, ut qui- 
busdam non aliud sit obiectum, quam quod partem 
rei familiaris in pecunia haberent; plurimis etiam 
civitatibus et privatis veteres immunitates et ius 
metallorum ac vectigalium adempta ; sed et Vononem 
regem Parthorum, qui pulsus a suis quasi in fidem 
p. R. eum ingenti gaza Antiochiam se receperat, 
spoliatum perfidia et occisum. — 

L. Odium adversus necessitudines in Druso primum 
fratre detexit, prodita eius epistula, qua secum de 
cogendo ad restituendam libertatem Augusto agebat, 
deinde et in reliquis. Iuliae uxori tantum afuit ut 
relegatae, quod minimum est, offici aut humanitatis 
aliquid impertiret, ut ex constitutione patris uno 
oppido clausam domo quoque egredi et commercio 


* Under pretence that they were hoarding money for 
revolutionary purposes. Caesar had limited the amount to be 
held by any one person in Italy to 60,000 sesterces; cf. Tac. 
Ann. 6. 16; Dio, 41. 38. > But cf. chap. xi. 4, above. 


360 


TIBERIUS 


any act of liberality, except Asia, when some cities 
were destroyed by an earthquake. 

XLIX. Presently, as time went on, he even re- 
sorted to plunder. All the world knows that he 
drove Gnaeus Lentulus Augur, a man of great wealth, 
to take his own life through fear and mental anxiety, 
and to make the emperor his sole heir; that Lepida, 
too, a woman of high birth, was condemned to death 
to gratify Quirinus, an opulent and childless ex- 
consul, who had divorced her after twenty years of 
wedded life, accusing her of an attempt to poison 
him many years before ; that besides this the leading 
men of the Spanish and Gallic provinces, as well as 
of Syria and Greece, had their property confiscated 
on trivial and shameless charges, some being accused 
of nothing more serious than having a part of their 
property in ready money ;% that many states and 
individuals were deprived of immunities of long 
standing, and of the right of working mines and 
collecting revenues; that Vonones, king of the 
Parthians, who on being dethroned by his subjects 
had taken refuge at Antioch with a vast treasure, in 
the belief that he was putting himself under the 
protection of the Roman people, was treacherously 
despoiled and put to death. 

L. He first showed his hatred of his kindred in 
the case of his brother Drusus, producing a letter of 
his, in which Drusus discussed with him the question 
of compelling Augustus to restore the Republic ; and 
then he turned against the rest. So far from show- 
ing any courtesy or kindness to his wife Julia, after 
her banishment, which is the least that one might 
expect, although her father's order had merely con- 
fined her to one town, he would not allow her even to 


261 


* 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


hominum frui vetuerit; sed et peculio concesso a 
patre praebitisque annuis fraudavit, per speciem 
publici iuris, quod nihil de his Augustus testamento 
cavisset. Matrem Liviam gravatus velut partes sibi 
aequas potentiae vindicantem, et congressum eius 
assiduum vitavit et longiores secretioresque sermones, 
ne consiliis, quibus tamen interdum et egere et uti 
solebat, regi videretur. Tulit etiam perindigne ac- 
tum in senatu, ut titulis suis quasi “ Augusti," ita et 
* Liviae filius " adiceretur. Quare non * parentem 
patriae" appellari, non ullum insignem honorem 
recipere publice passus est; sed et frequenter ad- 
monuit, maioribus nec feminae convenientibus 
negotiis abstineret, praecipue ut animadvertit 
incendio iuxta aedem Vestae et ipsam intervenisse 
populumque et milites, quo enixius opem ferrent, 
adhortatam, sicut sub marito solita esset. 

LI. Dehine ad simultatem usque processit hac, 
ut ferunt, de causa.  Instanti saepius, ut civitate 
donatum in decurias adlegeret, negavit alia se 
condicione adlecturum, quam si patereter ascribi 
albo extortum id sibi a matre. At illa commota 
veteres quosdam ad se Augusti codicillos de acerbi- 


tate et intolerantia morum eius e sacrario protulit. 


atque recitavit. Hos et custoditos tam diu et 


a See note on chap. xv. 2. 
^ Sacrarium is really a shrine (perhaps to Augustus) in 
which the letters had been deposited. 


362 i : 


TIBERTUS 


leave her house or enjoy the society of mankind. Nay 
more, he even deprived her of the allowance* granted 
her by her father and of her yearly income, under 
colour of observance of the common law, since 
Augustus had made no provision for these in his 
will. Vexed at his mother Livia, alleging that she 
claimed an equal share in the rule, he shunned 
frequent meetings with her and long and confidential 
conversations, to avoid the appearance of being 
guided by her advice ; though in point of fact he was 
wont every now and then to need and to follow it. 
He was greatly offended too by a decree of the 
senate, providing that “son of Livia,” as well as 
“son of Augustus” should be written in his honorary 
inscriptions. For this reason he would not suffer her 
to be named “ Parent of her Country," nor to receive 
any conspicuous publie honour. More than that, he 
often warned her not to meddle with affairs, of 
importance and unbecoming a woman, especially 
after he learned that at a fire near the temple of 
Vesta she had been present in person, and urged the 
people and soldiers to greater efforts, as had been 
her way while her husband was alive. 

LI. Afterwards he reached the point of open 
enmity, and the reason, they say, was this. On her 
urging him again and again to appoint among the 
jurors à man who had been made a citizen, he 
declared that he would do it only où condition that 
she would allow an entry to be made in the official 
list that it was forced upon him by his mother. 
Then Livia, in a rage, drew from a secret place ^ and 
read some old letters written to her by Augustus 
with regard to the austerity and stubbornness of 
Tiberius’ disposition. He in turn was:so put out 


363 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


exprobratos tam infeste adeo graviter tulit, ut 
quidam putent inter causas secessus hanc ei vel 
praecipuam fuisse. Toto quidem triennio, quo 
vivente matre afuit, semel omnino eam nec amplius 
quam uno die paucissimis vidit horis ; ac mox neque 
aegrae adesse curavit defunctamque et, dum adventus 
sui spem facit, complurium dierum mora corrupto 
demum et tabido corpore funeratam prohibuit con- 
secrari, quasi id ipsa mandasset. Testamentum 
quoque eius pro irrito habuit omnisque amicitias et 
familiaritates, etiam quibus ea funeris sui curam 
moriens demandaverat, intra breve tempus afflixit, 
uno eX iis, equestris ordinis viro, et in antliam 
condemnato. | 

LII. Filiorum neque naturalem Drusum neque 
adoptivum | Germanicum patria caritate dilexit, 
alterius vitiis infensus. Nam Drusus fluxioris re- 
missiorisque vitae erat. Itaque ne mortuo quidem 
perinde adfectus est, sed tantum non statim a funere 
ad negotiorum consuetudinem rediit iustitio longiore 
inhibito. Quin et lliensium legatis paulo serius 
consolantibus, quasi obliterata iam doloris memoria, 
irridens se quoque respondit vicem eorum dolere, 
quod egregium civem Hectorem amisissent. Ger- 
manico usque adeo obtrectavit, ut et praeclara facta 
364 


TIBERIUS 


that these had been preserved so long and were 
thrown up at him in such a spiteful spirit, that some 
think that this was the very strongest of the reasons 
for hisretirement. At all events, during all the three 
years that she lived after he left Rome he saw her 
but once, and then only one day, for a very few 
hours; and when shortly after that she fell ill, he 
took no trouble to visit her. When she died, and 
after a delay of several days, during which he held 
out hope of his coming, had at last been buried 
because the condition of the corpse made it necessary, 
he forbade her deification, alleging that he was 
acting according to her own instructions. He further 
disregarded the provisions of her will, and within a 
short time caused the downfall of all her friends and 
intimates, even of those to whom she had on her 
deathbed entrusted the care of her obsequies, actually 
condemning one of them, and that a man of equestrian 
rank, to the treadmill. 

LII. He had a father's affection neither for his 
natural son Drusus nor his adopted son Germanicus, 
being exasperated at the former's vices; and, in fact, 
Drusus led a somewhat loose and dissolute life. 
Therefore, even when he died, Tiberius was not 
greatly affected, but almost immediately after the 
funeral returned to his usual routine, forbidding 
a longer period of mourning. Nay, more, when a 
deputation from llium offered him somewhat belated 
condolences, he replied with a smile, as if the 
memory of his bereavement had faded from his 
mind, that they, too, had his sympathy for the loss 
of their eminent fellow-citizen Hector. As to 
Germanicus, he was so far from appreciating him, 
that he made light of his illustrious deeds as un- 


365 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


eius pro supervacuis elevarit et gloriosissimas vic- 
torias ceu damnosas rei p. increparet. Quod vero 
Alexandream propter immensam et repentinam 
famem inconsulto se adisset, questus est in senatu. 
Etiam causa mortis fuisse ei per Cn. Pisonem 
legatum Syriae creditur, quem mox huius criminis 
reum putant quidam mandata prolaturum, nisi ea 
secreto ostentanti auferenda ipsumque iugulandum 
curasset! Propter quae multifariam inscriptum et 
per noctes celeberrime adclamatum est: * Redde 
Germanicum !" Quam suspicionem confirmavit ipse 
postea coniuge etiam ac liberis Germanici crudelem 
in modum afflictis. 

LIII. Nurum Agrippinam post mariti mortem 
liberius quiddam questam manu apprehendit Graeco- 
que versu: “Si non dominaris," inquit, “filiola, in- 
iuriam te accipere existimas" ? Nec ullo mox 
sermone dignatus est. Quondam vero inter cenam 
porrecta a se poma gustare non ausam etiam vocare 
desiit, simulans veneni se crimine accersi ; cum prae- 
structum utrumque consulto esset, ut et ipse temp- 
tandi gratia offerret et illa quasi certissimum exitium ? 
caveret. Novissime calumniatus modo ad statuam 


Augusti modo ad exercitus confugere velle, Pan- . 


datariam relegavit conviciantique oculum per centu- 
rionem verberibus excussit. Rursus mori inedia desti- 


! ostentant(i auferenda ipsumque iugulandum curasset 
Propter) quae: the part in parenthesis is supplied by Roth. 
2 exitium, GS”; the other mss. have exitum. 


366 


8 — 


TIBERIUS 


important, and railed at his brilliant victories as 
ruinous to his country. He even made complaint in 
the senate when Germanicus, on the occasion of a 
sudden and terrible famine, went to Alexandria 
without consulting him. It is even believed that he 
caused his death at the hands of Gnaeus Piso, 
governor of Syria, and some think that when Piso 
was tried on that charge, he would have produced 
his instructions, had not Tiberius caused them to be 
taken from him when Piso privately showed them, 
and the man himself to be put to death. Because 
of this the words, “ Give us back Germanicus," were 
posted in many places, and shouted at night all over 
the city. And Tiberius afterwards strengthened this 
suspicion by cruelly abusing the wife and children of 
Germanicus as well. 

LIII. When his daughter-in-law Agrippina was 
somewhat outspoken in her complaints after her 
husband's death, he took her by the hand and quoted 
a Greek verse, meaning * Do you think a wrong is 
done you, dear daughter, if you are not empress ?”’ 
After that he never deigned to hold any conversation 
with her. Indeed, after she showed fear of tasting 
an apple which he handed her at dinner, he even 
ceased to invite her to his table,alleging that he had 
been charged with an attempt to poison her; but as 
a matter of fact, the whole affair had been pre- 
arranged, that he should offer her the fruit to test 
her, and that she should refuse it as containing 
certain death. At last, falsely charging her with a 
desire to take refuge, now at the statue of Augustus 
and now with the armies, he exiled her to Panda- 
taria, and when she loaded him with reproaches, he 
had her beaten by a centurion until one of her eyes 


367 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


nanti per vim ore diducto infulciri cibum iussit. Sed 
et perseverantem atque ita absumptam criminosissime 
insectatus, cum diem quoque natalem eius inter ne- 
fastos referendum suasisset, imputavit etiam, quod non 
laqueo strangulatam in Gemonias abiecerit ; proque 
tali clementia interponi decretum passus est, quo sibi 
gratiae agerentur et Capitolino Iovi donum ex auro 
sacraretur. 

LIV. Cum ex Germanico tres nepotes, Neronem 
et Drusum et Gaium, ex Druso unum Tiberium 
haberet, destitutus morte liberorum maximos natu de 
Germanici filiis, Neronem et Drusum, patribus con- 
scriptis commendavit diemque utriusque tirocinii 
congiario plebei dato celebravit. Sed ut comperit 
ineunte anno pro eorum quoque salute publice vota 
suscepta, egit cum senatu, non debere talia praemia 
tribui nisi expertis et aetate provectis. Atque ex eo 
patefacta interiore animi sui nota omnium criminationi- 
bus obnoxios reddidit variaque fraude inductos, ut et 
concitarentur ad convicia et concitati proderentur,. 
accusavit per litteras amarissime congestis etiam 
probris et iudicatos hostis fame necavit, Neronem in 
insula Pontia, Drusum in ima parte Palatii. Putant 


Neronem ad voluntariam mortem coactum, cum ei 


368 


TIBERIUS 


was destroyed. Again, when she resolved to die of 
starvation, he had her mouth pried open and food 
crammed into it. Worst of all, when she persisted in 
her resolution and so perished, he assailed her 
memory with the basest slanders, persuading the 
senate to add her birthday to the days of ill omen, 
and actually taking credit to himself for not having 
had her strangled and her body cast out on the 
Stairs of Mourning. He even allowed a decree to 
be passed in recognition of this remarkable clemency, 
in which thanks were offered him and a golden gift 
was consecrated to Jupiter of the Capitol. 

LIV. By Germanicus he had three grandsons, 
Nero, Drusus, and Gaius, and by Drusus one, called 
Tiberius. Bereft of his own children, he recom- 
mended Nero and Drusus, the elder sons of 
Germanicus, to the senate, and celebrated the day 
when each of them came to his majority by giving 
largess to the commons. But as soon as he learned 
that at the’ beginning of the year vows were being 
put up for their safety also, he referred the matter 
to the senate, saying that such honours ought to 
be conferred only on those of tried character and 
mature years. By revealing his true feelings to- 
wards them from that time on, he exposed them to 
accusations from all quarters, and after resorting to 
various tricks to rouse them to rail at him, and 
seeing to it that they were betrayed when they did 
so, he brought most bitter charges against them both 
in writing; and when they had in consequence been 
pronounced public enemies, he starved them to 
death, Nero on the island of Pontia and Drusus in a 
lower room of the Palace. It is thought that Nero- 
was forced to take his own life, since an executioner, 

369 

VOL. I. B B 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


carnifex quasi ex senatus auctoritate missus laqueos 
et uncos ostentaret, Druso autem adeo alimenta 
subducta, ut tomentum e culcita temptaverit man- 
dere ; amborum sic reliquias dispersas, ut vix quando- 
que colligi possent. 

LV. Super veteres amicos ac familiares viginti sibi 
e numero principum civitatis depoposcerat velut con- 
siliarios in negotiis publicis. Horum omnium vix 
duos anne tres incolumis praestitit, ceteros alium alia 
de causa perculit, inter quos cum plurimorum clade 
Aelium Seianum ; quem ad summam potentiam non 
tam benivolentia provexerat, quam ut esset cuius 
ministerio ac fraudibus liberos Germanici circum- 
veniret, nepotemque suum ex Druso filio naturalem ad 
successionem imperii confirmaret. 

LVI. Nihilo lenior in convictores Graeculos, quibus 
vel maxime adquiescebat, Xenonem quendam ex- 
quisitius sermocinantem cum interrogasset, quaenam 
illa tam molesta dialectos esset, et ille respondisset 
Doridem, relegavit Cinariam, existimans expro- 
bratum sibi veterem secessum, quod Dorice Rhodii 
loquantur. Item cum soleret ex lectione cotidiana 
quaestiones super cenam proponere comperissetque 
Seleucum grammaticum a ministris suis perquirere, 
quos quoque tempore tractaret auctores, atque ita 
praeparatum venire, primum a contubernio removit, 
deinde etiam ad mortem compulit. 

LVII. Saeva ac lenta natura ne in puero quidem 


latuit; quam Theodorus Gadareus! rhetoricae prae- 


1 Gadareus, editions of 1472 (?) and 1480 ; cadareus, n. 


a A sign that he was condemned to death ; the noose was 
for strangling him and the hooks for dragging his body to 
the Tiber. 


379 


TIBERIUS 


who pretended that he came by authority of the 
senate, showed him the noose and hooks,@ but that 
Drusus was so tortured by hunger that he tried 
to eat the stuffing of his mattress; while the 
remains of both were so scattered that it was with 
difficulty that they could ever be collected. 

LV. In addition to his old friends and intimates, | 
he had asked for twenty of the leading men of the 
State as advisers on public affairs. Of all these he 
spared hardly two or three ; the others he destroyed 
on one pretext or another, including Aelius Sejanus, 
whose downfall involved the death of many others. 
This man he had advanced to the highest power, not 
so much from regard for him, as that he might 
through his services and wiles destroy the children 
of Germanicus and secure the succession for his own: 
grandson, the child of his son Drusus. 

LVI. He was not a whit milder towards his Greek 
companions, in whose society he took special pleasure. 
When one Xeno was holding forth in somewhat far- 
fetched phrases, he asked him what dialect that was 
which was so affected, and on Xeno's replying that it 
was Doric, he banished him to Cinaria, believing that 
he was being taunted with his old-time exile, inas- 
much as the Rhodians spoke Doric. He had the 
habit, too, of putting questions at dinner suggested 
by his daily reading, and learning that the gram- 
marian Seleucus inquired of the imperial attendants 
what authors Tiberius was reading and so came 
primed, he at first banished the offender from his 
society, and later even forced him to commit suicide. 

LVII. His cruel and cold-blooded character was 
not completely hidden even in his boyhood. His 
teacher of rhetoric, Theodorus of Gadara, seems first 


371 


B B2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


ceptor et perspexisse primus sagaciter et assimilasse 
aptissime visus est, subinde in obiurgando appellans 
eum z9Àóv aiparı repupapevov, id est lutum a sanguine 
maceratum. Sed aliquanto magis in principe eluxit, 
etiam inter initia cum adhuc favorem hominum 
moderationis simulatione captaret. Scurram, qui 
praetereunte funere clare mortuo mandarat, ut 
nuntiaret Augusto nondum reddi legata quae plebei 
reliquisset, adtractum ad se recipere debitum ducique 
ad supplicium imperavit et patri suo verum referre. 
Nec multo post in senatu Pompeio cuidam equiti R. 
quiddam perneganti, dum vincula minatur, affirmavit 
fore ut ex Pompeio Pompeianus fieret, acerba. cavil- 
latione simul hominis nomen incessens veteremque ! 
partium fortunam. 

LVIII. Sub idem tempus consulente praetore an 
iudicia maiestatis cogi iuberet, exercendas esse leges 
respondit et atrocissime exercuit. Statuae quidam 
Augusti caput dempserat, ut alterius imponeret ; acta 
res in senatu et, quia ambigebatur, per tormenta 
quaesita est, Damnato reo paulatim genus calumniae 
eo processit, ut haec quoque capitalia essent: circa 
Augusti simulacrum servum cecidisse, vestimenta 
mutasse, nummo vel anulo effigiem impressam latrinae 
aut lupanari intulisse, dictum ullum factumve eius 

1 veterumque, PR (Roth, Preudhomme). 


—— > >. 


* With a play on the double meaning of debitum. 
372 


TIBERIUS 


to have had the insight to detect it, and to have 
characterized it very aptly, since in taking him to 
task he would now and then call him «yAóv aiuare 
meþpvpapévov, that is to say, “mud kneaded with 
blood.” But it grew still more noticeable after he 
became emperor, even at the beginning, when he 
was still courting popularity by a show of modera- 
tion. When a funeral was passing by and a jester 
called aloud to the corpse to let Augustus know that 
the legacies which he had left to the people were 
not yet being paid, Tiberius had the man haled before 
him, ordered that he be given his due® and put 
to death, and bade him go tell the truth to his 
father. Shortly afterwards, when a Roman knight 
called Pompeius stoutly opposed some action in the 
senate, Tiberius threatened him with imprisonment; 
declaring that from a Pompeius he would make of 
him a Pompeian, punning cruelly on the man’s 
name and the fate of the old party. 

LVIII. It was at about this time that a praetor 
asked him whether he should have the courts con- 
vened to consider cases of lese-majestie ; to which he 
replied that the laws must be enforced, and he did 
enforce them most rigorously. One man had re- 
moved the head from a statue of Augustus, to sub- 
stitute that of another; the case was tried in the 
senate, and since the evidence was conflicting, the 
witnesses were examined by torture. After the 
defendant had been condemned, this kind of accusa- 
tion gradually went so far that even such acts as 
these were regarded as capital crimes: to beat a 
slave near a statue of Augustus, or to change one’s 
clothes there; to carry a ring or coin stamped with 
his image into a privy or a brothel, or to criticize any 


373 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


existimatione aliqua laesisse. Perit 1 denique et is, 
qui honorem in colonia sua eodem die decerni sibi 
passus est, quo decreti et Augusto olim erant. 

LIX. Multa praeterea specie gravitatis ac morum 
corrigendorum, sed et magis naturae optemperans, 
ita saeve et atrociter factitavit, ut nonnulli versi- 
culis quoque et praesentia exprobrarent et futura 
denuntiarent mala : 


** Asper et immitis, breviter vis omnia dicam ? 
Dispeream, si te mater amare potest. 


Non es eques ; quare? non sunt tibi milia centum ; 
Omnia si quaeras, et Rhodus exilium est. 


Aurea mutasti Saturni saecula, Caesar ; 
Incolumi nam te ferrea semper erunt. 


Fastidit vinum, quia iam sitit iste cruorem ; 
Tam bibit hunc avide, quam bibit ante merum. 


Aspice felicem sibi, non tibi, Romule, Sullam - 
Et Marium, si vis, aspice, sed reducem, 
Nec non Antoni civilia bella moventis 
Non semel infectas aspice caede manus, 


1 periit, XY. 


a A knight must possess four hundred thousand sesterces ; . 


Tiberius, as the adopted son of Augustus, had no property. 
See chap. xv. 2. 

> That is, not even a Roman citizen, since an exile lost his 
citizenship ; still less a knight. 

¢ Sulla adopted the surname Felix. 


374 


TIBERIUS 


word or act of his. Finally, a man was put to death 
merely for allowing an honour to be voted him in his 
native town on the same day that honours had 
previously been voted to Augustus. 

LIX. He did so many other cruel and savage 
deeds under the guise of strictness and improvement 
of the public morals, but in reality rather to gratify 
his natural instincts, that some resorted to verses to 
express their detestation of the present ills and a 
warning against those to come : 


* Cruel and merciless man, shall I briefly say all I 
would utter? 
Hang me if even your dam for you affection can 
feel. 


You are no knight. Why so? The hundred thousands 
are lacking ; * 
If you ask the whole tale, you were an exile at 
Rhodes.’ 


You, O Caesar, have altered the golden ages of 
Saturn ; 
For while you are alive, iron they ever will be. 


Nothing for wine cares this fellow, since now ’tis for 
blood he is thirsting ; 
This he as greedily quaffs as before wine without 
water. 


Look, son of Rome, upon Sulla, for himself not for you 
blest and happy,° 
Marius too, if you will, but after capturing Rome ; 
Hands of an Antony see, rousing the strife of the 
people, 
Hands stained with blood not once, dripping again 
and again ; 


375 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


Et dic: Roma perit! regnavit sanguine multo, 
Ad regnum quisquis venit ab exsilio." 


Quae primo, quasi ab impatientibus remediorum ! ac 
non tam ex animi sententia quam bile et stomacho 
fingerentur, volebat accipi dicebatque identidem: 
* Oderint, dum probent." Dein vera plane certaque 
esse ipse fecit fidem. 

LX. In paucis diebus quam Capreas attigit pis- 
catori, qui sibi secretum agenti grandem mullum 
inopinanter obtulerat, perfricari eodem pisce faciem 
iussit, territus quod is a tergo insulae per aspera et 
devia erepsisset ad se; gratulanti autem inter 
poenam, quod non et lucustam, quam praegrandem 
ceperat, obtulisset, lucusta quoque lacerari os im- 
peravit. Militem praetorianum ob subreptum e 
viridiario pavonem capite puniit. In quodam itinere 
lectica, qua vehebatur, vepribus impedita explora- 
torem viae, primarum? cohortium centurionem, | 
stratum humi paene ad necem verberavit. 

LXI. Mox in omne genus crudelitatis erupit num- 
quam deficiente materia, cum primo matris, deinde 
nepotum et nurus, postremo Seiani familiares atque 
etiam notos persequeretur; post cuius interitum vel 
saevissimus exstitit. Quo maxime apparuit, non tam 


1 remediorum, Graevius ; remedium, mss. 
? primarum, mss. ; praetoriarum, Lipsius. 


a Of. Calig. xxx. 1. 
> If the text is correct, primae cohortes would seem. to refer 
to the praetorians. 


376 


TIBERIUS 


Then say: Rome is no more! He ever has reigned 
with great bloodshed 
Whoso made himself king, coming from banish- 
ment home." 


These at first he wished to be taken as the work of 
those who were impatient of his reforms, voicing 
not so much their real feelings as their anger and 
vexation; and he used to say from time to time: 
“Let them hate me, provided they respect my 
conduct." ^ Later he himself proved them only too 
true and unerring. 

LX. A few days after he reached Capreae and was 
by himself, a fisherman appeared unexpectedly and 
offered him a huge mullet; whereupon in his alarm 
that the man had clambered up to him from the back 
of the island over rough and pathless rocks, he had 
the poor fellow’s face scrubbed with the fish. And 
because in the midst of his torture the man thanked 
his stars that he had not given the emperor an 
enormous crab that he had caught, Tiberius had his 
face torn with the crab also. He punished a soldier 
of the praetorian guard with death for having stolen 
a peacock from his preserves. When the litter in 
which he was making a trip was stopped by brambles, 
he had the man who went ahead to clear the way, a 
centurion of the first cohorts,® stretched out on the 
ground and flogged half to death. 

LXI. Presently he broke out into every form of 
cruelty, for which he never lacked occasion, venting 
it on the friends and even the acquaintances, first 
of his mother, then of his grandsons and grand- 
daughter, and finally of Sejanus. After the death of 
Sejanus he was more cruel than ever, which showed 


371 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


ipsum ab Seiano concitari solitum, quam Seianum 
quaerenti occasiones sumministrasse ; etsi com- 
mentario, quem de vita sua summatim breviterque 
composuit, ausus est scribere Seianum se punisse, 
quod comperisset furere adversus liberos Germanici 
filii sui ; quorum ipse alterum suspecto iam, alterum 
oppresso demum Seiano interemit. 

Singillatim crudeliter facta eius exsequi longum 
est; genera, velut exemplaria saevitiae, enumerare 
sat erit. Nullus a poena hominum cessavit dies, ne 
religiosus quidem ac sacer; animadversum in quos- 
dam ineunte anno novo. Accusati damnatique multi 
cum liberis atque etiam a liberis suis. Interdictum 
ne capite damnatos propinqui lugerent. Decreta 
accusatoribus praecipua praemia, nonnumquam et 
testibus. Nemini delatorum fides abrogata. Omne 
crimen pro capitali receptum, etiam paucorum sim- 
pliciumque verborum. Obiectum est poetae, quod in 
tragoedia Agamemnonem probris lacessisset ; obiec- 
tum et historico, quod Brutum Cassiumque ultimos 
Romanorum dixisset ; animadversum statim in 
auctores scriptaque abolita, quamvis probarentur 
ante aliquot annos etiam Augusto audiente recitata. 
Quibusdam custodiae traditis non modo studendi 
solacium ademptum, sed etiam sermonis et conloqui 
usus. Citati ad causam dicendam partim se domi 
vulneraverunt certi damnationis et ad vexationem 


378 


TIBERIUS 


that his favourite was not wont to egg him on, but 
on the contrary gave him the opportunities which 
he himself desired. Yet in a brief and sketchy auto- 
biography which he composed he had the assurance 
to write that he had punished Sejanus because he 
found him venting his hatred on the children of his 
son Germanicus. Whereas in fact he had himself 
put one of them to death after he had begun to 
suspect Sejanus and the other after the latter's 
downfall. : 

It is a long story to run through his acts of cruelty 
in detail; it will be enough to mention the forms 
which they took, as samples of his barbarity. Not a 
day passed without an execution, even those that 
were sacred and holy; for he put some to death 
even on New Years day. Many were accused and 
condemned with their children and even by their 
children. The relatives of the victims were forbidden 
to mourn for them. Special rewards were voted the 
accusers and sometimes even the witnesses. The 
word of no informer was doubted. Every crime was 
treated as capital, even the utterance of a few simple 
words. A poet was charged with having slandered 
Agamemnon in a tragedy, and a writer of history of 
having called Brutus and Cassius the last of the 
Romans. The writers were at once put to death and 
their works destroyed, although they had been read 
with approval in public some years before in the pre- 
sence of Augustus himself. Some of those who were 
consigned to prison were denied not only the con- 
solation of reading, but even the privilege of conversing 
and talking together. Of those who were cited to 
plead their causes some opened their veins at home, 
feeling sure of being condemned and wishing to avoid 


379 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


ignominiamque vitandam, partim in media curia 
venenum hauserunt ; et tamen conligatis vulneribus 
ac semianimes palpitantesque adhuc in carcerem 
rapti. Nemo punitorum non in! Gemonias abiectus 
uncoque tractus, viginti uno die abiecti tractique, 
inter eos feminae et pueri. Immaturae puellae, quia 
more tradito nefas esset virgines strangulari, vitiatae 
prius a carnifice, deir strangulatae. Mori volentibus 
vis adhibita vivendi. Nam mortem adeo leve sup- 
plicium putabat, ut cum audisset unum e reis, 
Carnulum nomine, anticipasse eam, exclamaverit: 
* Carnulus me evasit." Et in recognoscendis custodiis 
precanti cuidam poenae maturitatem, respondit : 
* Nondum tecum in gratiam redii." Annalibus suis 
vir consularis inseruit, frequenti quodam convivio, 
cui et ipse affuerit, interrogatum eum subito et clare 
a quodam nano astante mensae inter copreas, cur 
Paconius maiestatis reus tam diu viveret, statim 
quidem petulantiam linguae obiurgasse, ceterum 
post paucos dies scripsisse senatui, ut de poena 
Paconi quam primum statueret. 

LXIl. Auxit intenditque saevitiam exacerbatus 
indicio de morte filii sui Drusi. Quem cum morbo et 
intemperantia perisse existimaret, ut tandem veneno 
interemptum fraude Livillae uxoris atque Seiani 
cognovit, neque tormentis neque supplicio cuiusquam 

1 in, M ; the other mas. have et in, 


380 


TIBERIUS 


annoyance and humiliation, while others drank poison 
in full view of the senate; yet the wounds of the 
former were bandaged and they were hurried half- 
dead, but still quivering, to the prison. Every one 
of those who were executed was thrown out upon the 
Stairs of Mourning and dragged to the Tiber with 
hooks, as many as twenty being so treated in a single 
day, including women and children. Since ancient 
usage made it impious to strangle maidens, young 
girls were first violated by the executioner and then 
strangled. ‘Those who wished to die were forced to 
live; for he thought death so light a punishment 
that when he heard that one of the accused, Carnulus 
by name, had anticipated his execution, he cried : 
* Carnulus has given me the slip" ; ; [and when he was 
inspecting the prisons and a man begged for a speedy 
death, he replied: *I have not yet become your 
friend. "AVÀn ex-consul has recorded in his Annals 
that once at a large dinner-party, at which the writer 
himself was present, Tiberius was suddenly asked in a 
loud voice by one of the dwarfs that stood beside the 
table among the jesters why Paconius, who was 
charged with treason, remained so long alive; that the 
emperor at the time chided him for his saucy tongue, 
but a few days later wrote to the senate to decide as 
soon as possible about the execution of Paconius.| 
LXII. He increased his cruelty and carried it to 
greater lengths, exasperated by what he learned 
about the death of his son Drusus. At first sup- 
posing that he had died of disease, due to his bad 
habits, on finally learning that he had been poisoned 
by the treachery of his wife Livilla and Sejanus, 
there was no one whom Tiberius spared from torment 
and death. Indeed, he gave himself up so utterly for 


381 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


pepercit, soli huic cognitioni adeo per totos dies 
deditus et intentus, ut Rhodiensem hospitem, quem 
familiaribus litteris Romam evocarat,! advenisse sibi 
nuntiatum torqueri sine mora iusserit, quasi aliquis 
ex necessariis quaestioni adesset, deinde errore 
detecto et occidi, ne vulgaret iniuriam. Carnificinae 
eius ostenditur locus Capreis, unde damnatos post 
longa et exquisita tormenta praecipitari coram se in 
mare iubebat, excipiente classiariorum manu et contis 
atque remis elidente cadavera, ne cui residui spiritus 
quicquam inesset. Excogitaverat autem inter genera 
cruciatus etiam, ut larga meri potione per fallaciam 
oneratos, repente veretris deligatis, fidicularum simul 
urinaeque tormento distenderet. Quod nisi eum et . 
mors praevenisset et Thrasyllus consulto, ut aiunt, 
differre quaedam spe longioris vitae compulisset, 
plures aliquanto necaturus ac ne reliquis quidem 
nepotibus parsurus creditur, cum et Gaium suspectum 
haberet et Tiberium ut ex adulterio conceptum 
aspernaretur. Nec abhorret a vero; namque iden- 
tidem felicem Priamum vocabat, quod superstes 
omnium suorum exstitisset. 

LXIII. Quam inter haec non modo invisus ac 
detestabilis, sed praetrepidus quoque atque etiam 
contumelis obnoxius vixerit, multa indicia sunt. 

1 evocarat, c (Beroaldus); evocabat, Q. 


382 


TIBERIUS 


whole days to this investigation and was so wrapped 
up in it, that when he was told of the arrival of a 
host of his from Rhodes, whom he had invited to Rome 
in a friendly letter, he had him put to the torture at 
once, supposing that someone had come whose testi- 
mony was important for the case. On discovering 
his mistake, he even had the man put to death, 
to keep him from giving publicity to the wrong 
done him. 

At Capreae they still point out the scene of his 
executions, from which he used to order that those 
who had been condemned after long and exquisite 
tortures be cast headlong into the sea before his 
eyes, while a band of marines waited below for the 
bodies and broke their bones with boathooks and 
oars, to prevent any breath of life from remaining in 
them. Among various forms of torture he had 
devised this one: he would trick men into loading 
themselves with copious draughts of wine, and then 
on a sudden tying up their private parts, would 
torment them at the same time by the torture of 
the cords and of the stoppage of their water. And 
had not death prevented him, and Thrasyllus, pur- 
posely it is said, induced him to put off some things 
through hope of a longer life, it is believed that still 
more would have perished, and that he would not 
even have spared the rest of his grandsons; for he had 
his suspicions of Gaius and detested Tiberius as the 
fruit of adultery. And this is highly probable, for 
he used at times to call Priam happy, because he 
had outlived all his kindred. 

LXIII. Many things go to show, not only how 
hated and execrable he was all this time, but also that 
he lived a life of extreme fear and was even exposed 


383 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


Haruspices secreto ac sine testibus consuli vetuit. 
Vicina vero urbi oracula etiam disicere conatus est, 
sed maiestate Praenestinarum sortium territus 
destitit, cum obsignatas devectasque Romam non 
repperisset in arca nisi relata rursus ad templum. 
Unum et alterum consulares oblatis provinciis non 
ausus a se dimittere usque eo detinuit, donec succes- 
sores post aliquot annos praesentibus daret, cum 
interim manente officii titulo etiam delegaret plurima 
assidue, quae illi per legatos et adiutores suos ex- 
sequenda curarent. 

LXIV. Nurum ac nepotes numquam aliter post 
damnationem quam catenatos obsutaque lectica loco 
movit, prohibitis per militem obviis ac viatoribus 
respicere usquam vel consistere. 

LXV. Seianum res novas molientem, quamvis iam 
et natalem eius publice celebrari et imagines aureas 
coli passim videret, vix tandem et astu magis ac dolo 
quam principali auctoritate subvertit. Nam primo, 
ut a se per speciem honoris dimitteret, collegàm sibi 
assumpsit in quinto consulatu, quem longo intervallo 
absens ob id ipsum susceperat. Deinde spe affinitatis 
ac tribuniciae potestatis deceptum  inopinantem 
criminatus est pudenda miserandaque oratione, cum 
inter alia patres conscriptos precaretur, mitterent 


- — 


a Of Fortuna Primigenia. ^ Cf. chap. xxvi. P 


384 


TIBERIUS 


to insult. He forbade anyone to consult soothsayers 
secretly and without witnesses. Indeed, he even 
attempted to do away with the oracles near the city, 
but forbore through terror at the divine power of the 
Praenestine lots ; for though he had them sealed up 
in a chest and brought to Rome, he could not find 
them until the box was taken back to the temple. 
He had assigned provinces to one or two ex-consuls, 
of whom he did not dare to lose sight, but he detained 
them at Rome and finally appointed their successors 
several years later without their having left the city. 
In the meantime they retained their titles, and he 
even continued to assign them numerous commissions, 
to execute through their deputies and assistants. 

LXIV. After the exile of his daughter-in-law and 
grandchildren he never moved them anywhere except 
in fetters and in a tightly closed litter, while a guard 
of soldiers kept any who met them on the road 
from looking at them or even from stopping as they 
went by. 

LXV. When Sejanus was plotting revolution, 


although he saw the man’s birthday publicly cele- - 


brated and his golden statues honoured everywhere, 
yetit was with difficulty that he at.last overthrew 
him, rather by craft and deceit than by his imperial 
authority. First of all, to remove him from his 
person under colour of showing him honour, he chose 
him as his colleague in a fifth consulship,^ which, with 
this very end in view, he assumed after a long in- 
terval while absent from the city. Then beguiling 
him with hope of marriage into the imperial family 
and of the tribunicial power, he accused him when 
he least expected it in a shameful and pitiable 
speech, begging the senators among other things 


385 
VOL. I. cc 


981 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


alterum e consulibus, qui se senem et solum in 
conspectum eorum cum aliquo militari praesidio 
perduceret. Sic quoque diffidens tumultumque 
metuens Drusum nepotem, quem vinculis adhuc 
Romae continebat, solvi, si res posceret, ducemque 1 
constitui praeceperat. Aptatis etiam navibus ad 
quascumque legiones meditabatur fugam, specula- 
bundus ex altissima rupe identidem signa, quae, 
ne nuntii morarentur, tolli procul, ut quidque factum 
foret, mandaverat. Verum et oppressa coniuratione 
Seiani nihilo securior aut constantior per novem 
proximos menses non egressus est villa, quae vocatur 
Ionis.? 

LXVI. Urebant insuper anxiam mentem varia 
undique convicia, nullo non damnatorum omne probri 
genus coram vel per libellos in orchestra positos 
ingerente. Quibus quidem diversissime adficiebatur, 
modo ut prae pudore ignota et celata cuncta cuperet, 
nonnumquam eadem contemneret et proferret ultro 
atque vulgaret. Quin et Artabani Parthorum regis 
laceratus est litteris parricidia et caedes et ignaviam 
et luxuriam obicientis monentisque, ut voluntaria 
morte maximo iustisimoque civium odio quam 
primum satis faceret. 


! ducem (omitting que), M ; et ducem, Salmasius. 
? Iovis, Lg and the editors; Iunonis, Heinsius. 


* Since Tiberius and Sejanus were consuls for the year, 
the reference is to consules suffecti, appointed to succeed to 
the honour for a part of the year, probably from July Ist. 

^ A somewhat similar method of telegraphy is mentioned 


396 


Wnétill Jasa.. 


TIBERIUS 


to send one of the consuls? to bring him, a lonely 
old man, into their presence under military protec- 
tion. Even then distrustful and fearful of an out- 
break, he had given orders that his grandson Drusus, 
whom he still kept imprisoned in Rome, should be 
set free, if occasion demanded, and made commander- 
in-chief. He even got ships ready and thought of - 
flight to some of the légions, constantly watching 
from a high cliff for the signals which he had 
ordered to be raised afar off® as each step was 
taken, for fear the messengers should be delayed. 
But even when the conspiracy of Sejanus was crushed, 
he was no whit more confident or courageous, but for 
the next nine months he did not leave the villa 
which is called Io's. 

LXVI. His anxiety of mind became torture 
because of reproaches of all kinds from every quarter, 
since every single one of those whó were condemned 
to death heaped all kinds of abuse upon him, either 
to his face or by billets placed in the orchestra.* 
By these, however, he was most diversely affected, now 
through a sense of shame desiring that they all be 
concealed and kept secret, sometimes scorning them 
and producing them of his own accord and giving them 
publicity. Why, he was even attacked by Artabanus, 
king of the Parthians, who charged him in a letter 
with the murder of his kindred,? with other bloody 
deeds, and with shameless and dissolute living, coun- 
selling him to gratify the intense and just hatred of 
the citizens as soon as possible by a voluntary death. 


at the beginning of the Agamemnon of Aeschylus as the 
means of sending the news of the fall of Troy to Mycenae. 

c Where the senators sat at the theatre; cf. Aug. lv. 

4 For this meaning of parricidium see note on Jul. xlii. 3. 


387 
cc2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


LXVII. Postremo semet ipse pertaesus, tali! 
epistulae principio tantum non summam malorum 
suorum professus est: “ Quid scribam vobis, p. c., aut 
quo modo scribam, aut quid omnino non scribam hoc 
tempore, dii me deaeque peius perdant quam cotidie 


. perire sentio, si scio." 


Existimant quidam praescisse haec eum peritia 
futurorum ac multo ante, quanta se quandoque 
acerbitas et infamia maneret, prospexisse ; ideoque, 
ut imperium inierit, et patris patriae appellationem 
et ne in acta sua iuraretur obstinatissime recusasse, 
ne mox maiore dedecore impar tantis honoribus 
inveniretur. Quod sane ex? oratione eius, quam de 


utraque re habuit, colligi potest; vel cum ait, | 


similem se semper sui futurum nec umquam muta- 
turum mores suos, quam diu sanae mentis fuisset ; 
sed exempli causa cavendum esse, ne se senatus 
in acta cuiusquam obligaret, quia aliquo casu mutari 
posset. Et rursus: | 

“Si quando autem," inquit, “de moribus meis 
devotoque vobis animo dubitaveritis,——quod prius 
quam eveniat, opto ut me supremus dies huic 
mutatae vestrae de me opinioni eripiat—nihil honoris 
adiciet mihi patria appellatio, vobis autem expro- 
brabit aut temeritatem delati mihi eius cognominis 
aut inconstantiam contrarii de me iudicii." 

LXVIII. Corpore fuit amplo atque robusto, statura 
quae iustam excederet; latus ab umeris et pectore, 


1 tali, Muretus ; talis, mss. 
? ex, MT; the other mss. have et ex. 


@ Quoted also by Tac. Ann. 6. 6. 
> That is, the change in his character and its consequences, 


388 


TIBERIUS 


LXVII. At last in utter self-disgust he all but | 


admitted the extremity of his wretchedness in a 
letter beginning as follows^: * If I know what to 
write to you, Fathers of the Senate, or how to write 
it, or what to leave unwritten at present, may all 
gods and goddesses visit me with more utter destruc- 
tion than I feel that I am daily suffering." Some 
think that through his knowledge of the future he 
foresaw this situation and knew long beforehand 
what detestation and ill-repute one day awaited 
him ; and that therefore when he became emperor, 
he positively refused the title of “Father of his 
Country” and to allow the senate to take oath to sup- 
port his acts, for fear that he might presently be found 
undeserving of such honours and thus be the more 
shamed. In fact, this may be gathered from the 
speech which he made regarding these two matters ; 
for example, when he says: “I shall always be 
consistent and never change my ways so long as I 
am in my senses ; but for the sake of precedent the 
senate should beware of binding itself to support the 
acts of any man, since he might through some 
mischance suffer a change." Again: “If you ever 
come to feel any doubt," he says, * of my character 
or of my heartfelt devotion to you (and before that 
happens, I pray that my last day may save me from 
this altered opinion of me), the title of Father of my 
Country wil give me no additional hononr, but 
will he a reproach to you, either for your hasty action 
in conferring the appellation upon me, or for your 
inconsistency in changing your estimate of my 
character." 

LXVIII. He was large and strong of frame, and 
of a stature above the average; broad of shoulders 


389 


82 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK [III 


ceteris quoque membris usque ad imos pedes aequalis 
et congruens; sinistra manu agiliore ac validiore, 
articulis ita firmis, ut recens et integrum malum 
digito terebraret, caput pueri vel etiam adulescentis 
talitro vulneraret. Colore erat candido, capillo pone 
occipitium summissiore ut cervicem etiam obtegeret, 
quod gentile in illo videbatur; facie honesta, in qua 
tamen crebri et subiti tumores, cum praegrandibus 
oculis et qui, quod mirum esset, noctu etiam et 
in tenebris viderent, sed ad breve et cum primum e 
somno  patuissent; deinde rursum  hebescebant. 
Incedebat cervice rigida et obstipa, adducto fere 
vultu, plerumque tacitus, nullo aut rarissimo etiam 
cum proximis sermone eoque tardissimo, nec sine 
molli quadam digitorum gesticulatione. Quae omnia 
ingrata atque arrogantiae plena et animadvertit 
Augustus in eo et excusare temptavit saepe apud 
senatum ac populum professus naturae vitia esse, 
non animi. Valitudine prosperrima usus est, tem- 
pore quidem principatus paene toto prope inlaesa, 
quamvis a tricesimo aetatis anno arbitratu eam suo 
rexerit sine adiumento consiliove medicorum. 

LXIX. Circa deos ac religiones neglegentior, 
quippe addictus mathematicae plenusque persuasionis 
cuncta fato agi, tonitrua tamen praeter modum 
expavescebat et turbatiore caelo numquam non 


d i — —À 2 A ——ÀÀ——— a — à — M —MMÀ — ——À 


* One of the strongest arguments against the truth of the 
tales of his debauchery. 


399 


TIBERIUS 


and chest; well proportioned and symmetrical from 
head to foot. His left hand was the more nimble 
and stronger, and its joints were so powerful that 
he could bore through a fresh, sound apple with 
his finger, and break the head of a boy, or even a 
young man, with a fillip. He was of fair complexion 
and wore his hair rather long at the back, so much 
so as even to cover the nape of his neck; which was 
apparently a family trait. His face was handsome, 
but would break out on a sudden with many pimples. 
His eyes were unusually large and, strange to say, 
had the power of seeing even at night and in the 
dark, but only for a short time when first opened 
after sleep; presently they grew dim-sighted again. 
He strode along with his neck stiff and bent forward, 
usually with a stern countenance and for the most 
part in silence, never or very rarely conversing with 
his companions, and then speaking with great de- 
liberation and with a kind of supple movement of his 
fingers. All of these mannerisms of his, which were 
disagreeable and signs of arrogance, were remarked 
by Augustus, who often tried to excuse them to the 
senate and people by declaring that they were 
natural failings, and not intentional. He enjoyed 
excellent health, which was all but perfect during 
nearly the whole of his reign,* although from the 
thirtieth year of his age he took care of it accord- 
' ing to his own ideas, without the aid or advice of 
physicians. 

LXIX. Although somewhat neglectful of the gods 
and of religious matters, being addicted to astrology 
and firmly convinced that everything was in the 
hands of fate, he was nevertheless immoderately 
afraid of thunder. Whenever the sky was lowering, 


391 


Lo 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


coronam lauream capite gestavit, quod fulmine afflari 
negetur id genus frondis. 

LXX. Artes liberales utriusque generis studio- 
sissime coluit. In oratione Latina secutus est 
Corvinum  Messalam, quem senem adulescens 
observarat. Sed adfectatione et morositate nimia 
obscurabat stilum, ut aliquanto ex tempore quam a 
cura praestantior haberetur. Composuit et carmen 
lyricum, cuius est titulus * Conquestio de morte L. 
Caesaris." ^ Fecit et Graeca poeiata imitatus 
Euphorionem et Rhianum et Parthenium, quibus 
poetis admodum delectatus scripta omnium et 
imagines publicis bibliothecis inter veteres et prae- 
cipuos auctores dedicavit; et ob hoc plerique — 
eruditorum certatim ad eum multa de his ediderunt. 
Maxime tamen curavit notitiam historiae fabularis 
usque ad ineptias atque derisum; nam et gram- 
maticos, quod genus hominum praecipue, ut diximus, 
appetebat, eius modi fere quaestionibus experiebatur : 
* Quae mater Hecubae, quod Achilli nomen inter 
virgines fuisset, quid Sirenes cantare sint solitae." 
Et quo primum die post excessum Augusti curiam 
intravit, quasi pietati simul ac religioni satis facturus 
Minonis exemplo ture quidem ac vino verum sine 
tibicine supplicavit, ut ille olim in morte filii. 

LXXI. Sermone Graeco quamquam alioqui promp- 
tus et facilis, non tamen usque quaque usus est. 
abstinuitque maxime in senatu; adeo quidem, ut 


a See note on Aug. xc. 

ò The grammaticus was a critic and teacher of literature, 
but ‘‘grammarian” has become conventional in this sense, 
as well as in its more restricted meaning. 


392 


EE A 9 — 


TIBERIUS 


he always wore a laurel wreath, because it is said 
that that kind of leaf is not blasted by lightning." 
LXX. He was greatly devoted to liberal studies in 
both languages. In his Latin oratory he followed 
Messala Corvinus, to whom he had given attention in 
his youth, when Messala was an old man. But he so 
obscured his style by excessive mannerisms and ped- 
antry, that he was thought*to speak much better off- 
hand than in a prepared address. He also composed 
a lyric poem, entitled “ A Lament for the Death of 
Lucius Caesar,” and made Greek verses in imitation 
of Euphorion, Rhianus, and Parthenius, poets of 
whom he was very fond, placing their busts in the 
public libraries among those of the eminent writers 
of old; and on that account many learned men vied . 
with one another in issuing commentaries on their 
works and dedicating them to the emperor. Yet his 
special aim was a knowledge of mythology, which 
he carried to a silly and laughable extreme ; for he 
used to test even the grammarians, a class of men in 
whom, as I have said, he was especially interested, 
by questions something like this: “Who was 
Hecuba’s mother?"  * What was the name of 
Achilles among the maidens?” “ What were the 
Sirens in the habit of singing?” Moreover, on the 
first day that he entered the senate after the death 


^ of Augustus, to satisfy at once the, demands of filial 


piety and of religion, he offered sacrifice after the 
example of Minos with incense and wine, but without 
a fluteplayer, as Minos had done in ancient times on 
the death of his son. | 

LXXI. Though he spoke Greek readily and 
fluently, yet he would not use it on all occasions, 
and especially eschewed it in the senate; so much 


393 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


monopolium nominaturus veniam prius postularet, 
quod sibi verbo peregrino utendum esset. Atque 
etiam cum in quodam decreto patrum é«BAypa 
recitaretur, commutandam censuit vocem et pro 
peregrina nostratem requirendam aut, si non reperi- 
retur, vel pluribus et per ambitum verborum rem 
enuntiandam, — Militem quoque Graece testimonium 
interrogatum nisi Latine respondere vetuit. 

LXXII. Bis omnino toto secessus tempore Romam 
redire conatus, semel triremi usque ad proximos nau- 
machiae hortos subvectus est disposita statione per 
ripas Tiberis, quae obviam prodeuntis submoveret, 
iterum Appia usque ad septimum lapidem ; sed pro- 
spectis modo nec aditis urbis moenibus rediit, primo in- 
certum qua de causa, postea ostento territus. Erat ei 
in oblectamentis serpens draco, quem ex consuetu- 
dine manu sua cibaturus cum consumptum a formicis 
invenisset, monitus est ut vim multitudinis caveret. 
Rediens ergo propere Campaniam  Asturae in 
languorem incidit, quo paulum levatus Cerceios 
pertendit. Ac ne quam suspicionem infirmitatis 
daret, castrensibus ludis non tantum interfuit, sed 
etiam missum in harenam aprum iaculis desuper 
petit; statimque latere convulso et, ut exaestuarat, 
afflatus aura in graviorem recidit morbum. Susten- 


a Monopoly,” a Greek word transliterated into Latin; 
see note on chap. xxx. 

6 The Greek word for inlaid figures of metal riveted or 
soldered to cups. There is no exact equivalent in Latin, but 
Cicero twice uses the transliterated form emblema (In Verr. 
4. 49). 

e See Jul, xxxix. 4, 


394 


TIBERIUS 


so that before using the word “ monopolium," * he 
begged pardon for the necessity of employing a 
foreign term. Again, when the word éuBAnpa® was 
read in a decree of the senate, he recommended that 
it be changed and a native word substituted for the 
foreign one; and if one could not be found, that the 
idea be expressed by several words, if necessary, 
and by periphrasis. On another occasion, when a 
soldier was asked in Greek to give testimony, he 
forbade him to answer except in Latin. 

LXXII. Twice only during the whole period of 
his retirement did he try to return to Rome, once 
sailing in a trireme as far as the gardens near the 
artificial lake," after first posting a guard along the 
banks of the Tiber to keep off those who came out to 
meet him ; and again coming up the Appian Way as 
far as the seventh milestone. But he returned after 
merely having a distant view of the city walls, 
without approaching them ; the first time for some 
unknown reason, the second through alarm at a 
_ portent. He had among his pets a serpent, and 

when he was going to feed it from his own hand, as 
his custom was, and discovered that it had been 
devoured by ants, he was warned to beware of the 
power of the multitude. So he went back in haste 
to Campania, fell ill at Astura, but recovering some- 
what kept on to Circeii. To avoid giving any 
suspicion of his weak condition, he not only attended 
the games of the soldiers, but even threw down 
darts from his high seat at a boar which was let into 
the arena. Immediately he was taken with a pain 
in the side, and then being exposed to a draught 
when he was overheated, his illness increased. For 
all that, he kept up for some time, although he con- 


395 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


tavit tamen aliquamdiu, quamvis Misenum usque 
devectus nihil ex ordine cotidiano praetermitteret, ne 
convivia quidem aut ceteras voluptates partim in- 
temperantia partim dissimulatione. Nam Chariclen 
medicum, quod commeatu afuturus e convivio egre- 
diens manum sibi osculandi causa apprehendisset, 
existimans temptatas ab eo venas, remanere ac 
recumbere hortatus est cenamque protraxit. Nec 
abstinuit consuetudine quin tunc quoque instans in 
medio triclinio astante lictore singulos valere dicentis 
appellaret. 

LXXIII. Interim cum in actis senatus legisset 
dimissos ac ne auditos quidem quosdam reos, 
de quibus strictim et nihil aliud quam nominatos ab 
indice scripserat, pro contempto se habitum fremens 
repetere Capreas quoquo modo destinavit, non temere 
quicquam nisi ex tuto ausurus. Sed tempestatibus et 
ingravescente vi morbi retentus paulo post obiit in 
villa Lucullana octavo et septuagesimo aetatis anno, 
tertio et vicesimo imperii, XVII. Kal. Ap. Cn. 
Acerronio Proculo C. Pontio Nigrino! conss. 

Sunt qui putent venenum ei a Gaio datum lentum 
atque tabificum; alii, in remissione fortuitae febris 
cibum desideranti negatum ; nonnulli, pulvinum iniec- 
tum, cum extractum sibi deficienti anulum mox 


1 Nigrino, Torrentius; Nigro, Q. 


396 


TIBERIUS 


tinued his journey as far as Misenum and made no 
change in his usual habits, not even giving up his 
banquets and other pleasures, partly from lack of 
self-denial and partly to conceal his condition. 
Indeed, when the physician Charicles had taken his 
hand to kiss it as he left the dining-room, since he 
was going away on leave of absence, Tiberius, think- 
ing that he was trying to feel his pulse, urged him 
to remain and take his place again, and prolonged 
the dinner to a late hour. Even then he did not 
give up his custom of standing in the middle of the 
dining-room with a lictor by his side and addressing 
all the guests by name as they said farewell. 

LXXIII. Meanwhile, having read in the pro- 
ceedings of the senate that some of those under 
accusation, about whom he had written briefly, 
merely stating that they had been named by an 
informer, had been discharged without a hearing, 
he cried out in anger that he was held in contempt, 
and resolved to return to Capreae at any cost, since 
he would not risk any step except from his place of 
refuge. Detained, however, by bad weather and 
the increasing violence of his illness, he died a little 
later in the villa of Lucullus, in the seventy-eighth 
year of his age and the twenty-third of his reign, on 
the seventeenth day before the Kalends of April, in 
the consulship of Gnaeus Acerronius Proculus and 
Gaius Pontius Nigrinus. } 

Some think that Gaius gave him a slow and 
wasting poison; others that during convalescence 
from an attack of fever food was refused him when 
he asked for it. Some say that a pillow was thrown 
upon his face, when he came to and asked for a 
ring which had been taken from him during a fainting 


397 


Mar, 16, 
37 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


resipiscens requisisset. Seneca eum scribit intellecta 
defectione exemptum anulum quasi alicui traditurum 
parumper tenuisse, dein rursus aptasse digito et com- 
pressa sinistra manu iacuisse diu immobilem ; subito 
vocatis ministris ac nemine respondente consurrexisse 
nec procul a lectulo deficientibus viribus concidisse. 

LXXIV. Supremo natali suo Apollinem Temenitem 
et amplitudinis et artis eximiae, advectum Syracusis ut 
in bibliotheca templi novi poneretur, viderat per 
quietem affirmantem sibi non posse se ab ipso 
dedicari. Et ante paucos quam obiret dies, turris 
Phari terrae motu Capreis concidit. Ac Miseni cinis 
e favilla et carbonibus ad calficiendum triclinium 
inlatis,! exstinctus iam et diu frigidus, exarsit repente 
prima vespera atque in multam noctem pertinaciter 
luxit. 

LXXV. Morte eius ita laetatus est populus, ut ad 
primum nuntium discurrentes pars: “ Tiberium in 
Tiberim !" clamitarent, pars Terram matrem deosque 
Manes orarent, ne mortuo sedem ullam nisi inter 
impios darent, alii uncum et Gemonias cadaveri 
minarentur, exacerbati super memoriam pristinae 
crudelitatis etiam recenti atrocitate. Nam cum 
senatus consulto cautum esset, ut poena damnatorum 
in decimum semper diem differretur, forte accidit ut 
quorundam supplicii dies is esset, quo nuntiatum de 
Tiberio erat. Hos implorantis hominum fidem, quia 


! illatis, ç ; inlatus (illatus), 0 


—— — — € ——À 


* This statue, which took its name from Temenos, a suburb 
of Syracuse, was a celebrated one; cf. Cic. In Verr. 2. 4. 119. 
> Of Augustus, on the western slope of the Palatine Hill. 

* Pharos, the lighthouse at Alexandria, became a general 
term. Cf. euripus, Jul. xxxix. 2. 


398 


—— —— 9 


TIBERIUS 


fit. Seneca writes that conscious of his approaching 
end, he took off the ring, as if to give it to someone, 
but held fast to it for a time; then he put it back 
on his finger, and clenching his left hand, lay for a 
long time motionless; suddenly he called for his 
attendants, and on receiving no response, got up; 
but his strength failed him and he fell dead near the 
couch. 

LXXIV. On his last birthday he dreamt that the 
Apollo of Temenos, a statue of remarkable size and 
beauty, which he had brought from Syracuse to be 
set up in the library of the new temple,’ appeared to 
him in a dream, declaring that it could not be 
dedicated by Tiberius. A few days before his death 
the lighthouse^ at Capreae was wrecked by an earth- 
quake. At Misenum the ashes from the glowing 
coals and embers which had been brought in to 
warm his dining-room, after they had died out and 
been for a long time cold, suddenly blazed up in the 
early evening and glowed without cessation until 
late at night. 

LXXV. The people were so glad of his death, 
that at the first news of it some ran about shouting, 
“Tiberius to the Tiber," while others prayed to 
Mother Earth and the Manes to allow the dead man 
no abode except among the damned. Still others 
threatened his body with the hook and the Stairs of 
Mourning, especially embittered by a recent outrage, 
added to the memory of his former cruelty. It 
had been provided by decree of the senate that the 
execution of the condemned should in all cases 
be put off for ten days, and it chanced that the 
punishment of some fell due on the day when the 
news came about Tiberius. The poor wretches 


399 


21 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK III 


absente adhuc Gaio nemo exstabat qui adiri inter- 
pellarique posset, eustodes, ne quid adversus con- 
stitutum facerent, strangulaverunt abieceruntque 
in Gemonias. Crevit igitur invidia, quasi etiam post 
mortem tyranni saevitia permanente. Corpus ut 
moveri a Miseno coepit, conclamantibus plerisque 
Atellam potius deferendum et in amphitheatro se- 
miustilandum, Romam per milites deportatum est 
crematumque publico funere. 

LXXVI. Testamentum duplex ante biennium 
fecerat, alterum sua, alterum liberti manu, sed eodem 
exemplo, obsignaveratque etiam humillimorum signis. 
Eo testamento heredes aequis partibus reliquit Gaium 
ex Germanico et Tiberium ex Druso nepotes sub- 
stituitque in vicem; dedit et legata plerisque, inter 
quos virginibus Vestalibus, sed et militibus universis 
plebeique Romanae viritim atque etiam separatim 
vicorum magistris. 


* The exact point is not clear. Perhaps an amphitheatre 
was chosen for the sake of ignominy, as well as to furnish 
accommodation for spectators, and that of Atella seems to 
have been the one nearest to Misenum. Or it may have been 
because of Tiberius's failure to entertain the people with 
shows (see chap. xlvii.) that it was proposed to make a farce 
of his funeral in Atella, the home of the popular Atellan 
farces. 


400 


TIBERIUS 


begged the public for protection; but since in the 
continued absence of Gaius there was no one who 
could be approached and appealed to, the jailers, 
fearing to act contrary to the law, strangled them 
and cast out their bodies on the Stairs of Mourning. 
Therefore hatred of the tyrant waxed greater, since 
his cruelty endured even after his death. When the 
funeral procession left Misenum, many cried out that 
the body ought rather to be carried to Atella,* and 
half-burned in the amphitheatre; but it was taken 
to Rome by the soldiers and reduced to ashes with 
ublic ceremonies. 

LXXVI. Two years before his death he had made 
two copies of a will, one in his own hand and the 
other in that of a freedman, but of the same content, 
and had caused them to be signed and sealed by 
persons of the very lowest condition. In this will 
he named his grandsons, Gaius, son of Germanicus, 
and Tiberius, son of Drusus, heirs to equal shares 
of his estate, each to be sole heir in case of the 
other's death. Besides, he gave legacies to several, 
including the Vestal virgins, as well as to each and 
every man of the soldiers and the commons of Rome, 
with separate ones to the masters of the city wards. 


401 
VOL. I. DD 


Hosted by Google 


BOOK IV 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


Dp 2 


LIBER IV 
C. CALIGULA 


I. Germanicus, C. Caesaris pater, Drusi et minoris 
Antoniae filius, a Tiberio patruo adoptatus, quaesturam 
quinquennio ante quam per leges liceret et post eam 
consulatum statim gessit, missusque ad exercitum in 
Germaniam, excessu Augusti nuntiato, legiones uni- 
versas imperatorem Tiberium pertinacissime recusantis 
et sibi summam rei p. deferentis incertum pietate an 
. constantia maiore compescuit atque hoste mox devicto 
triumphavit. Consul deinde iterum creatus ac prius 
quam honorem iniret ad componendum Orientis 
statum expulsus, cum Armeniae regem devicisset, 
Cappadociam in provinciae formam redegisset, annum 
agens aetatis quartum et tricensimum diuturno morbo 
Antiochiae obiit, non sine veneni suspicione. Nam 
praeter livores, qui toto corpore erant, et spumas, quae 
per os fluebant, cremati quoque cor inter ossa in- 
corruptum repertum est, cuius ea natura existimatur, 
ut tinctum veneno igne confici nequeat. 


a That is, without holding the intermediate offices ; the 
interval between his quaestorship and consulship was five 
years. 

b Cf. Tib. xxv. 2. 


404 


BOOK IV 
GAIUS CALIGULA 


I. Germanicus, father of Gaius Caesar, son of 
Drusus and the younger Antonia, after being 
adopted by his paternal uncle Tiberius, held the 
quaestorship five years before the legal age and 
passed directly to the consulship.* When the 
death of Augustus was announced, he was sent 
to the army in Germany, where it is hard to say 
whether his filial piety or his courage was more 
conspicuous ; for although all the legions obstinately 
refused to accept Tiberius as emperor, and offered 
him the rule of the state, he held them to their 
allegiance. And later he won a victory over the 
enemy and celebrated a triumph. Then chosen 
consul for a second time, before he entered on his 
term he was hurried off to restore order in the 
Orient, and after vanquishing the king of Armenia 
and reducing Cappadocia to the form of a province, 
died of a lingering illness at Antioch, in the thirty- 
fourth year of his age. There was some suspicion 
that he was poisoned; for besides the dark spots 
which appeared all over his body and the froth 
which flowed from his mouth, after he had been 
reduced to ashes his heart was found entire among 
his bones; and it is supposed to bea characteristic of 
that organ that when steeped in poison it cannot be 
destroyed by fire. 


405 


4 A.D. 
7 A.D. 
12 a.D, 
14 A.D. 


17 A.D. 
1S a.p. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


ll. Obiit autem, ut opinio fuit, fraude Tiberi, 
ministerio et opera Cn. Pisonis, qui sub idem tempus 
Syriae praepositus, nec dissimulans offendendum sibi 
aut patrem aut filium, quasi plane ita necesse esset, 
etiam aegrum Germanicum gravissimis verborum 
ac rerum acerbitatibus nullo adhibito modo adfecit ; 
propter quae, ut Romam rediit, paene discerptus a 
populo, a senatu capitis damnatus est. 

III. Omnes Germanico corporis animique virtutes, 
et quantas nemini cuiquam, contigisse satis constat : 
formam et fortitudinem egregiam, ingenium in utroque 
eloquentiae doctrinaeque genere praecellens, beni- 
volentiam singularem  conciliandaeque hominum 
gratiae ac promerendi amoris mirum et efficax studium. 
Formae minus congruebat gracilitas crurum, sed ea 
quoque paulatim repleta assidua equi vectatione post 
cibum. Hostem comminus saepe percussit. Oravit 
causas etiam triumphalis ; atque inter cetera studiorum 


monimenta reliquit et comoedias Graecas. Domi © 


forisque civilis, libera ac foederata oppida sine lictori- 
bus adibat. Sicubi clarorum virorum sepulcra cog- 
nosceret, inferias Manibus dabat. Caesorum clade 


Variana veteres ac dispersas reliquias uno tumulo ` 


humaturus, colligere sua manu et comportare primus 
adgressus est. Obtrectatoribus etiam, qualescumque 
et quantacumque de causa nanctus esset, lenis adeo 


a Cf. Tib. lii. 3. 
^ See note on Tib. xxvi. 1. 


406 


ae 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


II. Now the belief was that he met his death 
through the wiles of Tiberius, aided and abetted by 


Gnaeus Piso.” This man had been made governor of 


Syria at about that time, and openly declaring that 
he must give offence either to the father or the son, 
as if there were no alternative, he never ceased to 
show the bitterest enmity towards Germanicus in 
word and deed, even after the latter fell ill. In 
consequence Piso narrowly escaped being torn to 
pieces by the people on his return to Rome, and was 
condemned to death by the senate. 

III. It is the general opinion that Germanicus 
possessed all the highest qualities of body and mind, 
to a degree never equalled by anyone; a handsome 
person, unequalled valour, surpassing ability in the 
oratory and learning of Greece and Rome, un- 
exampled kindliness, and a remarkable desire and 
capacity for winning men's regard and inspiring 
their affection. His legs were too slender for the 
rest of his figure, but he gradually brought them to 
proper proportions by constant horseback riding 
after meals. He often slew a foeman in hand-to-hand 
combat. He pleaded causes even after receiving the 
triumphal regalia; and among other fruits of his 
studies he left some Greek comedies. Unassuming’ 
at home and abroad, he always entered the free and 
federate towns without lictors. Wherever he came 
upon the tombs of distinguished men, he always 
offered sacrifice to their shades. Planning to bury 
in one mound the old and scattered relies of those 
who fell in the overthrow of Varus, he was the first 
to attempt to collect and assemble them with his 
own hand. Even towards his detractors, whosoever 
they were and whatever their motives, he was so 


497 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


et innoxius, ut Pisoni decreta sua rescindenti, 
clientelas divexanti! non prius suscensere in animum 
induxerit, quam veneficiis quoque et devotionibus, 
impugnari se comperisset; ac ne tunc quidem ultra 
progressus, quam ut amicitiam ei more maiorum 
renuntiaret mandaretque domesticis ultionem, si quid 
sibi accideret. 

IV. Quarum virtutum fructum uberrimum tulit, 
sic probatus et dilectus a suis, ut Augustus—omitto 
enim necessitudines reliquas— diu cunctatus an sibi 
successorem destinaret, adoptandum Tiberio dederit ; 
sic vulgo favorabilis, ut plurimi tradant, quotiens 
aliquo adveniret vel sicunde discederet, prae turba 
oceurrentium  prosequentiumve nonnumquam eum 
discrimen vitae adisse, e Germania vero post com- 
pressam seditionem revertenti praetorianas cohortes 
universas prodisse obviam, quamvis pronuntiatum 
esset, ut duae tantum modo exirent, populi autem 
Romani sexum, aetatem, ordinem omnem usque ad 
vicesimum lapidem effudisse se. 

V. Tamen longe maiora et firmiora de eo iudicia in 
morte ac post mortem exstiterunt. Quo defunctus 
est die, lapidata sunt templa, subversae deum arae, 
Lares a quibusdam familiares in publicum abiecti, 
partus coniugum expositi. Quin et barbaros ferunt, 
quibus intestinum quibusque adversus nos bellum 
esset, velut in domestico communique maerore con- 
sensisse ad indutias; regulos quosdam barbam posuisse 


! divexanti, T'orrentius; diu vexanti, mss. 


^ Fuller details are given by Tac. Ann. 2. 69. 5. Such 
spells were often inscribed on leaden tablets (defixiones ; 
plumbers tabulis, Tac.), specimens of which have come down 
to us. 

> See note on Aug. ci. 3. e See note on 7^5. vii. 2. 


408 7 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


mild and lenient, that when Piso was annulling his 
decrees and maltreating his dependents, he could not 
make up his mind to break with him, until he found 
himself assailed also by potions and spells.^ Even 
then he went no farther than formally to renounce 
Piso’s friendship in the old-time fashion, and to bid 


his household avenge him, in case anything should 


befall him.? 

IV. He reaped plentiful fruit from these virtues, 
for he was so respected and beloved by his kindred 
that Augustus (to say nothing of the rest of his 
relatives) after hesitating for a long time whether to 
appoint him his successor, had him adopted by 
Tiberius. He was so popular with the masses, that, 
according to many writers, whenever he came to any 
place or left one, he was sometimes in danger of his 
life from the crowds that met him or saw him off; 
in fact, when he returned from Germany after quell- 
ing the outbreak, all the cohorts of the praetorian 
guard went forth to meet him, although orders had 
been given that only two should go, and the whole 
populace, regardless of age, sex, or rank, poured 
out of Rome as far as the twentieth milestone. 

V. Yet far greater and stronger tokens of regard 
were shown at the time of his death and immediately 
afterwards. On the day when he passed away the 
temples were stoned and the altars of the gods thrown 
down, while some flung their household gods into the 
street and cast out their newly born children. Even 
barbarian peoples, so they say, who were engaged in 
war with us or with one another, unanimously con- 
sented to a truce, as if all in common had suffered a 
domestic tragedy. It is said that some princes put 
off their beards and had their wives’ heads shaved, as 


409 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


et uxorum capita rasisse ad indicium maximi luctus ; 
regum etiam regem et exercitatione venandi et 
convictu megistanum abstinuisse, quod apud Parthos 
iustiti ! instar est. | 

“VI. Romae quidem, cum ad primam famam vali- 
tudinis attonita et maesta civitas sequentis nuntios 
opperiretur, et repente iam vesperi incertis auctoribus 
convaluisse tandem percrebruisset, passim cum lumini- 
bus et victimis in Capitolium concursum est ac paene 
revolsae templi fores, ne quid gestientis vota reddere 
moraretur, expergefactus e somno Tiberius gratu- 
lantium vocibus atque undique concinentium : 


* Salva Roma, salva patria, salvus est Germanicus." 


Et ut demum fato functum palam factum est, non 
solaciis ullis, non edictis inhiberi luctus publicus 
potuit duravitque etiam per festos Decembris mensis 
dies. Auxit gloriam desideriumque defuncti et 
atrocitas insequentium temporum, cunctis nec temere 
opinantibus reverentia eius ac metu repressam Tiberi 
saevitiam, quae mox eruperit. 

VII. Habuit in matrimonio Agrippinam, M. 
Agrippae et Iuliae filiam, et ex? ea novem liberos 
tulit; quorum duo infantes adhuc rapti, unus iam 
puerascens insigni festivitate, cuius effigiem habitu 
Cupidinis in aede Capitolinae Veneris Livia dedicavit, 

1 justicii IQ ; the other mss. have iusti. 
2 et ex TT; the other mas. have ex only. 


* A title originally applied to the king of Persia and trans- 
ferred to the king of the Parthians. 
^ The Saturnalia, see Index and cf. note on 4g. lxxi. 1. 


419 


——— 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


a token of the deepest mourning; that even the king 
of kings^ suspended his exercise at hunting and 
the banquets with his grandees, which among the 
Parthians is a sign of public mourning. 

VI. At Rome when the community, in grief and 
consternation at the first report of his illness, was 
awaiting further news, and suddenly after nightfall 
a report at last spread abroad, on doubtful authority, 
that he had recovered, a general rush was made from 
every side to .the Capitol with torches and victims, 
and the temple gates were all but torn off, that 
nothing might hinder them in their eagerness to pay 
their vows. Tiberius was roused from sleep by the 
cries of the rejoicing throng, who all united in sing- 
ing :— | 
* Safe is Rome, safe too our country, for Germanicus 

is safe." 


But when it was at last made known that he was 
no more, the public grief could be checked neither 
by any consolation nor edict, and it continued even - 
during the festal days of the month of December.’ 

The fame of the deceased and regret for his loss 
were increased by the horror of the times which 
followed, since all believed, and with good reason, 
that the cruelty of Tiberius, which soon burst forth, 
had been held in check through his respect and awe 
for Germanicus. 

VII. He had to wife Agrippina, daughter of 
Marcus Agrippa and Julia, who bore him nine 
children. Two of these were taken off when they 
were still in infancy, and one just as he was reaching 
the age of boyhood, a charming child, whose statue, 
in the guise of Cupid, Livia dedicated in the temple 


4II 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


Augustus in cubiculo suo positam, quotiensque in- 
troiret, exosculabatur ; ceteri superstites patri fuerunt, 
tres sexus feminini, Agrippina Drusilla Livilla, con- 
tinuo triennio natae ; totidem mares, Nero et Drusus 
et C. Caesar. Neronem et Drusum senatus Tiberio 
criminante hostes iudicavit. 

VIII. C. Caesar natus est pridie Kal. Sept. patre 
suo et C. Fonteio Capitone coss. Ubi natus sit, in- 
certum diversitas tradentium facit. Cn. Lentulus 
Gaetulicus Tiburi genitum scribit, Plinius Secundus 
in Treveris vico Ambitarvio supra Confluentes ; addit 
etiam pro argumento aras ibi ostendi inscriptas 
OB AGRIPPINAE PVERPERIVM.  Versiculi imperante mox 
eo divulgati apud hibernas legiones procreatum 
indicant : 

“In castris natus, patriis nutritus in armis, 
Iam designati principis omen erat." 


Ego in actis Anti editum invenio. Gaetulicum refellit 
Plinius quasi mentitum per adulationem, ut ad laudes 
iuvenis gloriosique principis aliquid etiam ex urbe 
Herculi sacra sumeret, abusumque audentius men- 
dacio, quod ante annum fere natus Germanico filius 
Tiburi fuerat, appellatus et ipse C. Caesar, de cuius 
amabili pueritia immaturoque obitu supra diximus, 
Plinium arguit ratio temporum. Nam qui res Augusti 


4 See Tib, liv. 

> The acta publica or acta, diurna, an official publication of 
important events. 

¢ Chap. vii. 


412 


seer m AI ILL d ta 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


of the Capitoline Venus, while Augustus had another 
placed in his bed chamber and used to kiss it fondly 
whenever he entered the room. The other children 
survived their father, three girls, Agrippina, Drusilla, 
and Livilla, born in successive years, and three boys, 
Nero, Drusus, and Gaius Caesar. Nero and Drusus 
were adjudged public enemies by the senate on the 
accusation of Tiberius. 

VIII. Gaius Caesar was born the day before the 
Kalends of September in the consulship of his father 
and Gaius Fonteius Capito. Conflicting testimony 
makes his birthplace uncertain. Gnaeus Lentulus 
Gaetulicus writes that he was born at Tibur, Plinius 
Secundus among the Treveri, in a village called 
Ambitarvium above the Confluence. Pliny adds as 
proof that altars are shown there, inscribed “ For 
the Delivery of Agrippina.” Verses which were in 
circulation soon after he became emperor indicate 
that he was begotten in the winter-quarters of the 
legions : 


* He who was born in the camp and reared mid the 
arms of his country, 
Gave at the outset a sign that he was fated to 
rule." 


I myself find in the gazette^ that he first saw the 
light at Antium. Gaetulicus is shown to be wrong 
by Pliny, who says that he told a flattering lie, to add 
some lustre to the fame of a young and vainglorious 
prince from the city sacred to Hercules; and that 
he lied with the more assurance because Germanicus 
really did have a son born to him at Tibur, also 
called Gaius Caesar, of whose lovable disposition and 
untimely death I have already spoken.^ Pliny has 


413 


Aug. 31, 
12 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


memoriae mandarunt, Germanicum exacto consulatu 
in Galliam missum consentiunt iam nato Gaio. Nec 
Plini opinionem inscriptio arae quicquam adiuverit, 
cum Agrippina bis in ea regione filias enixa sit, et 
qualiscumque partus sine ullo sexus discrimine puer- 
perium vocetur, quod antiqui etiam puellas pueras, 
sicut et pueros puellos dictitarent. Exstat et Augusti 
epistula, ante paucos quam obiret menses ad Agrippi- 
nam neptem ita scripta de Gaio hoc—neque enim 
quisquam iam alius infans nomine pari tunc supere- 
rat: * Puerum Gaium XV. Kal. Iun. si dii volent, 
ut ducerent Talarius et Asillius, heri cum iis con- 
stitui. Mitto praeterea cum eo ex servis meis 
medicum, quem scripsi Germanico si vellet ut 
retineret. Valebis, mea Agrippina, et dabis operam 
ut valens pervenias ad Germanicum tuum." Abunde 
parere arbitror non potuisse ibi nasci Gaium, quo 
prope bimulus demum perductus ab urbe sit. Versi- 
culorum quoque fidem eadem haec elevant et eo 


facilius, quod ii sine auctore sunt. Sequenda est 
igitur, quae sola! restat et publici instrumenti 


auctoritas, praesertim cum Gaius Antium omnibus 
semper locis atque secessibus praelatum non aliter 
quam natale solum dilexerit tradaturque etiam sedem 
ac domicilium imperii taedio urbis transferre eo de- 
stinasse. 

IX. Caligulae cognomen castrensi ioco? traxit, 
quia manipulario habitu inter milites educabatur. 


1 The mss. have auctor after sola. 
2 ioco, Beroaldus ; loco, 2. 


^ ffLittle Boots" (though really singular number). The 
caliga, or half-boot, was regularly worn by the soldiers. 


414 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


erred in his chronology; for the historians of 
Augustus agree that Germanicus was not sent to 
Germany until the close of his consulship, when 
Gaius was already born. Moreover, the inscription 
on the altar adds no strength to Pliny’s view, for 
Agrippina twice gave birth to daughters in that 
region, and any childbirth, regardless of sex, is called 
puerperium, since the men of old called girls puerae, 
just as they called boys pueli. Furthermore, we 
have a letter written by Augustus to his grand- 
daughter Agrippina, a few months before he died, 
about the Gaius in question (for no other child of the 
name was still alive at that time), reading as follows: 
* Yesterday I arranged with Talarius and Asillius to 
bring your boy Gaius on the fifteenth day before the 
Kalends of June, if it be the will of the gods. I 
send with him besides one of my slaves who is a 
physician, and I have written Germanicus to keep 
him if he wishes. Farewell, my own Agrippina, 
and take care to come in good health to your 
Germanicus.”’ 

I think it is clear enough that Gaius could not have 


been born in a place to which he was first taken from 


Rome when he was nearly two years old. This letter 
also weakens our confidence in the verses, the more 
so because they are anonymous. We must then ac- 
cept the only remaining testimony, that of the public 
record, particularly since Gaius loved Antium as if it 
were his native soil, always preferring it to all other 
places of retreat, and even thinking, it is said, of 
transferring thither the seat and abode of the empire 
through weariness of Rome. 

IX. His surname Caligula% he derived from a joke 
of the troops, because he was brought up in their 


415 


May 18, 
14 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


Apud quos quantum praeterea per hanc nutrimen- 
torum consuetudinem amore et gratia valuerit, 
maxime cognitum est, cum post excessum Augusti 
tumultuantis et in furorem usque praecipites solus 
haud dubie ex conspectu suo flexit. Non enim 
prius destiterunt, quam ablegari! eum ob seditionis 
periculum et in proximam civitatem demandari 
animadvertissent ; tunc demum ad paenitentiam versi 
reprenso ac retento vehiculo invidiam quae sibi fieret 
deprecati sunt. 

X. Comitatus est patrem et Syriaca expeditione. 
Unde reversus primum in matris, deinde ea relegata 
in Liviae Augustae proaviae suae contubernio mansit ; 
quam defunctam praetextatus etiam tunc pro rostris 
laudavit. Transitque ad Antoniam aviam et unde- 
vicensimo aetatis anno accitus Capreas a Tiberio 
uno atque eodem die togam sumpsit barbamque 
posuit, sine ullo honore qualis contigerat tirocinio 
fratrum eius. Hic omnibus insidiis temptatus elicien- 
tium ? cogentiumque se ad querelas nullam umquam 
occasionem dedit, perinde obliterato suorum casu ac 
si nihil cuiquam accidisset, quae vero ipse pateretur 
incredibili dissimulatione transmittens tantique in 
avum et qui iuxta erant obsequii, ut non immerito sit 
dictum nec servum meliorem ullum nec deteriorem 
dominum fuisse. 

XI. Naturam tamen saevam atque probrosam ne? 


1 ablegari, GQ ; the other mas. have oblegari, | 

2 elicientium, 737; elicentium, XTIQ; the other mss, 
have et licentium. 

* ne, Gc ; the other mas. have nec. 


416 


GAIUS CALIGULA | 


midst in the dress of a common soldier. To what ex- 
tent besides he won their love and devotion by being 
reared in fellowship with them is especially evident 
from the fact that when they threatened mutiny after 
the death of Augustus and were ready for any act of 
madness, the mere sight of Gaius unquestionably 
calmed them, For they did not become quiet until they 
saw that he was being spirited away because of the 
danger from their outbreak and taken for protection 
to the nearest town. Then at last they became 
contrite, and laying hold of the carriage and stopping 
it, begged to be spared the disgrace which was being 
put upon them. 

X. He attended his father also on his expedition to 
Syria. On his return from there he first lived with 
his mother and after her banishment, with his great- 
grandmother Livia ; and when Livia died, though he 
was not yet of age, he spoke her eulogy from the rostra. 
Then he fell to the care of his grandmother Antonia 
and in the nineteenth year of his age he was called 
to Capreae by Tiberius, on thé same day assuming 
the gown of manhood and shaving his first beard, 
but without any such ceremony as.had attended the 
coming of age of his brothers. Although at Capreae 
every kind of wile was resorted to by those who tried 
to lure him or force him to utter complaints, he never 
gave them any satisfaction, ignoring the ruin of his 
kindred as if nothing at all had happened, passing 
over his own ill-treatment with an incredible pretence 
of indifference, and so obsequious towards his grand- 
father and his household, that it was well said of him 
that no one had ever been a better slave or a worse 
master. 

XI. Yet even at that time he could not control 


7 417 
VOL. I. E E 


29 A.D, 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


tunc quidem inhibere poterat, quin et animadversioni- 
bus poenisque ad supplicium datorum cupidissime 
interesset et ganeas atque adulteria capillamento 
celatus et veste longa noctibus obiret ac scaenicas 
saltandi canendique artes studiosissime appeteret, fa- 
cile id sane Tiberio patiente, si per has mansuefieri 
posset ferum eius ingenium. Quod sagacissimus senex 
ita prorsus perspexerat, ut aliquotiens praedicaret 
exitio suo omniumque Gaium vivere et se na- 
tricem! populo Romano, Phaethontem orbi terrarum 
educare. 

XII. Non ita multo post luniam Claudillam M. 
Silani nobilissimi viri filiam duxit uxorem. Deinde 
augur in locum fratris sui Drusi destinatus, prius 
quam inauguraretur ad pontificatum traductus est 
insigni testimonio pietatis atque indolis, cum deserta 
desolataque reliquis subsidiis aula, Seiano hoste ? sus- 
pecto mox et oppresso, ad spem successionis paulatim 
admoveretur. Quam quo magis confirmaret, amissa 
Iunia ex partu Enniam Naeviam, Macronis uxorem, 
qui tum praetorianis cohortibus praeerat, sollicitavit 
ad stuprum, pollicitus et matrimonium suum, si 
potitus imperio fuisset; deque ea re et iure iurando 
et chirographo cavit. Per hanc insinuatus Macroni 
veneno Tiberium adgressus est, ut quidam opinan- 
tur, spirantique adhuc detrahi anulum et, quoniam 
suspicionem retinentis dabat, pulvinum iussit inici 


1 The mss. have the gloss serpentis id genus after natricem, 
2 hoste, T; vete, M ; vetere, G; ve tunc, LP’ (ne, L); 
hoste tunc, OP?7. 


418 | 


rr  —— —— — — — - 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


his natural cruelty and viciousness, but he was a most 
eager witness of the tortures and executions of those 
who suffered punishment, revelling at night in glut- 
tony and adultery, disguised in a wig and a long robe, 
passionately devoted besides to the theatrical arts of 
dancing and singing, in which Tiberius very willingly 
indulged him, in the hope that through these his savage 
nature might be softened. This last was so clearly 
evident to the shrewd old man, that he used to say 
now and then that to allow Gaius to live would 
prove the ruin of himself and of all men, and that 
he was rearing a viper for the Roman people and a 
Phaethon for the world. 

XII. Not so very long afterward Gaius took to 
wife Junia Claudilla, daughter of Marcus Silanus, a 
man of noble rank. Then appointed augur in place 
of his brother Drusus, before he was invested with 
the office he was advanced to that of pontiff, with 
strong commendation of his dutiful conduct and 
general character; for since the court was deserted 
and deprived of its other supports, after Sejanus had 
been suspected of hostile designs and presently put 
out of the way, he was little by little encouraged to 
look forward to the succession. To have a better 
chance of realising this, after losing Julia in child- 
birth, he seduced Ennia Naevia, wife of Macro, who 
at that time commanded the praetorian guard, even 
promising to marry her if he became emperor, and 
guaranteeing this promise by an oath and a written 
contract. Having through her wormed himself, into 
Macro’s favour, he poisoned Tiberius, as some think, 
and ordered that his ring be taken from him while he 
still breathed, and then suspecting that he was trying 
to hold fast to it, that a pillow be put over his face ; 


419 
EE 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


atque etiam fauces manu sua oppressit, liberto, qui 
ob atrocitatem facinoris exclamaverat, confestim in 
crucem acto. Nec abhorret a veritate, cum sint 
quidam auctores, ipsum postea etsi non de perfecto, 
at certe de cogitato quondam parricidio professum ; 
gloriatum enim assidue in commemoranda sua pietate, 
ad ulciscendam necem matris et fratrum introisse se 
cum pugione cubiculum Tiberi dormientis et miseri- 
cordia correptum abiecto ferro recessisse; nec illum, 
quanquam sensisset, aut inquirere quicquam aut 
exsequi ausum. l 

XIII. Sic imperium adeptus, populum Romanum, 
vel dicam hominum genus, voti compotem fecit, 
exoptatissimus princeps maximae parti provincialium 
ac militum, quod infantem plerique cognoverant, sed 
et universae plebi urbanae ob memoriam Germanici 
patris miserationemque prope afflictae domus. Itaque 
ut a Miseno movit quamvis lugentis habitu et funus 
Tiberi prosequens, tamen inter altaria et victimas 
ardentisque taedas densissimo et laetissimo obviorum 
agmine incessit, super fausta nomina **sidus" et 


? 


* pullum" et *pupum" et “alumnum” appellan- 
tium. | | 

XIV. Ingressoque urbem, statim consensu senatus 
et irrumpentis in curiam turbae, inrita Tiberi volun- 
tate, qui testamento alterum nepotem suum praetex- 


420 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


or even strangled the old man with his own hand, 
immediately ordering the crucifixion of a freedman 
who cried out at the awful deed. And this is likely 
enough ; for some writers say that Caligula himself 
later admitted, not it is true that he had committed 
parricide, but that he had at least meditated it at 
one time; for they say that he constantly boasted, in 
speaking of his filial piety, that he had entered the 
bedchamber of the sleeping Tiberius dagger in hand, 
to avenge the death of his mother and brother; but 


that, seized with pity, he threw down the dagger and 


went out again ; and that though Tiberius knew of 
this, he had never dared to make any inquiry or take 
any action. 

XIII. By thus gaining the throne he fulfilled the 
highest hopes of the Roman people, or I may say of 
all mankind, since he was the prince most earnestly 
desired by the great part of the provincials and 
soldiers, many of whom had known him in his 
infancy, as well as by the whole body of the city 
populace, because of the memory of his father 
Germanicus and pity for a family that was all but 


extinct. Accordingly, when he set out from Misenum, 


though he was in mourning garb and escorting the 
body of Tiberius, yet his progress was marked by 
altars, victims, and blazing torches, and he was met 
by a dense and joyful throng, who called him besides 
other propitious names their “star,” their * chick," 
their * babe," and their “ nursling." 

XIV. When he entered the city, full and absolute 
power was at once put into his hands by the unani- 
mous consent of the senate and of the mob, which 
forced its way into the House, and no attention was 


paid to the wish of Tiberius, who in his will had 


421 


87 A.D 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


tatum adhuc coheredem ei dederat, ius arbitriumque 
omnium rerum illi permissum est tanta publica 
laetitia, ut tribus proximis mensibus ac ne totis qui- 
dem supra centum sexaginta milia victimarum caesa 
tradantur. 

Cum deinde paucos post dies in proximas Cam- 
paniae insulas traiecisset, vota pro reditu suscepta 
sunt, ne minimam quidem occasionem quoquam 
omittente in testificanda sollicitudine et cura de 
incolumitate eius. Ut vero in adversam valitudinem 
incidit, pernoctantibus cunctis circa Palatium, non 
defuerunt qui depugnaturos se armis pro salute aegri 
quique capita sua titulo proposito voverent. Accessit 
ad immensum civium amorem notabilis etiam exter- 
norum favor. Namque Artabanus Parthorum rex, 
odium semper contemptumque Tiberi prae se ferens, 
amicitiam huius ultro petiit venitque ad colloquium 
legati consularis et transgressus Euphraten aquilas et 
signa Romana Caesarumque imagines adoravit. 

XV. Incendebat et ipse studia hominum omni 
genere popularitatis. Tiberio cum plurimis lacrimis 
pro contione laudato funeratoque amplissime, con- 
festim Pandateriam et Pontias ad transferendos 
matris fratrisque cineres festinavit, tempestate tur- 
bida, quo magis pietas emineret, adiitque venera- 
bundus ac per semet in urnas condidit ; nec minore 
scaena Ostiam praefixo in biremis puppe vexillo et 
inde Romam Tiberi subvectos per splendidissimum 


^ See Tib. Ixxvi. 

* They were compelled to fulfil their vows; see chap. 
xxvii. 2. 

e Cf. Vit. ii. 4, 


422 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


named his other grandson, still a boy, joint heir with 
Caligula.* So great was the public rejoicing, that 
within the next three months, or less than that, 
more than a hundred and sixty thousand victims are 
said to have been slain in sacrifice. 

A few days after this, when he crossed to the 
islands near Campania, vows were put up for his 
safe return, while no one let slip even the slightest 
chance of giving testimony to his anxiety and regard 
for his safety. But when he fell ill, they all spent 
the whole night about the Palace ; some even vowed 
to fight as gladiators, and others posted placards 
offering their lives, if the ailing prince were spared.^ 
To this unbounded love of his citizens was added 
marked devotion from foreigners. Artabanus, for 
example, king of the Parthians, who was always 
outspoken in his hatred and contempt for Tiberius, 
voluntarily sought Caligula’s friendship and came to 
a conference with the consular governor; then 
crossing the Euphrates, he paid homage to the 
Roman eagles and standards and to the statues of 
the Caesars.* 

XV. Gaius himself tried to rouse men’s devotion 
by courting popularity in every way. After eulo- 
gising Tiberius with many tears before the assembled 
people and giving him a magnificent funeral, he 
at once posted off to Pandateria and the Pontian 
islands, to remove the ashes of his mother and 
brother to Rome; and in stormy weather, too, to 
make his filial piety the more conspicuous. He 
approached them with reverence and placed them in 
the urns with his own hands. With no less theatrical 
effect he brought them to Ostia in a bireme with a 
banner set in the stern, and from there up the Tiber 


423 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


quemque equestris ordinis medio ac frequenti die 
duobus ferculis Mausoleo intulit, inferiasque is annua 
religione publice instituit, et eo amplius matri cir- 
censes carpentumque quo in pompa traduceretur. 
At in memoriam patris Septembrem mensem Ger- 
manicum appellavit. Post haec Antoniae aviae, 
quidquid umquam Livia Augusta honorum cepisset, 
uno senatus consulto congessit; patruum Claudium, 
equitem R. ad id tempus, collegam sibi in consulatu 
assumpsit ; fratrem Tiberium die virilis togae adop- 
tavit appellavitque principem iuventutis. De sorori- 
bus auctor fuit, ut omnibus sacramentis adicerentur!: 
* Neque me liberosque meos cariores habebo quam 
Gaium habeo et sorores eius”; item relationibus 
consulum: “Quod bonum felixque sit C. Caesari 
sororibusque eius." 

Pari popularitate damnatos relegatosque restituit ; 
criminum, si quae residua ex priore tempore mane- 
bant, omnium gratiam fecit; commentarios ad 
matris fratrumque suorum causas pertinentis, ne cui 
postmodum delatori aut testi maneret ullus metus, 
convectos in Forum, et ante clare obtestatus deos 
neque legisse neque attigisse quicquam, concremavit; 
libellum de salute sua oblatum non recepit, conten- 


! adiicerentur,. sixteenth century editions; afficerentur 
(adficerentur) Q. 


a Of Augustus; see Aug. c. 4. 

> Originally the title of the commander of the knights who 
were under forty-five and in active service. Conferred on 
C. and L. Caesar by Augustus, it became the designation of 
the heir to the throne, and was later assumed by theemperors 
themselves. 

* The consuls in making propositions to the senate began 


424 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


to Rome, where he had them carried to the Mauso- 
leum * on two biers by the most distinguished men of 
the order of knights, in the middle of the day, when 
the streets were crowded.. He appointed funeral 
sacrifices, too, to be offered each year with due 
ceremony, as well as games in the Circus in honour 
of his mother, providing a carriage to carry herimage 
in the procession. But in memory of his father 
he gave to the month of September the name of Ger- 
manicus. After this, by a single decree of the senate, 
he heaped upon his grandmother Antonia what- 
ever honours Livia Augusta had ever enjoyed ; took 
his uncle Claudius, who up to that time had been a 
Roman knight, as his colleague in the consulship ; 
adopted his brother Tiberius on the day that he 
assumed the gown of manhood, and gave him the 
title of Chief of the Youth He caused the names 
of his sisters to be included in all oaths: * And I 
will not hold myself and my children dearer than I 
do Gaius and his sisters"; as well as in the pro- 
positions* of the consuls: * Favour and good fortune 
attend Gaius Caesar and his sisters." 

With the same desire for popularity he recalled 
those who had been condemned to banishment ; took 
no cognizance of any charges that remained untried 
from an earlier time; had all documents relating to 
the cases of his mother and brothers carried to the 
Forum and burned, to give no informer or witness 
occasion for further fear, having first loudly called 
the gods to witness that he had neither read nor 
touched any of them. He refused a note which was 
offered him regarding his own safety, maintaining that 


with a set formula (cf. Aug. lviii. 2, Jul. lxxx. 2), wishing 
success to the emperor, or in earlier days to the State. 


425 


37 A.D. 


bo 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


dens nihil sibi admissum cur cuiquam invisus esset, 
negavitque se delatoribus aures habere. 

XVI. Spintrias monstrosarum libidinum aegre ne 
profundo mergeret exoratus, urbe submovit. Titi 
Labieni, Cordi Cremuti, Cassi Severi scripta senatus 
consultis abolita requiri et esse in manibus lectitari- 
que permisit, quando maxime sua interesset ut 
facta quaeque posteris tradantur. . Rationes imperii 
ab Augusto proponi solitas sed a Tiberio intermissas 
publicavit. Magistratibus liberam iuris dictionem et 
sine sui appellatione concessit. Equites R. severe 
curioseque nec sine moderatione recognovit, palam 
adempto equo quibus aut probri aliquid aut ignomi- 
niae inesset, eorum qui minore culpa tenerentur 
nominibus modo in recitatione praeteritis. Ut levior 
labor iudicantibus foret, ad quattuor prioris quintam 
decuriam addidit. Temptavit et comitiorum more 
revocato suffragia populo reddere. Legata ex testa- 
mento Tiberi quamquam abolito, sed et luliae 
Augustae, quod Tiberius suppresserat, cum fide 
ac sine calumnia repraesentata persolvit. Ducentesi- 
mam auctionum Italiae remisit; multis incendiorum 
damna supplevit; ac si quibus regna restituit, adiecit ! 
et fructum omnem vectigaliorum et reditum medii 
temporis, ut Antiocho Commageno sestertium milies 
confiscatum. Quoque magis nullius non boni 

1 adiecit, ¢ (Beroaldus); affecit (adfecit), N. 

a See Tib. xliii. 1. 

5 Of. Aug. xxxv. 2. 


* See Aug. xxviii. l and ci. 4. 
4 Ducentesimam (sc. partem), one half of one per cent, 


426 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


he had done nothing to make anyone hate him, and 
that he had no ears for informers. 

XVI. He banished from the city the sexual per- 
verts called spintriae, barely persuaded not to sink 
them in the sea. The writings of Titus Labienus, 
Cremutius Cordus? and Cassius Severus, which had 
been suppressed by decrees of the senate, he allowed 
to be hunted up, circulated, and read, saying that it 
was wholly to his interest that everything which 
happened be handed down to posterity. He published 
the accounts of the empire, which had regularly been 
made public by Augustus, a practice discontinued by 
Tiberius. He allowed the magistrates unrestricted 
jurisdiction, without appeal to himself. He revised 
the lists of the Roman knights strictly and scrupu- 
lously, yet with due inoderation, publicly taking their 
horses from those guilty of any wicked or scandalous 
act, but merely omitting to read the names of men 
convicted of lesser offences. To lighten the labour 
of the jurors, he added a fifth division to the 
previous four. He tried also to restore the suffrage 
to the people by reviving the custom of elections. 
He at once paid faithfully and without dispute the 
legacies named in the will of Tiberius, though this 
had been set aside, as well as in that of Julia 
Augusta, which Tiberius had suppressed. He 
remitted the tax of a two-hundredth ? on auction 
sales in Italy ; made good to many their losses from 
fires; and whenever he restored kings to their 
thrones, he allowed them all the arrears of their 
taxes and their revenue for the meantime; for 
example, to Antiochus of Commagene, a hundred 
million sesterces that had accrued to the Treasury. 
To make it known that he encouraged every kind of 


427 


bo 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


exempli fautor videretur, mulieri libertinae octin- 
genta donavit, quod excruciata gravissimis tormentis 
de scelere patroni reticuisset. Quas ob res inter 
reliquos honores decretus est ei clipeus aureus, quem 
quotannis certo die collegia sacerdotum in Capitolium 
ferrent, senatu prosequente nobilibusque pueris ac 
puellis carmine modulato laudes virtutum eius 
canentibus. Decretum autem ut dies, quo cepisset 
imperium, Parilia vocaretur, velut argumentum rursus 
conditae urbis. 

XVII. Consulatus quattuor gessit, prinum ex Kal. 
Iul. per duos menses, secundum ex Kal. Ian. per 
XXX dies, tertium usque in Idus Ian., quartum usque 
septimum Idus easdem. Ex omnibus duos novissi- 
mos coniunxit. Tertium autem Luguduni iniit solus, 
non ut quidam opinantur superbia neglegentiave, sed 
quod defunctum sub Kalendarum diem collegam 
rescisse absens non potuerat.  Congiarium populo 
bis dedit trecenos sestertios, totiens abundantissimum 
epulum senatui equestrique ordini, etiam coniugibus 
ac liberis utrorumque; posteriore epulo forensia 
insuper viris, feminis ac pueris fascias! purpurae 
atque ? conchylii distribuit. Et ut laetitiam publicam 
in perpetuum quoque augeret, adiecit diem Saturna- 
libus appellavitque Iuvenalem. 

XVIII. Munera gladiatoria partim in amphitheatro 
Tauri partim in  Saeptis aliquot edidit, quibus : 
inseruit catervas Afrorum Campanorumque pugilum 

1 fascias, - (Beroaldus); fasces, Q. 
2 atque, G ; ac, MX; at, MQR. 
a An error, since he was consul in 39, 40, and 41, 
b See Aug. xxix. 5. 
428 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


noble action, he gave eight hundred thousand ses- 
terces to a freedwoman, because she had kept silence 
about the guilt of her patron, though subjected to 
the utmost torture. Because of these acts, besides 
other honours, a golden shield was voted him, which 
was to be borne every year to the Capitol on an 
appointed day by the colleges of priests, escorted by 
the senate, while boys and girls of noble birth sang 
the praises of his virtues in a choral ode. It was 
further decreed that the day on which he began to 
reign should be called the Parilia, as a token that 
the city had been founded a second time. 

XVII. He held four consulships, one from the 
Kalends of July for two months, a second from the 
Kalends of January for thirty days,a third up to the 
Ides of January, and the fourth until the seventh 
day before the Ides of the same month. Of all 
these only the last two were continuous.* The third 
he assumed at Lugdunum without a colleague, not, 
as some think, through arrogance or disregard of 
precedent, but because at that distance from Rome 
he had been unable to get news of the death of the 
other consul just before the day of the Kalends. He 
twice gave the people a largess of three hundred ses- 
terces each, and twice a lavish banquet to the senate 
and the equestrian order, together with their wives 
and children. At the former of these he also dis- 
tributed togas to the men, and to the women and 
children scarves of red and scarlet. Furthermore, to 
make a permanent addition to the public gaiety, he 
added a day to the Saturnalia, and called it Juvenalis. 

XVIII. He gave several gladiatorial shows, some 
in the amphitheatre of Taurus® and some in the 
Saepta, in which he introduced pairs of African and 


429 


July1,37a.p. 
Jan,1,39 ,, 
Jan.13,40 ,, 
Jan.7,41 ,, 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


ex utraque regione electissimorum. Neque specta- 
culis semper ipse praesedit, sed interdum aut 
magistratibus aut amicis praesidendi munus iniunxit. 
Scaenicos ludos et assidue et varii generis ac 
multifariam fecit, quondam et nocturnos accensis 
tota urbe luminibus. Sparsit et missilia variarum 
rerum et panaria cum obsonio viritim divisit ; qua 
epulatione equiti R. contra se hilarius avidiusque 
vescenti partes suas misit, sed et senatori ob eandem 
causam codicillos, quibus praetorem eum extra 
ordinem designabat. Edidit et circenses pluri- 
mos a mane ad vesperam interiecta modo African- 
arum venatione modo Troiae decursione, et quosdam - 
praecipuos, minio et chrysocolla constrato Circo nec 
ulis nisi ex senatorio ordine aurigantibus. Com- 
misit et subitos, cum e Gelotiana apparatum Circi 
prospicientem pauci ex proximis Maenianis postu- 
lassent. 

XIX. Novum praeterea atque inauditum genus 
spectaculi excogitavit. Nam Baiarum medium inter- 
vallum ad! Puteolanas moles, trium milium et 
sescentorum fere passuum spatium, ponte coniunxit 
contractis undique onerariis navibus et ordine 
duplici ad ancoras conlocatis superiectoque aggere? 
terreno ac derecto in Appiae viae formam. Per 
hunc pontem ultro citro commeavit biduo continenti; 


1 ad, inserted by Torrentius. — 
* aggere terreno, 1’ P*; the other mss. omit aggere. 


a To be scrambled for by the spectators. 
è Africanae, supply bestiae and see Index. 
* On the houses adjoining the Cirous; called Maeniana 


430 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


Campanian boxers, the pick of both regions. He 
did not always preside at the games in person, but 
sometimes assigned the honour to the magistrates or 
to friends. He exhibited stage-plays continually, of 
various kinds and in many different places, sometimes 
even by night, lighting up the whole city. He also 
threw about gifts^ of various kinds, and gave each 
man a basket of victuals. During the feasting he 
sent his share to a Roman knight opposite him, who 
was eating with evident relish and appetite, while to 
a senator for the same reason he gave a commission 
naming him praetor out of the regular order. He also 
gave many games in the Circus, lasting from early 
morning until evening, introducing between the races 
now a baiting of panthers? and now the manceuvres of 
the game called Troy ; some, too, of special splendour, 
in which the Circus was strewn with red and green, 
while the charioteers were all men of senatorial rank. 
He also started some games off-hand, when a few 
people called for them from the neighbouring bal- 
conies, as he was inspecting the outfit of the Circus 
from the Gelotian house. 

XIX. Besides this, he devised a novel and un- 
heard of kind of pageant; for he bridged the gap 
between Baiae and the mole at Puteoli, a distance of 
about thirty-six hundred paces,? by bringing together 

merchant ships from all sides and anchoring them in 
-a double line, after which a mound of earth was 
heaped upon them and fashioned in the manner of 
the Appian Way. Over this bridge he rode back 
and forth for two successive days, the first day on a 
after a certain Maenius, who was supposed to have been the 


first to build such balconies. 
4 (ver three and a half Roman miles. 


431 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


primo die phalerato! equo insignisque quercea? 
corona et caetra et gladio aureaque chlamyde, 
postridie quadrigario habitu curriculoque  biiugi 
famosorum equorum, prae se ferens Dareum puerum 
ex Parthorum obsidibus, comitante praetorianorum 
agmine et in essedis cohorte amicorum. Scio 
plerosque existimasse talem a Gaio pontem ex- 
cogitatum aemulatione Xerxis, qui non sine ad- 
miratione aliquanto angustiorem Hellespontum 
contabulaverit; alios, ut Germaniam et Britanniam, 
quibus imminebat, alicuius inmensi operis fama 
territaret. Sed avum meum narrantem puer audie- 
bam, causam operis ab interioribus aulicis proditam, 
quod Thrasyllus mathematicus anxio de successore 
Tiberio et in verum nepotem proniori affirmasset 
non magis Gaium imperaturum quam per Baianum 
sinum equis discursurum. 

XX. Edidit et peregre spectacula, in Sicilia 
Syracusis asticos ludos et in Gallia Luguduni mis- 
cellos ; sed hic certamen quoque Graecae Latinaeque 
facundiae, quo certamine ferunt victoribus praemia 
victos contulisse, eorundem et laudes componere 
coactos; eos autem, qui maxime  displicuissent, 
scripta sua spongia linguave delere iussos, nisi 
ferulis obiurgari aut flumine proximo mergi malu- 
issent. 

XXI. Opera sub Tiberio semiperfecta, templum 


1 falerato, 0. 
2 quercea, ¢ (Roth); quiercica, MG; quercica, T ; insignis 
quoque aerea, X 


a See Jib. lv. 

> See note on Tib. vi. 4, 

* Obviously not a choice, but determined by the degree of 
success of the contestants, 


432 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


caparisoned horse, himself resplendent in a crown or 
oak leaves, a buckler, a sword, and a cloak of cloth of 
gold ; on the second, in the dress of a charioteer in 
a car drawn by a pair of famous horses, carrying 
before him a boy named Dareus, one of the hostages 
from Parthia, and attended by the entire praetorian 
guard and a company of his friends in Gallic 
chariots. I know that many have supposed that 
Gaius devised this kind of a bridge in rivalry of: 
Xerxes, who excited no little admiration by bridging 
the much narrower Hellespont; others, that it was 
to inspire fear in Germany and Britain, on which he 
had designs, by the fame of some stupendous work. 
But when I was a boy, I used to hear my grandfather 
say that the reason for the work, as revealed by the 
emperor's confidential courtiers, was that Thrasyllus 
the astrologer had declared to Tiberius, when he was 
worried about his successor and inclined towards his 
natural grandson,” that Gaius had no more chance of 
becoming emperor than of riding about over the gulf 
of Baiae on horseback. 

XX. He also gave shows in foreign lands, 
Athenian games? at Syracuse in Sicily, and mis- 
cellaneous games at Lugdunum in Gaul; at the 
latter place also a contest in Greek and Latin 
oratory, in which, they say, the losers gave prizes to 
the victors and were forced to compose eulogies 
upon them, while those who were least successful 
were ordered to erase their writings with a sponge 
or with their tongue,^ unless they elected rather 
to be beaten with rods or thrown into the neigh- 
bouring river. 

XXI. He completed the public works which had 
been half finished under Tiberius, namely the temple 


433 
VOL. 1. FF 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


Augusti theatrumque Pompei, absolvit. Incohavit 
autem aquae ductum regione Tiburti et amphi- 
theatrum iuxta Saepta, quorum operum a successore 
eius Claudio alterum peractum, omissum alterum 
est. Syracusis conlapsa vetustate moenia deorumque 
aedes refectae. Destinaverat et Sami Polycratis 
regiam restituere, Mileti Didymeum peragere, in 
iugo Alpium urbem condere, sed ante omnia 
Isthmum in Achaia perfodere, miseratque iam ad 
dimetiendum opus primipilarem. 

XXII. Hactenus quasi de principe, reliqua ut de 
monstro narranda sunt. 

Compluribus cognominibus adsumptis—nam et 
* pius” et * castrorum filius " et “pater exercituum " 
et “optimus maximus Caesar” vocabatur—cum 
audiret forte reges, qui officii causa in urbem 
advenerant, concertantis apud se super cenam de 
nobilitate generis, exclamavit : 


Els koípavos gotw, els aoi eis. 


Nec multum afuit quin statim diadema sumeret 
speciemque principatus in regni formam converteret. -> 
Verum admonitus et principum et regum se 
excessisse fastigium, divinam ex eo maiestatem 
asserere sibi coepit; datoque negotio, ut simulacra 
numinum religione et arte praeclara, inter quae 
Olympii lovis, apportarentur e Graecia, quibus 


1 e Graecia, Venetian ed. of 1510; egregia, 2 


a See Claud. xx. 1. 

> Cf. Jul. xliv. 3. * Thad 2. 204. 

4 Under Caligula the so-called ** principate" had become 
an absolute monarchy. Caligula proposed to assume the 
pomp of a king. 


434 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


of Augustus and the theatre of Pompey. He 
likewise began an aqueduct in the region near 
Tibur and an amphitheatre beside the Saepta, the 
former finished by his successor Claudius,“ while the 
latter was abandoned. At Syracuse he repaired the 
city walls, which had fallen into ruin through lapse of 
time, and the temples of the gods. He had planned, 
besides, to rebuild the palace of Polycrates at Samos, 
to finish the temple of Didymaean Apollo at Ephesus, 
to found a city high up in the Alps, but, above all, to 
dig a canal through the Isthmus in Greece, ? and he 
had already sent a chief centurion to survey the 
work. 

XXII. So much for Caligula as emperor ; we must 
now tell of his career as a monster. 

After he had assumed various surnames (for he 
was called ** Pious," * Child of the Camp," ** Father 
of the Armies,” and “ Greatest and Best of Caesars ”), 
chancing to overhear some kings, who had come to 
Rome to pay their respects to him, disputing at dinner 
about the nobility of their descent, he cried : 


* Let there be one Lord, one King." ¢ 


And he came near assuming a crown at once and 
changing the semblance of a principate into the 
form of a monarchy. But on being reminded that 
he had risen above the elevation both of princes and 
kings, he began from that time on to lay claim 
to divine majesty; for after giving orders that such 
statues of the gods as were especially famous for 
their sanctity or their artistic merit, including 
that of Jupiter of Olympia,’ should be brought from 


e The chryselephantine statue of Zeus by Pheidias; see 
chap. lvii. 1. 


435 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


capite dempto suum imponeret, partem Palatii ad 
Forum usque promovit, atque aede Castoris et 
Pollucis in vestibulum transfigurata, consistens saepe 
inter fratres deos, medium adorandum se adeuntibus 
exhibebat; et quidam eum Latiarem Iovem con- 
salutarunt. Templum etiam numini suo proprium 
et sacerdotes et excogitatissimas hostias instituit. 
In templo simulacrum stabat aureum iconicum 
amiciebaturque cotidie veste, quali ipse uteretur. 
Magisteria sacerdotii ditissimus quisque et ambitione 


et licitatione maxima vicibus comparabant.  Hostiae - 


erant phoenicopteri, pavones, tetraones, numidicae, 
meleagrides, phasianae, quae generatim per singulos 
dies immolarentur. Et noctibus quidem plenam 
fulgentemque lunam invitabat assidue in amplexus 
atque concubitum, interdiu vero cum Capitolino Iove 
secreto fabulabatur, modo insusurrans ac praebens 
in vicem aurem, modo clarius nec sine iurgiis. Nam 
vox comminantis audita est : 
'H w ávdep' ù eyo cé, 

donee exoratus, ut referebat, et in contubernium 
ultro invitatus super templum Divi Augusti ponte 
transmisso Palatium Capitoliumque coniunxit. Mox, 
quo propior esset, in area Capitolina novae domus 
fundamenta iecit. 

XXIII. Agrippae se nepotem neque credi neque 
dici ob ignobilitatem eius volebat suscensebatque, 
si qui vel oratione vel carmine imaginibus eum 
Caesarum insererent. Praedicabat autem matrem 


a Iliad, 23. 724, where after a long and indecisive wrestling 
bout Ajax thus challenges Odysseus to settle the contest. 
'Aváeipe is doubtless used in a double sense, perhaps with 
aposiopesis, ** Raise me up (to heaven), or thee Pll —.” 


4306 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


Greece, in order to remove their heads and put 
his own in their place, he built out a part of the 
Palace as far as the Forum, and making the temple 
of Castor and Pollux its vestibule, he often took his . 
place between the divine brethren, and exhibited 
himself there to be worshipped by those who pre- 
sented themselves ; and some hailed him as Jupiter 
Latiaris. He also set up a special temple to his own 
godhead, with priests and with victims of the choicest 
kind. In this temple was a life-sized statue of the 
emperor in gold, which was dressed each day in 
clothing such as he wore himself. The richest 
citizens used all their influence to secure the priest- 
hoods of his cult and bid high for the honour. The 
victims were flamingoes, peacocks, woodcock, guinea- 
hens and pheasants, offered day by day each after its 
own kind. At night he used constantly to invite the 
full and radiant moon to his embraces and his bed, 
while in the daytime he would talk confidentially 
with Jupiter Capitolinus, now whispering and then in 
turn putting his ear to the mouth of the god, now in 
louder and even angry language ; for he was heard 
to make the threat: “ Lift me up, or I'll lift thee." # 
But finally won by entreaties, as he reported, and 
even invited to live with the god, he built a bridge 
over the temple of the Deified Augustus, and thus 
joined his Palace to the Capitol. Presently, to be 
nearer yet, he laid the foundations of a new house in 
the court of the Capitol. 

XXIII. He did not wish to be thought the grand- 
son of Agrippa, or called so, because of the latter's 
humble origin; and he grew very angry if anyone in. 
a speech or a song included Agrippa among the 
ancestors of the Caesars. He even boasted that 


437 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


suam ex incesto, quod Augustus cum [ulia filia 
admisisset, procreatam ; ac non contentus hac 
Augusti insectatione Actiacas Siculasque ! victorias, 
ut funestas p. R. et calamitosas, vetuit sollemnibus 
feriis celebrari. Liviam Augustam proaviam “ Ulixem 
stolatum " identidem appellans, etiam ignobilitatis 
quadam ad senatum epistula arguere ausus est quasi 
materno avo decurione Fundano ortam, cum publicis 
monumentis certum sit, Aufidium Lurconem? Romae 
honoribus functunı. Áviae Antoniae secretum petenti 
denegavit, nisi ut interveniret Macro praefectus, 
ac per istius modi indignitates et taedia causa 
exstitit mortis, dato tamen, ut quidam putant, et 


veneno; nec defunctae ullum honorem habuit 


prospexitque e triclinio ardentem rogum. Fratrem 
Tiberium  inopinantem repente immisso tribuno 
militum interemit, Silanum item socerum ad necem 
secandasque novacula fauces compulit, causatus in 
utroque, quod hic ingressum se turbatius mare non 
esset secutus ac spe occupandi urbem, si quid sibi 
per tempestates accideret, remansisset, ille antidotum 
oboluisset,? quasi ad praecavenda venena sua sump- 
tum, cum et Silanus impatientiam nauseae vitasset 
et molestiam navigandi, et Tiberius propter assiduam 
et ingravescentem tussim medicamento usus esset. 

1 Sieulasque, c ; singulasque, 2 

? Lurconem, Stephanus ; Lyrgonem, Q. 

? oboluisset, Beroaldus ; obolevisset, mss. 


a See Aug. xvi. 1. 

5 The sfola was the characteristic dress of the Roman 
“Matron, as the toga was that of the man. 

c See note on Tib. xxxvii. 3. 

å By adoption ; see chap. xv. 2. 


438 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


his own mother was born in incest, which Augustus 
had committed with his daughter Julia; and not 
content with this slur on the memory of Augustus, 
he forbade the celebration of his victories at Actium 
and off Sicily by annual festivals," on the ground that 
they were disastrous and ruinous to the Roman 
people. He often called his greatgrandmother Livia 
Augusta “a Ulysses in petticoats,” è and he had the 
audacity to accuse her of low birth in a letter to the 
senate, alleging that her maternal grandfather had 
been nothing but a decurion* of Fundi; whereas it is 
proved by public records that Aufidius Lurco held 
high offices at Rome. When his grandmother 
Antonia asked for a private interview, he refused it 
except in the presence of the praefect Macro, and by 
such indignities and annoyances he caused her death ; 
although some think that he also gave her poison. 
After she was dead, he paid her no honour, but 
viewed her burning pyre from his dining-room. He 
had his brother ? Tiberius put to death without warn- 
ing, suddenly sending a tribune of the soldiers to do 
the deed ; besides driving his father-in-law Silanus to 
end his life by cutting his throat with a razor. His 
charge against the latter was that Silanus had not 
followed him when he put to sea in stormy weather, 
but had remained behind in the hope of taking 
possession of the city in case he should be lost in the 
storm; against Tiberius, that his breath smelled 
of an antidote, which he had taken to guard against 
being poisoned at his hand. Now as a matter of 
fact, Silanus was subject to sea-sickness and wished 
to avoid the discomforts of the voyage, while 
Tiberius had taken medicine for a chronic cough, 
which was growing worse. As for his uncle 


439 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


Nam Claudium patruum non nisi in ludibrium 
reservavit. 

XXIV. Cum omnibus sororibus suis consuetudinem | 
stupri fecit plenoque convivio singulas infra se 
vicissim conlocabat uxore supra cubante. Ex iis 
Drusillam  vitiasse virginem  praetextatus adhuc 
creditur atque etiam in concubitu eius quondam 
deprehensus ab Antonia avia, apud quam simul 
educabantur; mox Lucio Cassio Longino consulari 
conlocatam abduxit et in modum iustae uxoris 
propalam habuit; heredem quoque bonorum atque 
imperii aeger instituit. Eadem defuncta iustitium 
indixit, in quo risisse lavisse cenasse cum parentibus 
aut coniuge liberisve capital fuit. Ac maeroris im- 
patiens, cum repente noctu profugisset ab urbe transcu- 
currissetque Campaniam, Syracusas petit, rursusque 
inde propere rediit barba capilloque promisso; nec 
umquam postea quantiscumque de rebus, ne pro 
contione quidem populi aut apud milites, nisi per 
numen Drusillae deieravit. Reliquas sorores nec 
cupiditate tanta nec dignatione dilexit, ut quas saepe 
exoletis suis prostraverit!; quo facilius eas in causa 
Aemili Lepidi condemnavit quasi adulteras et in- 
sidiarum adversus se conscias ei. Nec solum chiro- 
grapha omnium requisita fraude ac stupro divulgavit, 
sed et tres gladios in necem suam praeparatos Marti 
Ultori addito elogio consecravit. 


1 prostraverit, ¢; the earlier mss. have prostravit. 


440 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


Claudius, he spared him merely as a laughing- 
stock. 

XXIV. He lived in habitual incest with all his 
sisters, and at a large banquet he placed each of 
them in turn below him, while his wife reclined 
above. Of these he is believed to have violated 
Drusilla when he was still a minor, and even to have 
been caught lying with her by his grandmother 
Antonia, at whose house they were brought up in 
company. Afterwards, when she was the wife of 
Lucius Cassius Longinus, an ex-consul, he took her 
from him and openly treated her as his lawful wife ; 
and when ill, he made her heir to his property and 
the throne. When she died, he appointed a season 
of public mourning, during which it was a capital 
offence to laugh, bathe, or dine in company with 
one’s parents, wife, or children. He was_so beside 
himself with grief that suddenly fleeing the city by . 
night and traversing Campania, he went to Syracuse 
and hurriedly returned from there without cutting 
his hair or shaving his beard. And he never after- 
wards took oath about matters of the highest moment, 
even before the assembly of the people or in the 
presence of the soldiers, except by the godhead of 
Drusilla. The rest of his sisters he did not love 
with so great affection, nor honour so highly, but 
often prostituted them to his favourites; so that he 
was the readier at the trial of Aemilius Lepidus to 
condemn them, as adulteresses and privy to the con- 
spiracies against him; and he not only made public 
letters in the handwriting of all of them, procured 
by fraud and seduction, but also dedicated to Mars 
the Avenger, with an explanatory inscription, three 
swords designed to take his life. 


441 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


XXV. Matrimonia contraxerit turpius an dimiserit 
an tenuerit, non est facile discernere. Liviam 
Orestillam C. Pisoni nubentem, cum ad officium et ipse 
venisset, ad se deduci imperavit intraque paucos dies 
repudiatam biennio post relegavit, quod repetisse usum 
prioris mariti tempore medio videbatur. Alii tradunt 
adhibitum cenae nuptiali mandasse ad Pisonem contra 
accumbentem : * Noli uxorem meam premere," statim- 
que e convivio abduxisse secum ac proximo die edi- 
xisse: matrimonium sibi repertum exemplo Romuli 
et Augusti. Lolliam Paulinam, C.! Memmio consulari 
exercitus regenti nuptam, facta mentione aviae eius 
ut quondam pulcherrimae, subito ex provincia evocavit 
. ac perductam a marito coniunxit sibi brevique missam 
feeit interdicto cuiusquam in perpetuum coitu. 
Caesoniam neque facie insigni neque aetate integra 
matremque iam ex alio viro trium filiarum, sed luxu- 
riae ac lasciviae perditae, et ardentius et constantius 
amavit, ut saepe chlamyde peltaque et galea ornatam 
ac iuxta adequitantem militibus ostenderit, amicis vero 
etiam nudam. Uxorio nomine non prius? dignatus 
est quam enixam, uno atque eodem die professus et 
maritum se eius et patrem infantis ex ea natae. In- 
fantem autem, Iuliam Drusillam appellatam, per 

1C., mss. 5 P., inscriptions. 
2 non prius, supplied by Roth. 
442 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


XXV. It is not easy to decide whether he acted 
more basely in contracting his marriages, in annulling 
them, or as a husband. At the marriage of Livia 
Orestilla to Gaius Piso, he attended the ceremony him- 
self, gave orders that the bride be taken to his own 
house, and within a few days divorced her; two years 
later he banished her, because of a suspicion that in 
the meantime she had gone back to her former 
husband. Others write that being invited to the 
wedding banquet, he sent word to Piso, who reclined 
opposite to him : * Don't take liberties with my wife," 
and at once carried her off with him from the table, the 
next day issuing a proclamation that he had got him- 
self a wife in the manner of Romulus and Augustus. 
When the statement was made that the grandmother 
of Lollia Paulina, who was married to Gaius Memmius, 
an ex-consul commanding armies, had once been a 
remarkably beautiful woman, he suddenly called Lollia 
from the province,separated her from her husband, and 
married her; then in a short time he put her away, 
with the command never to have intercourse with 
anyone. Though Caesonia was neither beautiful nor 
young, and was already mother of three daughters 
by another, besides being a woman of reckless ex- 
travagance and wantonness, he loved her not only 
more passionately but more faithfully, often exhibit- 
ing her to the soldiers riding by his side, decked 
with cloak, helmet and shield, and to his friends 
even in a state of nudity. He did not honour her 
with the title of wife until she had borne him a 
child, announcing on the selfsame day that he had 
married her and that he was the father of her babe. 
This babe, whom he named Julia Drusilla, he carried 
to the temples of all the goddesses, finally placing 


443 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


omnium dearum templa circumferens Minervae gremio 
imposuit alendamque et instituendam commendavit. 
Nec ullo firmiore indicio sui seminis esse credebat 
quam feritatis, quae illi quoque tanta iam tunc erat, 
ut infestis digitis ora et oculos simul ludentium in- 
fantium incesseret. 

XXVI. Leve ac frigidum sit his addere, quo pro- 
pinquos amicosque pacto tractaverit, Ptolemaeum regis 
Iubae filium, consobrinum suum—erat enim et is M. 
Antoni ex Selene filia nepos—et in primis ipsum 
Macronem, ipsam Enniam, adiutores imperii; quibus 
omnibus pro necessitudinis iure proque meritorum 
gratia cruenta mors persoluta est. 

Nihilo reverentior leniorve erga senatum, quosdam - 
summis honoribus functos ad essedum sibi currere 
togatos per aliquot passuum milia et cenanti modo 
ad pluteum modo ad pedes stare succinctos linteo 
passus est; alios cum clam interemisset, citare nihilo 
minus ut vivos perseveravit, paucos post dies volun- 
taria morte perisse mentitus.! Consulibus oblitis de 
natali suo edicere abrogavit magistratum fuitque per 
triduum sine summa potestate res p. Quaestorem 
suum in coniuratione nominatum flagellavit veste de- 
tracta subiectaque militum pedibus, quo firme ver- 
beraturi insisterent. 

Simili superbia violentiaque ceteros tractavit or- 
dines. Inquietatus fremitu gratuita in Circo loca de 
media nocte occupantium, omnis fustibus abegit ; elisi 


1 ementitus, Bentley. 


^ Or perhaps, in short linen tunics, 
6 This remark shows the regard in which the empty title 
of ** consul" was still held. 


444 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


her in the lap of Minerva and commending to her 
the child’s nurture and training. And no evidence 
convinced him so positively that she was sprung 
from his own loins as her savage temper, which was 
even then so violent that she would try to scratch 
the faces and eyes of the little children who played 
with her. 

XXVI. It would be trivial and pointless to add to 
this an account of his treatment of his relatives and 
friends, Ptolemy, son of king Juba, -his cousin (for 
he was the grandson of Mark Antony by Antony’s 
daughter Selene), and in particular Macro himself 


-and even Ennia, who helped him to the throne; all 


these were rewarded for their kinship and their 
faithful services by a bloody death. 

He was no whit more respectful or mild towards 
the senate, allowing some who had held the highest 
offices to run in their togas for several miles beside 
his chariot and to wait on him at table, standing 
napkin in hand * either at the head of his couch, or at 
his feet. Others he secretly put to death, yet con- 
tinued to send for them as if they were alive, after a 
few days falsely asserting that they had committed 
suicide. When the consuls forgot to make proclama- 
tion of his birthday, he deposed them, and left the 
state for three days without its highest magistrates.^ 
He flogged his quaestor, who was charged with con- 
spiracy, stripping off the man's clothes and spreading 
them under the soldiers' feet, to give them a firm 
footing as they beat him. 

He treated the other orders with like insolence 
and cruelty. Being disturbed by the noise made by 
those who came in the middle of the night to secure 
the free seats in the Circus, he drove them all out 


445 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


per eum tumultum viginti amplius equites R., totidem 
matronae, super innumeram turbam ceteram. Scaenicis 
ludis, inter plebem et equitem causam discordiarum 
ferens, decimas maturius dabat, ut equestria! ab 
infimo quoque occuparentur. Gladiatorio munere re- 
ductis interdum flagrantissimo sole velis emitti quem- 
quam vetabat, remotoque ordinario apparatu tabidas 
feras, vilissimos senioque confectos gladiatores, pro- 
que? paegniariis? patres familiarum notos in bonam 
partem sed insignis debilitate aliqua corporis subicie- 
bat. Ac nonnumquam horreis praeclusis populo 
famem indixit. | 

XXVII. Saevitiam ingenii per haec maxime osten- 
dit. Cum ad saginam ferarum muneri praeparatarum 
carius pecudes compararentur, ex noxiis laniandos 
adnotavit, et custodiarum seriem recognoscens, nullius 
inspecto elogio, stans tantum modo intra porticum 
mediam, * a calvo ad calvum ” duci imperavit. Votum 
exegit ab eo, qui pro salute sua gladiatoriam operam 
promiserat, spectavitque ferro dimicantem nec dimisit 


nisi victorem et post multas preces. Alterum, qui se . 


periturum ea de causa voverat, cunctantem pueris 


1 equestria, Sc ; equestri, Q. 
2 proque, Biicheler ; quoque, mas. 
3 paegniaris (-iis), MG X; pegmares, IIQ. 


a The reason for the term decimas, if the reading be correct, 
is uncertain ; cf. note on Aug. xli. 2. Obviously his purpose 
was to lead the rabble to occupy the knights’ seats before 
the plays began, and thus to start a fight. 

è The meaning of paegniary is uncertain ; they may have 
carried arma lusoria or arms incapable of causing death. See 
Friedlinder, Roman Life and Manners, Eng. trans. iv. p. 179. 

¢ The elogium was the tablet on which the charge against 
the prisoner was recorded. __ 


446 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


with cudgels; in the confusion more than twenty 
Roman knights were crushed to death, with as many 
matrons and a countless number of others. At the 
plays in the theatre, sowing discord between the 
commons and the knights, he scattered the gift 
tickets ^ ahead of time, to induce the rabble to take 
the seats reserved for the equestrian order. At a 
gladiatorial show he would sometimes draw back the 
awnings when the sun was hottest and give orders that 
no one be allowed to leave ; then removing the usual 
equipment, he would match worthless and decrepit 
gladiators against mangy wild beasts, and have sham 
fights® between householders who were of good 
repute, but conspicuous for some bodily infirmity. 
Sometimes too he would shut up the granaries and 
condemn the people to hunger. 

XXVII. The following are special instances of his 
innate brutality. When cattle to feed the wild beasts 
which he had provided for a gladiatorial show were 
rather costly, he selected criminals to be devoured, 
and reviewing the line of prisoners without examining 
the charges," but merely taking his place in the middle 
of a colonnade, he bade them be led away * from 
baldhead to baldhead."? A man who had made a 
vow to fight in the arena,’ if the emperor recovered, 
he compelled to keep his word, watched him as he 
fought sword in hand, and would not let him go 
until he was victorious, and then only after many 
entreaties. Another who had offered his life for the 
same reason, but delayed to kill himself, he turned 


.* [t seems probable that there happened to be a bald- 
headed man at each end of the line; the expression became 
proverbia]. 

e See chap. xiv. 2. 


44] 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


tradidit, verbenatum  infulatumque votum  repos- 
centes per vicos agerent, quoad praecipitaretur ex 
aggere. Multos honesti ordinis deformatos prius 
stigmatum notis ad metalla et munitiones viarum 
aut ad bestias condemnavit aut bestiarum more 
quadripedes cavea coercuit aut medios serra dissecuit, 
nec omnes gravibus ex causis, verum male de munere 
suo opinatos, vel quod numquam per genium suum 
deierassent. Parentes supplicio filiorum interesse 
cogebat: quorum uni valitudinem excusanti lecticam 
misit, alium a spectaculo poenae epulis statim adhi- 
buit atque omni comitate ad hilaritatem et iocos 
provocavit. Curatorem munerum ac venationum per 
continuos dies in conspectu suo catenis verberatum 
non prius occidit quam offensus putrefacti cerebri 
odore. Atellanae poetam ob ambigui ioci versiculum 
media amphitheatri harena igni cremavit. Equitem 
R. obiectum feris, cum se innocentem proclamasset, 
reduxit abscisaque lingua rursus induxit. 

XXVIII. Revocatum quendam a vetere exilio 
sciscitatus, quidnam ibi facere consuesset, respon- 
dente eo per adulationem : * Deos semper oravi ut, 
quod evenit, periret Tiberius et tu imperares," 
opinans sibi quoque exsules suos mortem imprecari, 


a See Aug. Ix. 
448 


i a as a es, nes 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


over to his slaves, with orders to drive him through 
the streets decked with sacred boughs and fillets, 
calling for the fulfilment of his vow, and finally hurl 
him from the embankment. Many men of honour- 
able rank were first disfigured with the marks of 
branding-irons and then condemned to the mines, to 
work at building roads, or to be thrown to the 
wild beasts; or else he shut them up in cages on all 
fours, like animals, or had them sawn asunder. Not 


all these punishments were for serious offences, but 


merely for criticising one of his shows, or for never 
having sworn by his Genius.* He forced parents to 
attend the executions of their sons, sending a litter for 
one man who pleaded ill health, and inviting another 
to dinner immediately after witnessing the death, 
and trying to rouse him to gaiety and jesting by a 
great show of affability. He had the manager of his 
gladiatorial shows and beast-baitings beaten with 
chains in his presence for several successive days, 
and would not kill him until he was disgusted at the 
stench of his putrefied brain. He burned a writer of 
Atellan farces alive in the middle of the arena of the 
amphitheatre, because of a humorous line of double 
meaning. When a Roman knight on being thrown 
to the wild beasts loudly protested his innocence, he 
took him out, cut off his tongue, and put him back 
again. 

XXVIII. Having asked a man who had been 
recalled from an exile of long standing, how in the 
world he spent his time there, the man replied by way 
of flattery : “ I constantly prayed the gods for what 
has come to pass, that Tiberius might die and you 
become emperor.” Thereupon Caligula, thinking 
that his exiles were likewise praying for his death, 


449 
VOL. I G G 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


misit circum insulas, qui universos contrucidarent. 
Cum discerpi senatorem concupisset, subornavit qui 
ingredientem curiam repente hostem publicum appel- 
lantes invaderent, graphiisque confossum lacerandum 
ceteris traderent ; nec ante satiatus est quam membra 
et artus et viscera hominis tracta per vicos atque 
ante se congesta vidisset. 

XXIX. Immanissima facta augebat atrocitate ver- 
borum. Nihil magis in natura sua laudare se ac 
probare dicebat quam, ut ipsius verbo utar, åĝiarpe- 
wiav, hoc est inverecundiam. Monenti Antoniae aviae 
tamquam parum esset non oboedire: * Memento," 
ait, * omnia mihi et in omnis licere."  Trucidaturus 
fratrem, quem metu venenorum praemuniri medica- 
mentis suspicabatur: * Antidotum,” inquit, “ adversus 
Caesarem ?"  Relegatis sororibus non solum insulas 
habere se, sed etiam gladios minabatur. Praetorium 
virum ex secessu Anticyrae, quam valitudinis causa 
petierat, propagari sibi commeatum saepius desideran- 
tem eum mandasset interimi, adiecit necessariam 
esse sanguinis missionem, cui tam diu non prodesset 
elleborum. Decimo quoque die numerum punien- 
dorum ex custodia subscribens, rationem se purgare 
dicebat. Gallis Graecisque aliquot uno tempore 
condemnatis gloriabatur Gallograeciam se subegisse. 

XXX. Non temere in quemquam nisi crebris et 
minutis ictibus animadverti passus est, perpetuo 


a “Tmmobility,” a Stoic virtue. Since in Gaius this took 
the form of callous indifference to suffering and to public 
opinion, it became inverecundia. ! 


450 


GAIUS CALIGULA | 


sent emissaries from island to island to butcher them 
all. Wishing to have one of the senators torn to 
pieces, he induced some of the members to assail 
him suddenly, on his entrance into the House, with 
the charge of being a public enemy, to stab him with 
their styles, and turn him over to the rest to be 
mangled ; and his cruelty was not sated until he 
saw the man's limbs, members, and bowels dragged 
through the streets and heaped up before him. 
XXIX. He added to the enormity of his crimes 
by the brutality of his language. He used to say 
that there was nothing in his own character which 
he admired and approved more highly than what he 
called his à3urpejío," that is to say, his shameless 
impudence. When his grandmother Antonia gave him 
some advice, he was not satisfied merely not to listen 
but replied : * Remember that I have the right to 
do anything to anybody." When he was on the point 
of killing his brother, and suspected that he had 
taken drugs as a precaution against poison, he cried : 
* What! an antidote against Caesar?" After banish- 
ing his sisters, he made the threat that he not only 
had islands, but swords as well An ex-praetor who 
had retired to Anticyra for his health, sent frequent 
requests for an extension of his leave, but Caligula 
had him put to death, adding that a man who had 
not been helped by so long a course of hellebore 
needed to be bled. On signing the list of prisoners 
who were to be put to death every ten days, he 
said that he was clearing his accounts. Having 
condemned several Gauls and Greeks to death in a 
body, he boasted that he had subdued Gallograecia. 
XXX. He seldom had anyone put to death except 
by numerous slight wounds, his constant order, which 


451 
aa 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


notoque iam praecepto: * Ita feri ut se mori sentiat.” 
Punito per errorem nominis alio quam quem destina- 
verat, ipsum quoque paria meruisse dixit. Tragicum 
illud subinde iactabat : 


* Oderint, dum metuant." 


Saepe in cunctos pariter senatores ut Seiani clientis, 
ut matris ac fratrum suorum delatores, invectus est 
prolatis libellis, quos crematos simulaverat, defensa- 
que Tiberi saevitia quasi necessaria, cum tot 
criminantibus credendum esset. Equestrem ordinem 
ut scaenae harenaeque devotum assidue proscidit. 
Infensus turbae faventi adversus studium suum 
exclamavit: “ Utinam p. R. unam cervicem haberet ! 
cumque  Tetrinius latro  postularetur, et qui 
postularent, Tetrinios esse ait. Retiarii tunicati 
quinque numero gregatim dimicantes sine certamine 
ullo totidem secutoribus suceubuerant; cum occidi 
iuberentur, unus resumpta fuscina omnes victores 
interemit ; hanc ut crudelissimam caedem et deflevit 
edicto et eos, qui spectare sustinuissent, exsecratus 
est. 

XXXI. Queri etiam palam de condicione temporum 
suorum solebat, quod nullis calamitatibus publicis 
insignirentur; Augusti principatum clade Variana, 
Tiberi ruina spectaculorum apud Fidenas memora- 


* Accius, T'rag., 203. 

> See chap. xv. 4. 

¢ For punishment, or to fight in the arena. 

a See Index and Friedlander, op. cit. (p. 446, ftn. b) iv, 
171 ff. 

* See Aug. xxiii. 1. f See Tib. xl. 


452 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


soon became well-known, being: * Strike so that he 
may fee] that he is dying." When a different man 
than he had intended had been killed, through a 
mistake in the names, he said that the victim too 
had deserved the same fate. He often uttered the 
familiar line of the tragic poet" : 


* Let them hate me, so they but fear me." 


He often inveighed against all the senators alike, 
as adherents of Sejanus and informers against his 
mother and brothers, producing the documents 
which he pretended to have burned, and upholding 
the cruelty of Tiberius as forced upon him, since he 
could not but believe so many accusers. He con- 
stantly tongue-lashed the equestrian order as devotees 
of the stage and the arena. Angered at the rabble 
for applauding a faction which he opposed, he cried : 
* [ wish the Roman people had but a single neck," 
and when the brigand Tetrinius was demanded, he 
said that those who asked for him were Tetriniuses 
also. Once a band of five retiarii 4 in tunics, matched 
against the same number of secutores,? yielded without 
a struggle; but when their death was ordered, one 
of them caught up his trident and slew all the 
victors. Caligula bewailed this in a public pro- 
clamation as a most cruel murder, and expressed 
his horror of those who had had the heart to 
witness it. 

XXXI. He even used openly to deplore the state 
of his times, because they had been marked by no 
public disasters, saying that the rule of Augustus had 
been made famous by the Varus massacre,’ and that 
of Tiberius by the collapse of the amphitheatre 
at Fidenae, while his own was threatened with 


453 


^- 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


bilem factum, suo oblivionem imminere prosperitate 
rerum ; atque identidem exercituum caedes, famem, 
pestilentiam, incendia, hiatum aliquem terrae 
optabat. 

XXXII. Animum quoque remittenti ludoque et 
epulis dedito eadem factorum dictorumque saevitia 
aderat. Saepe in conspectu prandentis vel comis- 
antis seriae quaestiones per tormenta habebantur, 
miles decollandi artifex quibuscumque e custodia 
capita amputabat. Puteolis dedicatione pontis, quem 
excogitatum ab eo significavimus, cum multos e 
litore invitasset ad se, repente omnis praecipitavit, 
quosdam gubernacula apprehendentes contis remis- 
que detrusit in mare. Romae publico epulo servum 
ob detractam lectis argenteam laminam carnifici 
confestim tradidit, ut manibus abscisis atque ante 
pectus e collo pendentibus, praecedente titulo qui 
causam poenae indicaret, per coetus epulantium 
circumduceretur. Murmillonem e ludo rudibus 
secum battuentem et sponte prostratum confodit 
ferrea sica ac more victorum cum palma discucurrit. 
Admota altaribus victima succinctus poparum habitu 
elato alte malleo cultrarium mactavit. Lautiore 
convivio effusus subito in cachinnos consulibus, qui 
iuxta cubabant, quidnam rideret blande quaerentibus : 


æ See chap. xix. * See note on chap. xxx. 3. 

¢ The popa knocked down the victim with a mallet or with 
the back of an axe-head, and the cultrarzus then cut the 
animals throat. 


454 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


oblivion because of its prosperity; and every now 
and then he wished for the destruction of his 
armies, for famine, pestilence, fires, or a great 
earthquake. 

XXXII. His acts and words were equally cruel, 
even when he was indulging in relaxation and given 
up to amusement and feasting. While he was 
lunching or revelling capital examinations by torture 
were often made in his presence, and a soldier who 
was an adept at decapitation cut off the heads of 
those who were brought from prison. At Puteoli, at 
the dedication of the bridge that he contrived, as has 
been said, after inviting a number to come to him 
from the shore, on a sudden he had them all thrown 
overboard; and when some caught hold of the 
rudders of the ships, he pushed them off into the 
sea with boathooks and oars. At a public banquet 
in Rome he immediately handed a slave over to the 
executioners for stealing a strip of silver from the 
couches, with orders that his hands be cut off and 
hung from his neck upon his breast, and that he 
then be led about among the guests, preceded by 
a placard giving the reason for his punishment. 
When a murmillo? from the gladiatorial school fought 
with him with wooden swords and fell on purpose, 
he stabbed him with a real dagger and then ran 
about with a palm-branch, as victors do. Once 
when he stood by the altar dressed as a popa, 
and a victim was brought up, he raised his mallet 
on high and slew the cwltrariws. At one of his 
more sumptuous banquets he suddenly burst into 
a fit of laughter, and when the consuls, who were 
reclining next him, politely inquired at what he 
was laughing, he replied: * What do you suppose, 


455 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


* Quid,” inquit, '* nisi uno meo nutu iugulari utrumque 
vestrum statim posse ? " 

XXXIII. Inter varios iocos, cum assistens simulacro 
Iovis Apellen tragoedum consuluisset uter illi maior 
videretur, cunctantem flagellis discidit conlaudans 
subinde vocem deprecantis quasi etiam in gemitu 
praeduleem. Quotiens uxoris vel amiculae collum 
exoscularetur, addebat: * Tam bona cervix simul ac 
iussero demetur.” Quin et subinde iactabat exquisi- 
turum se vel fidiculis de Caesonia sua, cur eam tanto 
opere diligeret. 

XXXIV. Nec minore livore ac malignitate quam 
superbia saevitiaque paene adversus omnis aevi 
hominum genus grassatus est.  Statuas virorum 
inlustrium ab Augusto ex Capitolina area propter 
angustias in campum Martium conlatas ita subvertit 
atque disiecit ut restitui salvis titulis non potuerint, 
vetuitque posthac viventium cuiquam usquam statuam 
aut imaginem nisi consulto et auctore se poni 
Cogitavit etiam de Homeri carminibus abolendis, cur 
enim sibi non licere, dicens, quod Platoni licuisset, 
qui eum e civitate quam constituebat eiecerit? Sed 
et Vergili ac Titi Livi scripta et imagines paulum afuit 
quin ex omnibus bibliothecis amoveret, quorum 
alterum ut nullius ingenii minimaeque doctrinae, : 
alterum ut verbosum in historia neglegentemque 
carpebat. De iuris quoque consultis, quasi scientiae 


* Literally, “ the cords," as an instrument of torture: cf. 
Tib. lxii. 2. On the whole passage cf. Calig. xxv. 3. and l. 2. 


456 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


except that at a single nod of mine both of you 
could have your throats cut on the spot? " 

XXXIII. As a sample of his humour, he took his 
place beside a statue of Jupiter, and asked the 
tragic actor Apelles which of the two seemed to him 
the greater, and when he hesitated, Caligula had 
him flayed with whips, extolling his voice from time 
to time, when the wretch begged for mercy, as 
passing sweet even in his groans. Whenever he 
kissed the neck of his wife or sweetheart, he would 
say: “Off comes this beautiful head whenever I 
give the word.” He even used to threaten now and 
then that he would resort to torture" if necessary, 
to find out from his dear Caesonia why he loved her 
so passionately. 

XXXIV. He assailed mankind of almost every 
epoch with no less envy and malice than insolence 
and cruelty. He threw down the statues of famous 
men, which for lack of room Augustus had moved 
from the court of the Capitol to the Campus Martius, 
and so utterly demolished them that they could not 
be set up again with their inscriptions entire ; and 
thereafter he forbade the erection of the statue of 
any living man anywhere, without his knowledge 
and consent. He even thought of destroying the 
poems of Homer, asking why he should not have 
the same privilege as Plato, who excluded Homer 
from his ideal commonwealth. More than that, he 
all but removed the writings and the busts of Vergil 
and of Titus Livius from all the libraries, railing at 
the former as a man of no talent and very little 
learning, and the latter as a verbose and careless 
historian. With regard to lawyers too, as if intend- 
ing to do away with any practice of their profession, 


457 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


eorum omnem usum aboliturus, saepe iactavit se 
mehercule effecturum ne quid respondere possint 
praeter eum. 

XXXV. Vetera familiarum insignia nobilissimo 
cuique ademit, Torquato torquem, Cineinnato crinem, 
Cn. Pompeio stirpis antiquae Magni cognomen. 
Ptolemaeum, de quo rettuli, et arcessitum e regno et 
exceptum honorifice, non alia de causa repente per- 
cussit, quam quod edente se munus ingressum 
spectacula convertisse hominum oculos fulgore 
purpureae abollae animadvertit. Pulchros et comatos 
quotiens sibi occurrerent, occipitio raso deturpabat. 
Erat Aesius! Proculus patre primipilari, ob egregiam 
corporis amplitudinem et speciem Colosseros dictus ; 
hunc spectaculis detractum repente et in harenam 
deductum Thraeci et mox hoplomacho? comparavit 
bisque victorem constringi sine mora iussit et pannis 
obsitum vicatim circumduci ac mulieribus ostendi, 
deinde iugulari. Nullus denique tam abiectae condi- 
cionis tamque extremae sortis fuit, cuius non commodis 
obtrectaret. Nemorensi ? regi, quod multos iam annos 


poteretur sacerdotio, validiorem adversarium suborn- 


avit. Cum quodam die muneris essedario Porio post 
prosperam pugnam servum suum manumittenti 


2 Aesius, Ihm ; Esius, 0. 
? hoplomacho, Sabellicus; aplomacho, à. 
3 Nemorensi, G?c; nemoressi, Q. 


* See chap. xxvi. l. 

^ He himself was bald; see chap. 1. 1. 

c The “ Giant Cupid” from «oAozcós and čpws. 

4 The priest of Diana at Nemi, who must be a fugitive 
slave and obtain his office by slaying his predecessor. 

* A gladiator who fought from a British chariot; see note 
on chap. xxx. 3. 


458 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


he often threatened that he would see to it, by 
Heaven, that they could give no advice contrary to 
his wish. 

XXXV. He took from all the noblest of the city 
the ancient devices of their families, from Torquatus 
his collar, from Cincinnatus his lock of hair, from 
Gnaeus Pompeius the surname Great belonging to 
his ancient race. After inviting Ptolemy, whom I 
have mentioned before," to come from his kingdom 
and receiving him with honour, he suddenly had 
him executed for no other reason than that when 
giving a gladiatorial show, he noticed that Ptolemy 
on entering the theatre attracted general attention 
by the splendour of his purple cloak. Whenever he 
ran across handsome men with fme heads of hair? he 
disfigured them by having the backs of their heads 
shaved. There was a certain Aesius Proculus, son of 
a chief centurion, called Colosseros* because of his 
remarkable size and handsome appearance ; this man 
Caligula ordered to be suddenly dragged from his 
seat in the amphitheatre and led into the arena, 
where he matched him first against a Thracian and 
then against a heavy-armed gladiator ; when Proculus 
was victor in both contests, Caligula gave orders that 
he be bound at once, clad in rags, and then put 
to death, after first being led about the streets and 
exhibited to the women. In short, there was no one 
of such low condition or such abject fortune that he 
did not envy him such advantages as he possessed. 
Since the king of Nemi? had now held his priest- 
hood for many years, he hired a stronger adversary 
to attack him. When an essedarius ? called Porius was 
vigorously applauded on the day of one of the games 
for setting his slave free after a victory, Caligula 


459 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


studiosius plausum esset, ita proripuit! se spectaculis, 
ut calcata lacinia togae praeceps per gradus iret, 
indignabundus et clamitans dominum gentium 
populum ex re levissima plus honoris gladiatori 
tribuentem quam consecratis principibus aut praesenti 
sibi. 

XXXV]. Pudicitiae neque suae? neque alienae. 
pepercit. M. Lepidum, Mnesterem pantomimum, 
quosdam obsides dilexisse fertur commercio mutui 
stupri. Valerius Catullus, consulari familia iuvenis, 
stupratum a se ac latera sibi contubernio eius defessa 
etiam vociferatus est. Super sororum incesta et 
notissimum prostitutae Pyrallidis amorem non temere 
ulla inlustriore femina abstinuit. Quas plerumque 
cum maritis ad cenam vocatas praeterque pedes suos 
transeuntis diligenter ac lente mercantium more con- 
siderabat, etiam faciem manu adlevans, si quae pudore 
submitterent ; quotiens deinde libuisset egressus tri- 
clinio cum maxime placitam sevocasset, paulo post 
recentibus adhuc lasciviae notis reversus vel laudabat 
palam vel vituperabat, singula enumerans bona malave 
corporis atque concubitus. Quibusdam absentium 
maritorum nomine repudium ipse misit iussitque in . 
acta ita referri. 

XXXVII. Nepotatus sumptibus omnium  prodi- 
gorum ingenia superavit, commentus novum bal- 
nearum usum, portentosissima genera ciborum atque 

l proripuit se, Roth; proripuit, M L!P ; proripuit e, GR; 


se proripuit, Z°S7'; se proripuit e, TIQ. 
? neque suae, added in Nç; omitted by the other mss. 


460 ‘ 


. GAIUS CALIGULA 


rushed from the amphitheatre in such haste that he 
trod on the fringe of his toga and went headlong 
down the steps, fuming and shouting: “The people 
that rule the world give more honour to a gladiator 
for a trifling act than to their deified emperors or 
to the one still present with them.” 

XXXVI. He respected neither his own chastity 
nor that of anyone else. He is said to have had 
unnatural relations with Marcus Lepidus, the panto- 
mimic actor Mnester, and certain hostages. Valerius 
Catullus, a young man of a consular family, publicly 
proclaimed that he had violated the emperor and 
worn himself out in commerce with him. To 
say nothing of his incest with his sisters and his 
notorious passion for the concubine Pyrallis, there 
was scarcely any woman of rank whom he did 
not approach. These as a rule he invited to 
dinner with their husbands, and as they passed 
by the foot of his couch, he would inspect them 
critically and deliberately, as if buying slaves, even 
putting out his hand and lifting up the face of 
anyone who looked down in modesty; then as 
often as the fancy took him he would leave the 
room, sending for the one who pleased him best, 
and returning soon afterward with evident signs 
of what had occurred, he would openly commend 
or criticise his partner, recounting her charms 
or defects and commenting on her conduct. To 
some he personally sent a bill of divorce in the 
name of their absent husbands, and had it entered 
in the public records. 

. XXXVII. In reckless extravagance he outdid 
the prodigals of all times in ingenuity, inventing 
a new sort of baths and unnatural varieties of food 


461 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


cenarum, ut calidis frigidisque unguentis lavaretur, 
pretiosissima margarita aceto liquefacta sorberet, con- 
vivis ex auro panes et obsonia apponeret, aut frugi 
hominem esse oportere dictitans aut Caesarem. 
Quin et nummos non mediocris summae e fastigio 
basilicae Iuliae per aliquot dies sparsit in plebem. 
Fabricavit et deceris Liburnicas gemmatis puppibus, 
versicoloribus velis, magna thermarum et porticuum 
et tricliniorum laxitate magnaque etiam vitium 
et pomiferarum arborum varietate; quibus discumbens 
de die inter choros ac symphonias! litora Campaniae 
peragraret. In extructionibus praetoriorum atque 
villarum omni ratione posthabita nihil tam efficere 
concupiscebat quam quod posse effici negaretur. Et 
iactae itaque moles infesto ac profundo mari et excisae 
rupes durissimi silicis et campi montibus aggere 
aequati et complanata fossuris montium iuga, in- 
credibili quidem celeritate, cum morae culpa capite 
lueretur. Ac ne singula enumerem, immensas opes 
totumque ilud Ti? Caesaris vicies ac septies milies 
sestertium non toto vertente anno absumpsit. 
XXXVIII. Exhaustus igitur atque egens ad rapinas 
convertit animum vario et exquisitissimo calumniarum 
et auctionum et vectigalium genere. Negabat iure 
civitatem Romanam usurpare eos, quorum maiores 
sibi posterisque eam impetrassent, nisi si filii essent, 
neque enim intellegi debere * posteros" ultra hunc 


1 symphonias, GSNg; the other mss have symphro or 
simphro. l 
2 Ti., Roth; T., Q. 


a The Liburnian galleys, so-called from a people of Illy- 
ricum, were famous for their speed. They commonly had 
but one or two banks of oars. 


462 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


and feasts; for he would bathe in hot or cold 
perfumed oils, drink pearls of great price dissolved 
in vinegar, and set before his guests loaves and 
meats of gold, declaring that a man ought either 
to be frugal or Caesar. He even scattered 
large sums of money among the commons from 
the gable of the basilica Julia for several days in 
succession. He also built Liburnian galleys* with 
ten banks of oars, with sterns set with gems, 
particoloured sails, huge spacious baths, colonnades, 
and banquet-halls, and even a great variety of vines 
and fruit trees; that on board of them he might re- 
cline at table from an early hour, and coast along the 
shores of Campania amid songs and choruses. He 
built villas and country houses with utter disregard of 
expense, caring for nothing so much as to do what 
men said was impossible. So he built moles out 
into the deep and stormy sea, tunnelled rocks of 
hardest flint, built up plains to the height of 
mountains and razed mountains to the level of 
the plain; all with incredible dispatch, since the 
penalty for delay was death. To make a long 
story short, vast sums of money, including the 
2,700,000,000 sesterces which Tiberius Caesar had 
amassed, were squandered by him in less than the 
revolution of a year. 

XXXVII. Having thus impoverished himself, 
from very need he turned his attention to pillage 
through a complicated and cunningly devised system 
of false accusations, auction sales, and imposts. He 
ruled that Roman citizenship could not lawfully 
be enjoyed by those whose forefathers had ob- 
tained it for themselves and their descendants, 
except in the case of sons, since “descendants” 


463 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


gradum ; prolataque Divorum Iuli et Augusti diplo- 
mata ut vetera et obsoleta deflabat.! Arguebat et 
perperam editos census, quibus postea quacumque de 
causa quicquam incrementi accessisset. Testamenta 
primipilarium, qui ab initio Tiberi principatus neque 
illum neque se heredem reliquissent, ut ingrata 
rescidit ; item ceterorum ut irrita et vana quoscumque 
quis diceret herede Caesare mori destinasse. Quo 
metu iniecto cum iam et ab ignotis inter familiares et 
a parentibus inter liberos palam heres nuncuparetur, 
derisores vocabat, quod post nuncupationem vivere 
perseverarent, et multis venenatas matteas misit. 
Cognoscebat autem de talibus causis, taxato prius modo 
summae ad quem conficiendum consideret, confecto 
demum excitabatur. Ac ne paululum quidem morae 
patiens super quadraginta reos quondam ex diversis 
criminibus una sententia condemnavit gloriatus- 
que est expergefacta e somno Caesonia quantum 
egisset, dum ea meridiaret. 

Auctione proposita reliquias omnium spectaculorum 
subiecit ac venditavit, exquirens per se pretia et usque 
eo extendens, ut quidam immenso coacti quaedam 
emere ac bonis exuti venas sibiinciderent. Nota res 


1 deflabat, Lipsius; deflabat, corrected to defluebat (= de- 
flebat), M ; deflebat, XT; detebat; G. 


* That is, if anyone chanced to have received an addition 
to his income since the last census, he charged him with 
having made a false report to the censors, and of course con- 
fiscated his estate. 


464 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


ought not to be understood as going beyond that 
degree ; and when certificates of the deified Julius 
and Augustus were presented to him, he waved 
them aside as old and out of date. He also charged 
that those estates had been falsely returned, to 
which any addition had later been made from 
any cause whatever. If any chief centurions since 
the beginning of Tiberius’ reign had not named 
that emperor or himself among their heirs, he 
set aside their wills on the ground of ingratitude ; 
also the testaments of all others, as null and void, 
if anyone said that they had intended to make 
Caesar their heir when they died. When he 
had roused such fear in this way that he came 
to be named openly as heir by strangers among 
their intimates and by parents among their 
children, he accused them of making game of 
him by continuing to live after such a declaration, 
and to many of them he sent poisoned cakes. He 
used further to conduct the trial of such cases 
in person, naming in advance the sum which he 
proposed to raise at each sitting, and not rising 
until it was made up. Impatient of the slightest 
delay, he once condemned in a single sentence 
more than forty who were accused on different 
counts, boasting to Caesonia, when she woke after 
a nap, of the great amount of business he had 
done while she was taking her siesta. 

Appointing an auction, he put up and sold 
what was left from all the shows, personally 
soliciting bids and running them up so high, that 
some who were forced to buy articles at an 


. enormous price and were thus stripped of their 


possessions, opened their veins. A well-known 


465 
VOL. I. HH 


e 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK 1V 


est, Aponio Saturnino inter subsellia dormitante 
monitum a Gaio praeconem ne praetorium virum 
crebro capitis motu nutantem sibi praeteriret, nec 
licendi finem factum, quoad tredecim gladiatores 
sestertium nonagies ignoranti addicerentur. 

XXXIX. In Gallia quoque, cum damnatarum 
sororum ornamenta et supellectilem et servos atque 
etiam libertos immensis pretiis vendidisset, invitatus 
lucro, quidquid instrumenti veteris aulae erat ab urbe 
repetiit comprensis ad deportandum meritoriis quoque 
vehiculis et pistrinensibus iumentis, adeo ut et panis 
Romae saepe deficeret et litigatorum plerique, quod 
occurrere absentes ad vadimonium non possent, causa 
caderent. Cui instrumento distrahendo nihil non 
fraudis ac lenocinii adhibuit, modo avaritiae singulos 
increpans et quod non puderet eos locupletiores esse 
quam se, modo paenitentiam simulans quod princi- 
palium rerum privatis copiam faceret. Compererat 
provincialem locupletem ducenta sestertia numerasse 
vocatoribus, ut per fallaciam convivio interponeretur, 
nec tulerat moleste tam magno aestimari honorem 
cenae suae ; huic postero die sedenti in auctione misit, 
qui nescio quid frivoli ducentis milibustraderet diceret- 
que cenaturum apud Caesarem vocatu ipsius. 

XL. Vectigalia nova atque inaudita primum per 


* The part occupied by Augustus and Tiberius, to which 
Caligula had made some additions. 


466 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


incident is that of Aponius Saturninus; he fell 
asleep on one of the bencbes, and as the auc- 
tioneer was warned by Gaius not to overlook the 
praetorian gentleman who kept nodding to him, 
the bidding was not stopped until thirteen glad- 
iators were knocked down to the unconscious sleeper 
at nine million sesterces. m 

XXXIX. When he was in Gaul and had sold 
at immense figures the jewels, furniture, slaves, 
and even the freedmen of his sisters who had 
been condemned to death, finding the business 
so profitable, he sent to the city for all the para- - 
phernalia of the old palace," seizing for its trans- 
portation even public carriages and animals from 
the bakeries; with the result that bread was often 
scarce at Rome and many who had cases in court 
lost them from inability to appear and meet their 
bail. To get rid of this furniture, he resorted to 
every kind of trickery and wheedling, now rail- 
ing at the bidders for avarice and because they 
were not ashamed to be richer than he, and 
now feigning regret for allowing common men 
to acquire the property of princes. Having learned 
that a rich provincial had paid those who issued the 
emperor's invitations two hundred thousand sesterces, 
to be smuggled in among the guests at one of his 
dinner-parties, he was not in the least displeased 
that the honour of dining with him was rated 
so high; but when next day the man appeared 
at his auction, he sent a messenger to hand him 
some trifle or other at the price of two hundred 
thousand sesterces and say that he should dine 
with Caesar on his personal invitation. 

XL. He levied new and unheard of taxes, at 


467 
HH 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


publicanos, deinde, quia lucrum exuberabat, per 
centuriones tribunosque praetorianos exercuit, nullo 
rerum aut hominum genere omisso, cui non tributi 
aliquid imponeret. Pro edulibus, quae tota urbe 
venirent, certum statumque exigebatur ; pro litibus 
ac iudiciis ubicumque conceptis quadragesima summae, 
de qua litigaretur, nec sine poena, si quis composuisse 
vel donasse negotium convinceretur; ex gerulorum 
diurnis quaestibus pars octava ; ex capturis prostitu- 
tarum quantum quaeque uno concubitu mereret ; 
additumque ad caput legis, ut tenerentur publico et 
quae meretricium quive lenocinium fecissent, nec non 
et matrimonia obnoxia essent. 

XLI. Eius modi vectigalibus indictis neque propo- 
sitis, cum per ignorantiam scripturae multa commissa 
fierent, tandem flagitante populo proposuit quidem 
legem, sed et minutissimis litteris et angustissimo 
loco, uti ne cui describere liceret. Ac ne quod non 
manubiarum genus experiretur, lupanar in Palatio 
constituit, districtisque et instructis pro loci dignitate 
compluribus cellis, in quibus matronae ingenuique 
starent, misit circum fora et basilicas nomenculatores 
ad invitandos ad libidinem iuvenes senesque ; praebita 
advenientibus pecunia faenebris appositique qui 
nomina palam  subnotarent, quasi adiuvantium 
Caesaris reditus. Ac ne ex lusu quidem aleae 
compendium spernens plus mendacio atque etiam 


a See note on Aug. xix. l. 


468 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


first through the publicans and then, because their 
profit was so great, through the centurions and 
tribunes of the praetorian guard; and there was 
no class of commodities or men on whichhe did 
not impose some form of tariff. On all eatables 
sold in any part of the city he levied a fixed and 
definite charge; on lawsuits and legal processes 
begun everywhere, a fortieth part of the sum 
involved, providing a penalty in case anyone was 
found guilty of compromising or abandoning a 
suit; on the daily wages of porters, an eighth; 
on the earnings of prostitutes, as much as each 
received for one embrace; and a clause was added 
to this chapter of the law, providing that those who 
had ever been prostitutes or acted as panders should 
be liable to this publie tax, and that even matri- 
mony should not be exempt. 

XLI. When taxes ofthis kind had been proclaimed, 
but not published in writing, inasmuch as many 
offences were committed through ignorance of the 
letter of the law, he at last, on the urgent demand of 
the people, had the law posted up, but in a very 
narrow place and in excessively small letters, to 
prevent the making of a copy. To leave no kind of 
plunder untried, he opened a brothel in his palace, 
setting apart a number of rooms and furnishing them 
to suit the grandeur of the place, where matrons 
and freeborn youths should stand exposed. Then 
he sent his pages% about the fora and basilicas, 
to invite young men and old to enjoy themselves, 
lending money on interest to those who came and 
having clerks openly take down their names, as 
contributors to Caesars revenues. He did not 
even disdain to make money from play, and to 


469 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


periurio lucrabatur. Et quondam proximo conlusori 
demandata vice sua progressus in atrium domus, cum 
praetereuntis duos equites R. locupletis sine mora 
corripi confiscarique iussisset, exultans rediit glorians- 
que numquam se prosperiore alea usum. 


XLII. Filia vero nata paupertatem nec iam impera- | 


toria modo sed et patria conquerens onera conlationes 
in alimonium ac dotem puellae recepit. Edixit et 
strenas ineunte anno se recepturum stetitque in 
vestibulo aedium Kal. Ian. ad captandas stipes, quas 
plenis ante eum manibus ac sinu omnis generis turba 
fundebat. Novissime contrectandae pecuniae cupi- 
dine incensus, saepe super immensos aureorum acer- 
vos patentissimo diffusos loco et nudis pedibus 
spatiatus et toto corpore aliquamdiu volutatus est. 
XLIII. Militiam resque bellicas semel attigit 
neque ex destinato, sed cum ad visendum nemus 
flumenque Clitumni Mevaniam processisset, admoni- 
tus de supplendo numero Batavorum, quos circa 
se habebat, expeditionis Germanicae impetum cepit ; 
neque distulit, sed legionibus et auxiliis undique 
excitis, dilectibus ubique acerbissime actis, contracto 
et omnis generis commeatu quanto numquam antea! 
iter ingressus est confecitque modo tam festinanter 
et rapide, ut praetorianae cohortes contra morem 
1 antea iter, Gronovius: ante alter, 2 


See Aug. lvii. 1. 

* Sinus means the bosom of the toga, which was often 
used as a pocket. 

* Celebrated for its beautiful scenery, described by Pliny, 
Epist. 8. 8. 


470 


m E ems m e ne 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


increase his gains by falsehood and even by perjury. 
Having on one occasion given up his place to the 
player next him and gone into the courtyard, he spied 
two wealthy Roman knights passing by ; he ordered 
them to be seized at once and their property con- 
fiscated and came back exultant, boasting that he 
had never played in better luck. 

XLII. But when his daughter was born, com- 
plaining of his narrow means, and no longer 
merely of the burdens of a ruler but of those 
of a father as well, he took up contributions for 
the girl's maintenance and dowry. He also made 
proclamation that he would receive New Year's 
gifts and on the Kalends of January took his 
place in the entrance to the Palace, to clutch the | 
coins which a throng of people of all classes 
showered on him by handfuls and lapfuls. Finally, 
seized with a mania for feeling the touch of money, 
he would often pour out huge piles of goldpieces 
in some open place, walk over them barefooted, and 
wallow in them for a long time with his whole body. 

XLIII. He had but one experience with military 
affairs or war, and then on a sudden impulse; for 
having gone to Mevania to visit the river Clitumnus ^ 
and its grove, he was reminded of the necessity of 
recruiting his body-guard of Batavians and was 
seized with the idea of an expedition to Germany. 
So without delay he assembled legions and aux- 
iliaries from all quarters, holding levies every- 
where with the utmost strictness, and collecting 
provisions of every kind on an unheard of scale. 
Then he began his march and made it now so 
hurriedly and rapidly, that the praetorian cohorts 
were forced, contrary to all precedent, to lay their 


411 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


signa iumentis imponere et ita subsequi cogerentur, 
interdum adeo segniter delicateque, ut octaphoro 
veheretur atque a propinquarum urbium plebe verri 
sibi vias et conspergi propter pulverem exigeret. 

XLIV. Postquam castra attigit, ut se acrem ac 
severum ducem ostenderet, legatos, qui auxilia serius 
ex diversis locis adduxerant, cum ignominia dimisit ; 
at in exercitu recensendo plerisque centurionum 
maturis iam et nonnullis ante paucissimos quam 
consummaturi essent dies, primos pilos ademit, 
causatus senium cuiusque et imbecillitatem ; cetero- 
rum increpita cupiditate commoda emeritae militiae 
ad senum! milium summam recidit. Nihil autem 
amplius quam Adminio Cynobellini Britannorum 
regis filio, qui pulsus a patre cum exigua manu 
transfugerat, in deditionem recepto, quasi universa 
tradita insula, magnificas Romam litteras misit, 
monitis speculatoribus, ut vehiculo ad Forum usque 
et curiam pertenderent nec nisi in aede Martis ac 
frequente senatu consulibus traderent. 

XLV. Mox deficiente belli materia paucos de 
custodia Germanos traici occulique trans Rhenum 
iussit ac sibi post prandium quam tumultuosissime 
adesse hostem nuntiari. Quo facto proripuit se cum 


! senum, Lipsins ; sescentorum, 2. 


a Half the amount established by Augustus ; see Dio, 55. 23. 

> Ordinarily such vehicles were allowed to pass through 
the city streets only before sunrise or during the last two 
hours of the day. See Friedlinder, Roman Life and Manners, 
Eng. trans. iv. p. 28. 

¢ See Aug. xxix. 2. 


472 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


standards on the pack-animals and thus to follow 
him; again he was so lazy and luxurious that he 
was carried in a litter by eight bearers, requiring 
the inhabitants of the towns through which he 
passed to sweep the roads for him and sprinkle 
them to lay the dust. 

XLIV. On reaching his camp, to show his vigil- 
ance and strictness as a commander, he dismissed 
in disgrace the generals who were late in bringing 
in the auxiliaries from various places, and in re- 
viewing his troops he deprived many of the chief 
centurions who were well on in years of their 
rank, in some cases only a few days before they 
would have served their time, giving as a reason 
their age and infirmity; then railing at the rest 
for their avarice, he reduced the rewards given on 
completion of full military service to six thousand 
sesterces.% | 

All that he accomplished was to receive 
the surrender of Adminius, son of Cynobellinus 
king of the Britons, who had been banished by 
his father and had deserted to the Romans 
with a small force; yet as if the entire island had 
submitted to him, he sent a grandiloquent letter 
to Rome, commanding the couriers who carried 
it to ride in their post-chaise^ all the way to the 


Forum and the House, and not to deliver it to 


anyone except the consuls, in the temple of Mars 
the Avenger,° before a full meeting of the senate. 
XLV. Presently, finding no one to fight with, 
he had a few Germans of his body-guard taken 
across the river and concealed there, and word 
brought him after luncheon with great bustle and 
confusion that the enemy were close at hand. Upon 


473 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


amicis et parte equitum praetorianorum in proximam 
silvam, truncatisque arboribus et in modum tropae- 
orum adornatis ad lumina reversus, eorum quidem qui 
secuti non essent timiditatem et ignaviam corripuit, 
comites autem et participes victoriae novo genere ac 
nomine coronarum donavit, quas distinctas solis ac 
lunae siderumque specie exploratorias appellavit. 
Rursus obsides quosdam abductos e litterario ludo 
clamque praemissos, deserto repente convivio, cum 
equitatu insecutus veluti profugos ac reprehensos in 
catenis reduxit; in hoc quoque mimo praeter modum 
intemperans. Repetita cena renuntiantis coactum 
agmen sic ut erant loricatos ad discumbendum 
adhortatus est. Monuit etiam notissimo Vergili 
versu “ durarent secundisque se rebus servarent." 

Atque inter haec absentem senatum populumque 
gravissimo obiurgavit edicto, quod Caesare proeli- 
ante et tantis discriminibus obiecto tempestiva 
convivia, circum et theatra et amoenos secessus 
celebrarent. 

XLVI. Postremo quasi perpetraturus TN de- 
recta acie in litore Oceani ac ballistis machinisque 
dispositis, nemine gnaro aut opinante quidnam 
coepturus esset, repente ut conchas legerent galeas- 
que et sinus replerent imperavit, *spolia Oceani " 
vocans * Capitolio Palatioque debita," et in indicium 


^ From exploratores, scouts or rangers. 
> Aen. 1. 207. 
* One of the various kinds of ** torsion-engines ” (tormenta) 
used by the Romans. The hallista cast stones, the catapulta 
large arrows or darts. 


474 


` 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


this he rushed out with his friends and a part 
of the praetorian cavalry to the woods close by, 
and after cutting the branches from some trees 
and adorning them like trophies, he returned by 
torchlight, taunting those who had not followed 
him as timorpus and cowardly, and presenting his 
companions and the partners in his victory with 
crowns of a new kind and of a new name, orna- 
mented with figures of the sun, moon and stars, 
and called ezploratoriae.* Another time some 
hostages were taken from a common school and 
secretly sent on ahead of him, when he suddenly 
left a banquet and pursued them with the cavalry 
as if they were runaways, caught them, and brought 
them back in fetters, in this farce too showing 


immoderate extravagance. On coming back to 


the table, when some announced that the army 
was assembled, he urged them to take their places 
just as they were, in their coats of mail. He 
also admonished them in the familiar line of Vergil 
to “bear up and save themselves for better days." ^ 

Meanwhile he rebuked the absent senate and 
people in a stern edict because “while Caesar was 
fighting and exposed to such dangers they were 
indulging in revels and frequenting the theatres 


and their pleasant villas." 


XLVI. Finally, as if he intended to bring the war 
to an end, he drew up a line of battle on the shore 
of the Ocean, arranging his ballistas?^ and other 
artillery; and when no one knew or could imagine 
what he was going to do, he suddenly bade them 
gather shells and fill their helmets and the folds of 
their gowns, calling them “spoils from the Ocean, 
due to the Capitol and Palatine." As a monument 


475 


^ 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


vietoriae altissimam turrem excitavit, ex qua ut 
Pharo noctibus ad regendos navium cursus ignes 
emicarent ; pronuntiatoque militi donativo centenis 
viritim denariis, quasi omne exemplum liberalitatis 
supergressus: “ Abite,” inquit, * laeti, abite locu- 

pletes.” | | 

XLVII. Conversus hinc ad curam triumphi praeter 
captivos ac transfugas barbaros Galliarum quoque 
procerissimum quemque et, ut ipse dicebat, åfroĝpiadp- 
Bevrov, ac nonnullos ex principibus legit ac seposuit 
ad pompam coegitque non tantum rutilare et 
summittere comam, sed et sermonem Germanicum 
addiscere et nomina barbaricaferre. Praecepit etiam 
triremis, quibus introierat Oceanum, magna ex parte 
itinere terrestri Romam devehi Scripsit et pro- 
curatoribus, triumphum appararent quam minima 
summa, sed quantus numquam alius fuisset, quando 
in omnium hominum bona ius haberent. 

XLVIII. Prius quam provincia decederet, consilium 
iniit nefandae atrocitatis legiones, quae post excessum 
Augusti seditionem olim moverant, contrucidandi, 
quod et patrem suum Germanicum ducem et se 
infantem tunc obsedissent, vixque a tam praecipiti 
cogitatione revocatus, inhiberi nullo modo potuit quin 
decimare velle perseveraret. Vocatas itaque ad con- 
tionem inermes, atque etiam gladiis depositis, equitatu 
armato circumdedit. Sed cum videret suspecta re 
plerosque dilabi ad resumenda si qua vis fieret arma, 


* The lighthouse at Alexandria. 
b To the privy-purse, of course. 
¢ See chap. ix. 
4 See Aug. xxiv. 2. 


476 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


of his victory he erected a lofty tower, from which 
lights were to shine at night to guide the course of 
ships, as from the Pharos.* Then promising the 
soldiers a gratuity of a hundred denarii each, as if 
he had shown unprecedented liberality, he said, 
* Go your way happy; go your way rich." 

XLVII. Thenturning his attention to his triumph, 
in addition to a few captives and deserters from the 
barbarians he chose all the tallest of the Gauls, and 
as he expressed it, those who were * worthy of a 
triumph,” as well as some of the chiefs. ‘These he 
reserved for his parade, compelling them not only to 
dye their hair red and to let it grow long, but also 
to learn the language of the Germans and assume 
barbarian names. He also had the triremes in which 
he had entered the Ocean carried overland to Rome 
for the greater part of the way. He wrote besides 
to his financial agents to prepare for a triumph at 
the smallest possible cost, but on a grander scale 
than had ever before been known, since the goods 
of all were at their disposal. 

XLVIII. Before leaving the province he formed a 
design of unspeakable cruelty, that of butchering the 
legions that had begun the mutiny years before just 
after the death of Augustus, because - they had 
beleagured his father Germanicus, their leader, and 
himself, at the time an infant; and though he was 
with difficulty turned from this mad purpose, he 
could by no means be prevented from persisting in 
his desire to decimate? them. Accordingly he sum- 
moned them to an assembly without their arms, 


. not even wearing their swords, and surrounded them 


with armed horsemen. But seeing that some of the 
legionaries, suspecting his purpose, were stealing off 


477 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


profugit contionem confestimque urbem 1 petit, deflexa 
omni acerbitate in senatum, cui ad avertendos ? tan- 
torum dedecorum rumores palam minabatur, querens 
inter cetera fraudatum se iusto triumpho, cum ipse 
paulo ante, ne quid de honoribus suis ageretur, etiam 
sub mortis poena denuntiasset. 

XLIX. Aditus ergo in itinere a legatis amplissimi 
ordinis ut maturaret orantibus, quam maxima voce: 
* Veniam," inquit, * veniam, et hic mecum," capulum 
gladii crebro verberans, quo cinctus erat. Edixit et 
reverti se, sed iis tantum qui optarent, equestri 
ordini et populo; nam se neque civem neque 
principem senatui amplius fore.  Vetuit etiam 
quemquam senatorum sibi occurrere. Atque omisso 
vel dilato triumpho ovans urbem natali suo ingressus 
est; intraque quartum mensem periit, ingentia 
facinora ausus et aliquanto maiora moliens, siquidem 
proposuerat Antium, deinde Alexandream commigrare 
interempto prius utriusque ordinis electissimo quoque. 
Quod ne cui dubium videatur, in secretis eius reperti 
sunt duo libelli diverso titulo, alteri “ Gladius," 
alteri * Pugio" index erat; ambo nomina et notas 
continebant morti destinatorum. Inventa et arca 
ingens variorum venenorum plena, quibus mox a 


* 1 urbem, fT; urbem omnem, MGS; omnem urbem, X. 
2 ad avertendos, TL’; animadvertendos, T; the ofher mss. 
have advertendos, 


See note on Aug. xxii. 


478 


ec i aem m a a i a S a i s s aa. 


1 GAIUS CALIGULA 


to resume their arms, in case any violence should be 
offered them, he fled from the assembly and set out 
for the city in a hurry, turning all his ferocity upon 
the senate, against which he uttered open threats, in 
order to divert the gossip about his own dishonour. 
He complained among other things that he had 
been cheated of his fairly earned triumph ; whereas 
a short time before he had himself given orders 
that on pain of death no action should be taken 
about his honours. 

XLIX. Therefore when he was met on the road by 
envoys from that distinguished body, begging him to 
hasten his return, he roared, ^I will come, and this 
will be with me," frequently smiting the hilt of the 
sword which he wore at his side. He also made 
proclamation that he was returning, but only to 
those who desired his presence, the equestrian order 
and the people, for to the senate he would never 
more be fellow-citizen nor prince. He even for- 
bade anyone of the senators to meet him. Then 
giving up or postponing his triumph, he entered 
the city on his birthday in an ovation ;^ and within 
four months he perished, having dared great crimes 
and meditating still greater ones. For he had made 
up his mind to move to Antium, and later to 
Alexandria, after first slaying the noblest members of 
the two orders. That no one may doubt this, let me 
say that among his private papers two notebooks 
were found with different titles, one called * The 
Sword" and the other * The Dagger," and both 
containing the names and marks of identification of 
those whom he had doomed to death. There was 
found besides a great chest full of divers kinds of 
poisons, which they say were later thrown intothe sea 


i 479 


2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV . 


Claudio demersis infecta maria traduntur non sine 
piscium exitio, quos enectos aestus in proxima litora 
eiecit. 

L. Statura fuit eminenti, colore expallido, corpore 
enormi, gracilitate maxima cervicis et crurum, oculis 
et temporibus concavis, fronte lata et torva, capillo 
raro at circa verticem nullo, hirsutus cetera. Quare 
transeunte eo prospicere ex superiore parte aut 
omnino quacumque de causa capram nominare, 
criminosum et exitiale habebatur. Vultum vero 
natura horridum ac taetrum etiam ex industria 
efferabat componens ad speculum in omnem terrorem 
ac formidinem. 

Valitudo ei neque corporis neque animi constitit. 
Puer comitiali morbo vexatus, in adulescentia ita pa-. 
tiens laborum erat, ut tamen nonnumquam subita de- 
fectione ingredi, stare, colligere semet ac sufferre vix 
posset. Mentis valitudinem et ipse senserat ac 
subinde de secessu deque purgando cerebro cogitavit. 
Creditur potionatus a Caesonia uxore amatorio quidem 
medicamento, sed quod in furorem verterit. Incita- 
batur insomnio maxime; neque enim plus quam 
tribus nocturnis horis quiescebat ac ne iis quidem 
placida quiete, sed pavida miris rerum imaginibus, ut 
qui inter ceteras pelagi quondam speciem conloquen- 
tem secum videre visus sit. Ideoque magna parte 
noctis vigiliae cubandique taedio nunc toro residens, 


a Of. chap. iii. 1. > See Jul. xlv. 1. 
480 


eee 


oe ee ee 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


by Claudius and so infected it as to kill the fish, 
which were thrown up by the tide upon the neigh- 
bouring shores. 

L. He was very tall and extremely pale, with a 
huge body, but very thin neck and legs. His eyes 
and temples were hollow, his forehead broad and 
grim, his hair thin and entirely gone on the top 
of his head, though his body was hairy. Because 
of this to look upon him from a higher place as he 
passed by, or for any reason whatever to mention a 
goat, was treated as a capital offence. While his 
face was naturally forbidding and ugly, he purposely 
made it even more savage, practising all kinds of 
terrible and fearsome expressions before a mirror. 

He was sound neither of body nor mind. As 
a boy he was troubled with the falling sickness," 
and while in his youth he had some endurance, yet 
at times because of sudden faintness he was hardly 
able to walk, to stand up, to collect his thoughts, or to 
hold up his head. He himself realised his mental in- 
firmity, and thought at times of going into retirement 
and clearing his brain. It is thought that his wife 
Caesonia gave him a drug intended for a love 
potion, which however had the effect of driving 
him mad. He was especially tormented with sleep- 
lessness ; for he never rested more than three hours 
at night, and even for that length of time he did 
not sleep quietly, but was terrified by strange 
apparitions, once for example dreaming that the 
spirit of the Ocean talked with him. Therefore 
weary of lying in bed wide awake during the greater 
part of the night, he would now sit upon his couch, 
and now wander through the long colonnades, crying 


481 
VOL. I. II 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


nunc per longissimas porticus vagus invocare 
identidem atque expectare lucem consuerat. 

LI. Non inmerito mentis valitudini attribuerim 
diversissima in eodem vitia, summam confidentiam et 
contra nimium metum. Nam qui deos tanto opere 
contemneret, ad minima tonitrua et fulgura conivere, 
caput obvolvere, at vero maiore! proripere see strato 
sub lectumque condere solebat. Peregrinatione 
quidem Siciliensi irrisis multum locorum miraculis 
repente a Messana noctu profugit Aetnaei verticis 
fumo ac murmure pavefactus. Adversus barbaros 
quoque minacissimus, cum trans Rhenum inter 
angustias densumque agmen iter essedo faceret, 
dicente quodam non mediocrem fore consternationem 
sicunde hostis appareat, equum ilico conscendit ac 
propere reversus ad pontes, ut eos calonibus et 
impedimentis stipatos repperit, impatiens morae per 
manus ac super capita hominum translatus est. Mox 
etiam audita rebellione Germaniae fugam et subsidia 
fugae classes apparabat, uno solacio adquiescens 
transmarinas certe sibi superfuturas provincias, si 
victores Alpium iuga, ut Cimbri, vel etiam urbem, ut 
Senones quondam, occuparent; unde credo percus- 
soribus eius postea consilium natum apud tumultuantes 
milites ementiendi, ipsum sibi manus intulisse nuntio 
malae pugnae perterritum. 

l at vero maiore, MLP (ad, M.) ; ad (at) vero maiora, 


GYO ; ad maiora vero HZ Ne. 
2 reversus, Bentley, Cannegieter ; versus, 0. 


a After his murder ; probably referring to the praetorians. 
482 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


out from time to time for daylight and longing for 
its coming. 

LI. I think I may fairly attribute to mental weak- 
ness the existence of two exactly opposite faults in 
the same person, extreme assurance and, on the 
other hand, excessive timorousness. For this man, 
who so utterly despised the gods, was wont at the 
slightest thunder and lightning to shut his eyes, to 
muffle up his head, and if they increased, to leap from 
his bed and hide under it. In his journey through 
Sicily, though he made all manner of fun of the 
miracles in various places, he suddenly fled from 
Messana by night, panic-stricken by the smoke and 
roaring from Aetna’s crater. Full of threats as he 
was also against the barbarians, when he was riding 
in a chariot through a narrow defile on the far side 
of the Rhine, and someone said that there would be 
no slight panic if the enemy should appear any- 
where, he immediately mounted a horse and hastily 
returned to the bridges. Finding them crowded 
with camp servants and baggage, in his impatience 
of any delay he was passed along from hand to 
hand over the men’s heads. Soon after, hearing 
of an uprising in Germany, he made preparations 
to flee from the city and equipped fleets for the 
purpose, finding comfort only in the thought that 
the provinces across the sea would at any rate be 
left him, in case the enemy should be victorious and 
take possession of the summits of the Alps, as the 
Cimbri, or even of the city, as the Senones had once 
done. And it was this, I think, that later inspired 
his assassins with the idea of pretending to the 
riotous soldiers * that he had laid hands on himself in 
terror at the report of a defeat. 


483 
112 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


LII. Vestitu calciatuque et cetero habitu neque 
patrio neque civili, ac ne virili quidem ac denique 
humano semper usus est. Saepe depictas gemmatasque 
indutus paenulas, manuleatus et armillatus in 
publicum processit ; aliquando sericatus et cycladatus ; 
ac modo in crepidis vel coturnis, modo in speculatoria 
caliga, nonnumquam socco muliebri ; plerumque vero 
aurea barba, fulmen tenens aut fuscinam aut caduceum 
deorum insignia, atque etiam Veneris cultu conspectus 
est. Triumphalem quidem ornatum etiam ante expe- 
ditionem assidue  gestavit, interdum et Magni 
Alexandri thoracem repetitum e conditorio eius. 

LIII. Ex disciplinis liberalibus minimum eruditioni, 
eloquentiae plurimum attendit, quamtumvis facundus 
et promptus, utique si perorandum in aliquem esset. 
Irato et verba et sententiae suppetebant, pronuntiatio 
quoque et vox, ut neque eodem loci prae ardore 
consisteret et exaudiretur a proculstantibus. Perora- 
turus stricturum se ]lucubrationis suae telum 
minabatur, lenius comptiusque scribendi genus adeo 
contemnens, ut Senecam tum maxime placentem 
* commissiones meras " componere et * harenam esse 
sine calce” diceret. Solebat etiam prosperis oratorum 
actionibus rescribere et magnorum in senatu reorum 
accusationes defensionesque meditari ac, prout stilus 


^ Men were forbidden to wear silk garments; see Tac. 
Ann. 9. 33, ne vestis serica viros foedaret. 

> The cycias was a kind of robe worn by women and em- 
broidered with gold and purple. 

* Cf. Aug. xviii. 1. 


484 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


LII. In his clothing, his shoes, and the rest of his 
attire he did not follow the usage of his country 
and his fellow-citizens ; not always even that of his 
sex ; or in fact, that of an ordinary mortal. He 
often appeared in public in embroidered cloaks 
covered with precious stones, with a long-sleeved 
tunic and bracelets; sometimes in silk and in a 
woman's robe ®; now in slippers or buskins, again in 
boots, such as the emperor’s body-guard wear, and 
at times in the low shoes which are used by females. 
But oftentimes he exhibited himself with a golden 
beard, holding in his hand a thunderbolt, a trident, or 
a caduceus, emblems of the gods, and even in the 
garb of Venus. He frequently wore the dress of 
a triumphing general, even before his campaign, 
and sometimes the breastplate of Alexander the 
Great, which he had taken from his sarcophagus.¢ 

LIII. As regards liberal studies, he gave little 
attention to literature but a great deal to oratory, 
and he was as ready of speech and eloquent as you 
please, especially if he had occasion to make a charge 
against anyone. For when he was angry, he had an 
abundant flow of words and thoughts, and his voice 
and delivery were such that for very excitement he 
could not stand still and he was clearly heard by 
those at a distance. When about to begin an 
harangue, he threatened to draw the sword of his 
nightly labours, and he had such scorn of a polished 
and elegant style that he used to say that Seneca, 
who was very popular just then, composed “mere 
school exercises," and that he was “sand without 
lime." He had the habit too of writing replies to 
the successful pleas of orators and composing 
accusations and defences of important personages 


485 


+ 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


cesserat, vel onerare sententia sua quemque vel 
sublevare, equestri quoque ordine ad audiendum 
invitato per edicta. 

LIV. Sed et aliorum generum artes studiosissime 
et diversissimas exercuit. Thraex! et auriga, idem 
cantor atque saltator, battuebat pugnatoriis armis, 
aurigabat exstructo plurifariam circo; canendi ac 
saltandi voluptate ita efferebatur, ut ne publicis 
quidem spectaculis temperaret quo minus et tragoedo 
pronuntianti concineret et gestum histrionis quasi 
laudans vel corrigens palam effingeret. Nec alia de 
causa videtur eo die, quo periit, pervigilium indixisse 
quam ut initium in scaenam prodeundi licentia temporis 
auspicaretur. Saltabat autem nonnumquam etiam 
noctu; et quondam tres consulares secunda vigilia in 
Palatium accitos multaque et extrema metuentis super 
pulpitum conlocavit, deinde ? repente magno tibiarum 
et scabellorum crepitu cum palla tunicaque talari 
prosiluit ac desaltato cantico abiit. Atque hic tam 
docilis ad cetera natare nesciit. J 

LV. Quorum vero studio teneretur, omnibus ad 
insaniam favit. Mnesterem pantomimum etiam inter 
spectacula osculabatur, ac si qui saltante eo vel leviter 


1 Thrax, 2. 
2 deinde, MT ; the other mas. have dein. 


a That is, if he succeeded better in his accusation, he took 
sides against the defendant, and vice versa, regardless of 
justice. 

> Cf. chap. xxxii. 2. 

* A festival in honour of some god or goddess, celebrated 
with feasting, dancing, and plays of all kinds. 

4 About midnight, since the night was divided into four 
vigiliae. 


486 


- 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


who were brought to trial before the senate ; and 
according as his pen had run most easily, he brought 
ruin or relief to each of them by his speech,” while 
he would also invite the equestrian order by pro- 
clamation to come in and hear him. 

LIV. Moreover he devoted himself with much 
enthusiasm to arts of other kinds and of great 
variety, appearing as a Thracian gladiator, as a 
charioteer, and even as a singer and dancer, fighting 
with the weapons of actual warfare, and driving in 
circuses built in various places; so carried away by 
his interest in singing and dancing that even at the 
publie performances he could not refrain from sing- 
ing with the tragic actor as he delivered his lines, or 
from openly imitating his gestures by way of praise 
or correction. Indeed, on the day when he was 
slain he seems to have ordered an all-night vigil^ for 
the sole purpose of taking advantage of the licence of 
the occasion to make his first appearance on the 
stage. Sometimes he danced even at night, and once 
he summoned three consulars to the Palace at the 
close of the second watch,? and when they arrived in 
great and deathly fear, he seated them on a stage 
and then on a sudden burst out with a great din of 
flutes and clogs, dressed in a cloak and a tunic 
reaching to his heels, and after dancing a number 
went off again. And yet varied as were his accom- 
plishments, the man could not swim. 

LV. Toward those to whom he was devoted his 
partiality became madness. He used to kiss Mnester, 
an actor of pantomimes, even in the theatre, and 
if anyone made even the slightest sound while his 


e The scabellum was attached to the feet of dancers and 
sounded an accompaniment to their movements. 


487 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


obstreperet, detrahi iussum manu sua flagellabat. 
Equiti R. tumultuanti per centurionem denuntiavit, 
abiret sine mora Ostiam perferretque ad Ptolemaeum 
regem in Mauretaniam! codicilos suos; quorum 
exemplum erat: * Ei quem istoc misi, neque boni 
quicquam neque mali feceris"  Thraeces quosdam 
Germanis corporis custodibus praeposuit. Murmil- 
lonum armaturas recidit. Columbo victori, leviter 
tamen saucio, venenum in plagam addidit, quod ex 
eo Columbinum appellavit; sic certe inter alia 
venena scriptum ab eo repertum est.  Prasinae 
factioni ita addictus et deditus, ut cenaret in stabulo 
assidue et maneret, agitatori Eutycho comisatione 
quadam in apophoretis vicies sestertium contulit. 
Incitato equo, cuius causa pridie circenses, ne inquie- 
taretur, viciniae silentium per milites indicere solebat, 
praeter equile marmoreum et praesaepe eburneum 
praeterque purpurea tegumenta ac monilia e gemmis 
domum etiam et familiam et supellectilem dedit, 
quo lautius nomine eius invitati acciperentur; con- 
sulatum quoque traditur destinasse. 

LVI. Ita bacchantem atque grassantem non defuit 
plerisque animus adoriri. Sed una atque altera? 
conspiratione detecta, aliis per inopiam occasionis 


1 Mauritaniam, 0. 
2 atque altera, Jhm; altera, M ; et altera, GNQ ; alteraque 
XR. 


ee note on chap. xxx. 3. He disliked the murmillones, 
as the opponents of bis favourites, the Thracians. 

ò The charioteers in the Circus were divided into four 
parties, distinguished by their colours, which were red, white, 
blue, and green. Domitian added two more ; see Dom. vii. 1. 

¢ The “stable ” was in reality a kind of club, containing 
the quarters of the drivers as well as the stalls of the horses. 

4 The host at a dinner party often gave gifts to his guests 


488 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


favourite was dancing, he had him dragged from 
his seat and scourged him with his own hand. 
When a Roman knight created a disturbance, he 
sent a centurion to bid him go without delay 
to Ostia and carry a message for him to king 
Ptolemy in Mauretania; and its purport was this: 
“Do neither good nor ill to the man whom I have 
sent you, He gave some Thracian gladiators com- 
mand of his German body-guard. He reduced the 
amount of armour of the murmillones.t When one 
Columbus had won a victory, but had suffered a 
slight wound, he had the place rubbed with a poison 
which he henceforth called “ Columbinum " ; at least 
that name was found included in his list of poisons. 
He was so passionately devoted to the green faction ^ 
that he constantly dined and spent the night in their 
stable, and in one of his revels with them he gave 
the driver Eutychus two million sesterces in gifts. 
He used to send his soldiers on the day before the 
games and order silence in the neighbourhood, to — 
prevent the horse Incitatus* from being disturbed. 
Besides a stall of marble, a manger of ivory, purple 
blankets and a collar of precious stones, he even gave 
this horse a house, a troop of slaves and furniture, 
for the more elegant entertainment of the guests 
invited in his name; and it is also: said that he 
planned to make him consul. 

LVI. During this frantic and riotous career several 
thought of attempting his life. But when one or 
two conspiracies had been detected and the rest were 
waiting for a favourable opportunity, two men made 
to take away with them (hence called by the Greek name 
apophoreta) ; cf. Aug. lxxv. 

e Swift, *' Flyer.” 


489 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


cunctantibus, duo consilium communicaverunt per- 
feceruntque, non sine conscientia potentissimorum 
libertorum praefectorumque praetori; quod ipsi 
quoque etsi falso in quadam coniuratione quasi 
participes nominati, suspectos tamen se et invisos 
sentiebant. Nam et statim seductis magnam fecit 
invidiam destricto gladio affirmans sponte se peritu- 
rum, si et illis morte dignus videretur, nec cessavit 
ex eo criminari alterum alteri atque inter se omnis 
committere 

Cum placuisset Palatinis ludis spectaculo egressum 
meridie adgredi, primas sibi partes Cassius Chaerea 
tribunus cohortis praetoriae depoposcit, quem Gaius 
seniorem iam et mollem et effeminatum denotare 
omni probro consuerat et modo signum petenti 
- * Priapum" aut “ Venerem " dare, modo ex aliqua 
causa agenti gratias osculandam manum offerre 
formatam commotamque in obscaenum modum.  , 

LVII. Futurae caedis multa prodigia exstiterunt. 
Olympiae simulacrum Iovis, quod dissolvi transferrique 
Romam placuerat, tantum cachinnum repente edidit, 
ut machinis labefactis opifices diffugerint ; supervenit- 
que ilico quidam Cassius nomine, iussum se somnio 
affirmans immolare taurum lovi. Capitolium Capuae 
Id. Mart. de caelo tactum est, item Romae cella 
Palatini atriensis. Nec defuerunt qui coniectarent 
altero ostento periculum a custodibus domino 


a Cf. Aug. xlv. 4. 
490 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


common cause and succeeded, with the connivance of 
his most influential freedmen and the officers of the 
praetorian guard; for although the charge that these 
last were privy to one of the former conspiracies was 
false, they realised that Caligula hated and feared 
them. In fact, he exposed them to great odium by 
at once taking them aside and declaring, drawn 
sword in hand, that he would kill himself, if they too 
thought he deserved death; and from that time on 
he never ceased accusing them one to the other and 
setting them all at odds. 

When they had decided to attempt his life at the 
exhibition of the Palatine games, as he went out at 
noon, Cassius Chaerea, tribune of a cohort of the 
praetorian guard, claimed for himself the principal 
part ; for Gaius used to taunt him, a man already well 
on in years, with voluptuousness and effeminacy by 
every form of insult. When he asked for the watch- 
word Gaius would give him * Priapus" or “ Venus," 
and when Chaerea had occasion to thank him for 
anything, he would hold out his hand to kiss, form- 
ing and moving it in an obscene fashion.^ 

LVII. His approaching murder was foretold by 
many prodigies. The statue of Jupiter at Olympia, 
which he had ordered taken to pieces and moved to 
Rome, suddenly uttered such a peal of laughter that 
the scaffoldings collapsed and the workmen took to 
their heels ; and at once a man called Cassius turned 
up, who declared that he had been bidden in à dream 
to sacrifice a bull to Jupiter. The Capitol at Capua 
was Struck by lightning on the Ides of March, and 
also the room of the doorkeeper of the Palace 
at Rome. Some inferred from the latter omen that 
danger was threatened to the owner at the hands of 


491 


Mar. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK 1V 


portendi, altero caedem rursus insignem, qualis 
eodem die facta quondam fuisset. Consulenti quoque 
de genitura sua Sulla mathematicus certissimam 
necem appropinquare affirmavit. Monuerunt et 
Fortunae Antiatinae, ut a Cassio caveret; qua causa 
ille Cassium Longinum Asiae tum proconsulem 
occidendum delegaverat, inmemor Chaeream Cassium 
nominari. Pridie quam periret, somniavit consistere 
se in caelo iuxta solium lovis impulsumque ab eo 
dextri pedis pollice et in terras praecipitatum. 
Prodigiorum loco habita sunt etiam, quae forte illo 
ipso die paulo prius acciderant. Sacrificans respersus 
est phoenicopteri sanguine ; et pantomimus Mnester 
tragoediam saltavit, quam olim Neoptolemus tragoe- 
dus ludis, quibus rex Macedonum Philippus occisus 
est, egerat ; et cum in Laureolo mimo, in quo actor! ! 
proripiens se ruina sanguinem vomit, plures secun- 
darum certatim experimentum artis darent, cruore 
scaena abundavit. Parabatur et in noctem specta- 
culum, quo argumenta inferorum per Aegyptios et 
Aethiopas explicarentur. 

LVIII. VIII. Kal. Febr. hora fere septima cunc- 
tatus an ad prandium surgeret marcente adhuc 
stomacho pridiani cibi onere, tandem suadentibus 
amicis egressus est. Cum in crypta, per quam trans- 


1 ancor c ; actor, OQ. 


« Referring of course to the assassination of Julius Caesar. 

> See chap. xxii. 3. . 

¢ It was called Cinyras, and its story is told by Ovid, 
Metam. 10. 298 ff. 

4 Its name was derived from a famous highwayman ; ef. 
Juv. 8. 186. 

¢ The actors secundarum partium entertained the spectators 
after a play by imitating the actions of the star. 


492 


GAIUS CALIGULA. 


his guards; and from the former, the murder of a 
second distinguished personage, such as had taken 
place long before on that same day." The sooth- 
sayer Sulla too, when Gaius consulted him about his 
horoscope, declared. that inevitable death was close 
at hand. The lots of Fortune at Antium warned 
him to beware of Cassius, and he accordingly ordered 
the death of Cassius Longinus, who was at the time 
proconsul of Asia, forgetting that the family name 
of Chaerea was Cassius. The day before he was 
killed he dreamt that he stood in heaven beside the 
throne of Jupiter and that the god struck him with 
the toe of his left foot and hurled him to earth. 


Some things which had happened on that very day 


shortly before he was killed were also regarded as 
portents. As he was sacrificing, he was sprinkled 
with the blood of a flamingo,? and the pantomimic 
actor Mnester danced a tragedy ¢ which the tragedian 
Neoptolemus had acted years before during the 
games at which Philip king of the Macedonians was 
assassinated. In a farce called * Laureolus," 4 in 
which the chief actor falls as he is making his escape 
and vomits blood, several understudies ¢ so vied with 
one another in giving evidence of their proficiency 
that the stage swam in blood. A nocturnal perform- 
ance besides was rehearsing, in which scenes from 
the lower world were represented by Egyptians and 
Aethiopians. 


LVIII. On the ninth day before the Kalends of Jan. 


February at about the seventh hour he hesitated 
whether or not to get up for luncheon, since his 
stomach was still disordered from excess of food 
on the day before, but at length he came out at the 
persuasion of his friends. In the covered passage 


493 


41 A 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


eundum erat, pueri nobiles ex Asia ad edendas in 
scaena operas evocati praepararentur, ut eos inspiceret 
hortareturque restitit, ac nisi princeps gregis algere 
se diceret, redire ac repraesentare spectaculum voluit. 
Duplex dehine fama est: alii tradunt adloquenti 
pueros a tergo Chaeream cervicem gladio caesim 
graviter percussisse praemissa voce: “Hoc age!" 
dehinc Cornelium Sabinum, alterum e coniuratis, 
tribunum ex adverso traiecisse pectus; alii Sabinum 
summota per conscios centuriones turba signum more 
militiae petisse et Gaio “Iovem” dante Chaeream 
exclamasse: “Accipe ratum!” respicientique maxillam 
ictu discidisse. Iacentem contractisque membris 
clamitantem se vivere ceteri vulneribus triginta 
confecerunt ; nam signum erat omnium: “ Repete ! " 
Quidam etiam per obscaena ferrum adegerunt. Ad 
primum tumultum lecticarii cum asseribus in auxilium 
accucurrerunt, mox Germani corporis custodes, ac non- 
nullos ex percussoribus, quosdam etiam senatores in- 
noxios interemerunt. | 

LIX. Vixit annis viginti novem, imperavit triennio 
et decem mensibus diebusque octo.! Cadaver eius 
clam in hortos Lamianos asportatum et tumultuario 
rogo semiambustum levi caespite obrutum est, postea 
per sorores ab exsilio reversas erutum et crematum 


1 viii, XY; vii, G. 


a Part of the ritual at a sacrifice. The slayer raised his 
axe with the question ‘‘ Agone?” “Shall I do the deed (t.e., 
strike)?” To which the priest replied ** Hoc age.” Cf. Galba, 
xx. l, ut hoc agerent acferirent. Chaerea addressed himself. 

d Another formula ‘‘ Receive the fulfilment of your omen” 
t.e., in naming Jupiter, the god of the thunderbolt and sudden 
death. 

¢ With which they carried his litter. 


494 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


through which he had to pass, some boys of good 
birth, who had been summoned from Asia to appear 
on the stage, were rehearsing their parts, and he 
stopped to watch and encourage them; and had not 
the leader of the troop complained that he had a chill, 
he would have returned and had the performance 
given at once. From this point there are two 
versions of the story: some say that as he was talk- 
ing with the boys, Chaerea came up behind and gave 
him a deep cut in the neck, having first cried, 
* Do your duty,"^ and that then the tribune 
Cornelius Sabinus, who was the other conspirator 
and faced Gaius, stabbed him in the breast. 
Others say that Sabinus, after getting rid of the 
crowd through centurions who were in the plot, 
asked for the watchword, as soldiers do, and that 
when Gaius gave him “ Jupiter,” he cried “So be 
it," ® and as Gaius looked around, he split his jawbone 
with a blow of his sword. As he lay upon the 
ground and with writhing limbs called out that he 
still lived, the others dispatched him with thirty 
wounds ; for the general signal was “ Strike again.” 
Some even thrust their swords through his privates. 
At the beginning of the disturbance his bearers ran 
to his aid with their poles? and presently the 
Germans of his body-guard, and they slew several of 
his assassins, as well as some inoffensive senators. 
LIX. He lived twenty-nine years and ruled three 
years, ten months and eight days. His body was 
conveyed secretly to the gardens of the Lamian 
family, where it was partly consumed on a hastily 
erected pyre and buried beneath a light covering 
of turf; later his sisters on their return from 
exile dug it up, cremated it, and consigned it to 


. 495 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK IV 


sepultumque. Satis constat, prius quam id fieret, 
hortorum custodes umbris inquietatos ; in ea quoque 
domo, in qua occubuerit, nullam noctem sine aliquo 
terrore transactam, donec ipsa domus incendio con- 
sumpta sit. Perit una et uxor Caesonia gladio a 
centurione confossa et filia parieti inlisa. 

LX. Condicionem temporum illorum etiam per 
haec aestimare quivis possit. Nam neque caede 
vulgata statim creditum est, fuitque suspicio ab ipso 
Gaio famam caedis simulatam et emissam, ut eo pacto 
hominum erga se mentes deprehenderet; neque 
coniurati cuiquam imperium destinaverunt ; et senatus 
in asserenda libertate adeo consensit, ut consules 
primo non in curiam, quia Iulia vocabatur, sed in 
Capitolium convocarent, quidam vero sententiae loco 
abolendam Caesarum memoriam ac diruenda templa 
censuerint. Observatum autem notatumque est in 
primis Caesares omnes, quibus Gai praenomen fuerit, 
ferro perisse, iam inde ab eo, qui Cinnanis temporibus 
sit occisus. 


a Gaius Julius Caesar Strabo, slain in 87 B.o. But the 
Dictator’s father died a natural death, as did also Gaius 
Caesar, grandson of Augustus ; see Aug. Ixv. 1. 


496 


GAIUS CALIGULA 


the tomb. Before this was done, it is weli known 
that the caretakers of the gardens were disturbed by 
ghosts, and that in the house where he was slain not 
a night passed without some fearsome apparition, 
until at last the house itself was destroyed by fire. 
With him died his wife Caesonia, stabbed with 
a sword by a centurion, while his daughter's brains 
were dashed out against a wall. 

LX. One may form an idea of the state of those 
times by what followed. Not even after the murder 
was made known was it at once believed that he was 
dead, but it was suspected that Gaius himself had 
made up and circulated the report, to find out by 
that means how men felt towards him. The con- 
spirators too had not agreed on a successor, and the 
senate was so unanimously in favour of. re-establish- 
ing the republic that the consuls called the first 
meeting, not in the senate house, because it had the 
name Julia, but in the Capitol; while some in ex- 
pressing their views proposed that the memory of 
the Caesars be done away with and their temples 
destroyed. Men further observed and commented on 
the fact that all the Caesars whose forename was 
Gaius perished by the sword, beginning with the 
one who was slain in the times of Cinna.* 


497 


VOL, 1. K K 


(g “ATXxX pno) 


(p "Inxx -dyoA) SNUBS (1 HX °62709) 
SUAE suar. anan "1 snuspg snpun] "UK - 
Snuvrq snopueu (S 'AXXX 042g) 
surung sniddy -A9£) Jo "n'ep vjsn3ny vrpn'vi) 
= "pidoT vrpuey snptdo'T snipuey "* = ‘tLIsnig | (1 AXXX Otan) 
gee MAD SEEN n (g oog) (QOUAN = vurqeg voeddoq 
| (5 "IAXX pnug) 

(g oos) (t arxi Ony) snipus[) snag = (Z ‘A 0.t2N) 
snut snorueut sn[nu]g BUITESSOPY tIIO[EA | SNIJUVU 
-ngsod -199 = snipwey "[ (L'axe ny) (1 Ax, hny) suHe[pRA"-W-— | (T 74 0424) 18H Jo ‘nep 
vddtisy (2) Suede. = (9) sm TEND "I ds. LS SITIO] epider} "nog sugue "uo- (g) vurddiay 

UR Y cuc hemh Va ges Eie L Bae re oe me e-o IM 
CT "ATX[ ony) (T ees) (t T T9) (T 7A 04287) . supuoguy. sum 
(D snsnaq sngrunoq "I Aougtu pus sddrsy ‘W = 
= Jouu epuojuy -: JOIUUI opiy *[[0019 Joeu BOOTH Snipoor K W 
CIRIL ‘Anp ) sddrisy *W —(r)vnni E e ROM SU ear tee une pamela ads 
(g oas) | (8 ‘Ix '/n922) snpyüoqu y “jy pus 
sna (z nx ony) (T "HAXX mf) SNIEN 7o . 
TUTI = €"uoqris = SOESNoONvV snAlId = AUT BUFO 
ni —MÀ a 
JOT€UI BIALIOO ; CIXX Sp 
| (T ‘al ny) snuĝejg supoduioq "uj 
(3 XXX Nnr) sutpoq “O elvyqouy = En JALO Q = thy = (g) emi 
pus snLireurq "T (L "AT Jay) | i | (Urmp 
jo 19]30Urpue2 '(2) BINT snqieg MHY "WK = (i)vinr SNITNI SAAIA =  vpowrop 
b es RN PUn el cq EM EMEND E NR er E E NEL ED NP 3 
(z ‘axx me) | (ISt *L HC Cura) 
TIo9iny = ivsoe2 sup o 
V 


MTINVA NVICAOV'ID'OFIQfÓ£ AHL JO. VWILLS 


(s AXX aga) 


BNIOIUTA “AL = BEATTY erm 
——— 


supidor SOTUV *'I« 
pus snupdjuorg suisevg "[ = Csu 
Ses 


| 

snot rer ~i 
| | 

(€) OUUN | 

Ch i 

(c) OWN = VARPO Snip ‘up = (g)vurddridy — | 


(c AXX *puvjo) 
BIING 8n3snu,p FI pue 
snury snieduroq ‘ug = vruojuy 


(T ‘HAXX *pnn79) 
WUTSsso fT SLIO[VA 
pus “surgoug vey 


"ejpruv[nZaf) vvd = 


—s 


A 


A, : 


(F "AXX 02) | 
vIDsnaq BIEN] 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| ejuosavo = VINOIIVO UVSAVO ‘0 


=~) (g ‘Axx nm) 7 | 
vrpue | 
i LE N 
spydo| vitmey — snsnaq ` 

snsn.t([ N 
ran Ser | 


(p*mnrp-(DoswN : 
| TU 
| (5) osnaq = i 

SAIGAV'IO SQAKI BILAL 


—— — 


Jougut vittoqu y. = (1) snsnaqq 
pe ey ae Tm 


(€ “Al QALE) 


snəpueuta p = (zZ) 


-A 


SUINU¢] spettoduat 
snpu'erer 
sni[Iequ 79 pav 
su tod (T) o1eN = (9) enu] 
TRE PREND 
| 
(Z) snsnaq = *[[IAUT 
Cpa 702) | 
eulddiiay 
| ( "HA QZ) 
SNIUAAIL = (1T) emddusy 


^ 
— 


FION SuTPU'vID AFL = ertiSuiq VAPI = snisnsny snag 


a 


This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized 
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the 
information in books and make it universally accessible. 


Google books 


https://books.google.com 


EDITED BY 


— LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 
EF 
Í T. E. PAGE, Lrrr. D., ann W. H. D. ROUSE, Lir. D. 


SUETONIUS 
II 


SUETONIUS 


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY 
J. C. ROLFE, Pu.D. 


PROFESSOR OF THE LATIN LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE 
IN THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA 


IN TWO VOLUMES 
II 


: "NDON : WILLIAM HEINEMANN 


^ W YORK : THE MACMILLAN CO. 
MCMXIV | 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 
THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS (continued)— 
BOOK V.—THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS .. f ; l 
4 
BOOK VL—NERO. .. . . ... .. xc GS di 85 
BOOK VIIL.—GALBA, OTHO, AND VITELLIUS. . . . . 189 
BOOK VIII, — THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN, THE DEIFIED 
TITUS, DMITIAN . .. . . ..... v... 219 
THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN— 
PREFATORY NOTE . . . . .. . . . 388 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE .. , us ; 394 
GRAMMARIANS AND RHETORICIANS— 
GRAMMARIANS ...° . . . . . . .. ... 396 
RHETORICIANS . . . . . . . . . ...... 434 
POETS— 
TERENCE ons Lala A wu we &CXoUe xou (RBZ 
VERGIL . . . . . . .. . . ...«..... 404 
HORACE . . . . . . . 2... 484 
s TIBULLUS . . M Wu Ee xeu Bae es A94 
PERSIUS . . . . e... sn. s.s. s... 404 
LUCAN. soes OR a Se ;:!! 


THE LIVES OF PLINY THE ELDER AND PASSIENUS © 
CRISPUS .... eus cub Rete ace den ew Stee, UOUE 


$08 EUR Wu, a SON m a GAP Sg: UU 


; vii 


ee od —— ~ eee ee ee ee e Reg 


THE 
- LIVES OF THE CAESARS 


BOOK V 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


DE VITA CAESARUM 


LIBER V 
DIVUS CLAUDIUS 


I. PATREM Claudi Caesaris Drusum, olim Decimum 
' mox Neronem praenomine, Livia, cum Augusto gra- 
vida nupsisset, intra mensem tertium peperit, fuitque 
suspicio ex vitrico per adulterii consuetudinem pro- 
creatum. Statim certe vulgatus est versus : 


Y^ 9 a S , Nf 
Tots evrvxovat kat Tpipnva 7a. 


Is Drusus in quaesturae praeturaeque honore dux 
Raetici, deinde Germanici belli Oceanum septem- 
trionalem primus Romanorum ducum navigavit trans- 
que Rhenum fossas navi et immensi operis effecit, 
quae nunc adhuc Drusinae vocantur. Hostem etiam 
frequenter caesum ac penitus in intimas solitudines 
actum non prius destitit insequi, quam species 
barbarae mulieris humana amplior victorem tendere 


^ See Aug. lxii. 9. 

» Literally, ** the blest,” those on whom fortune smiles. 

¢ The fossae Drusinae, two miles long, connecting the Rhine 
with the Yssel, to furnish a passage to the North Sea. 


2 


> tinea oni ee «i — n 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS 


BOOK V 
THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


I. Tue father of Claudius Caesar, Drusus, who at 
first had the forename Decimus and later that of 
Nero, was born of Livia within three months after 
her marriage to Augustus @ (for she was with child at 
the time) and there was a suspicion that he was 
begotten by his stepfather in adulterous intercourse. 
Certain it is that this verse at once became 
current : 


* In three months’ time come children to the great." ^ 


This Drusus, while holding the offices of quaestor 
and praetor, was in charge of the war in Raetia and 
later of that in Germany. He was the first of Roman 
generals to sail the northern Ocean, and beyond the 
Rhine with prodigious labour he constructed the 
huge canals which to this very day are called by his 
name.^ Even after he had defeated the enemy in 
many battles and driven them far into the wilds of 
the interior, he did not cease his pursuit until the 
apparition of a barbarian woman of greater than 


3 
B 2 


35 B.c. 


15 B.c. 


12-11 b.c 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


3 ultra sermone Latino prohibuisset. Quas ob res 
ovandi ius ‘et triumphalia ornamenta percepit; ac 
post praeturam confestim inito consulatu atque 
expeditione repetita supremum diem morbo obiit in 


aestivis castris, quae ex eo Scelerata sunt appellata. 


Corpus eius per municipiorum coloniarumque primores 
suscipientibus obviis scribarum decuriis ad urbem 
devectum sepultumque est in campo Martio. Ceterum 
exercitus honorarium ei tumulum excitavit, circa 
quem deinceps stato die quotannis miles decurreret 
Galliarumque civitates publice supplicarent. Praeterea 
senatus inter alia complura marmoreum arcum cum 
tropaeis via Appia decrevit et Germanici cognomen 
ipsi posterisque eius. Fuisse autem creditur non 
minus gloriosi quam civilis animi; nam ex hoste 
super victorias opima quoque spolia captasse summo- 
que saepius discrimine duces Germanorum tota acie 
insectatus ; nec dissimulasse umquam pristinum se 
rei p. statum, quandoque posset, restituturum. Unde 
existimo nonnullos tradere ausos, suspectum eum 
Augusto revocatumque ex provincia et quia cuuc- 
taretur, interceptum veneno. Quod equidem magis 


^ See Aug. xxii. > Of. Tib. vii. 3. 

c The reference is probably to the scribae quaestori, the 
quaestor's clerks, who were the inost important of the 
attendants upon the magistrates. They formed a guild com- 
posed of six decuriae, or divisions of ten, presided over by 
six officers called sex prim: curatorum. 

* A decursus or decursio. Dio, 56. 42, describes the one 
about the funeral pyre of Augustus. After running around 
it in full armour, the soldiers cast into the fire the military 
prizes which they had received from the emperor; cf. Jul. 
Ixxxiv. 4. 


4 


EEE in, Eo ca ELL - — optime. ^ “eS E EED ESRI LTT eae a ge . 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


human size, speaking in the Latin tongue, forbade 
him to push his victory further. For these exploits 
he received the honour of an ovation? with the 
triumphal regalia ; and immediately after his praetor- 
ship he became consul and resumed his campaign, 
but died in his summer camp, which for that reason 
was given the name of “ Accursed.” The body was 
earried by the leading men of the free towns and 
colonies to Rome,? where it was met and received 
by the decuries of scribes,’ and buried in the campus 
Martius. But the army reared a monument in his 
honour, about which the soldiers should make a 
ceremonial run 4^ each year thereafter on a stated 
day, which the cities of Gaul were to observe with 
prayers and sacrifices. The senate, in addition 
to many other honours, voted him a marble arch 
adorned with trophies on the Appian Way, and 
the surname Germanicus for himself and his 
descendants. It is the general belief that he was 
as eager for glory as he was democratic? by nature ; 
for in addition to victories over the enemy he greatly 
desired to win the “ noble trophies,” often pursuing 
the leaders of the Germans all over the field at great 
personal risk ; and he made no secret of his intention 
of restoring the old-time form of government, when- 
ever he should have the power. It is because of this, 
I think, that some have made bold to write that he 
was an object of suspicion to Augustus; that the 
emperor recalled him from his province, and when he 
did not obey at once, took him off by poison. This 


e See note on Tib. xxvi. 1. 

7 The spolia opima were the armour of the leader of the 
enemy, taken from him in hand-to-hand combat by a Roman 
general. 


5 


t BG. 


6 


Ld 
THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


ne praetermitterem rettuli, quam quia verum aut 
veri simile putem, cum Augustus tanto opere. et 
vivum dilexerit, ut coheredem semper filiis instituerit, 
sicut quondam in senatu professus est, et defunctum 
ita pro contione laudaverit, ut deos precatus sit, 
similes ei Caesares suos facerent sibique tam honestum 
quandoque exitum darent quam illi dedissent. Nec 
contentus elogium tumulo eius versibus a se com- 
positis insculpsisse, etiam vitae memoriam prosa 
oratione composuit. 

Ex Antonia minore complures quidem liberos tulit, 
verum tres omnino reliquit: Germanicum, Livillam, 
Claudium. 

II. Claudius natus est Iullo! Antonio Fabio 
Africano conss. Kal. Aug. Luguduni eo ipso die quo 
primum ara ibi Augusto dedicata est, appellatusque 
Tiberius Claudius Drusus. Mox fratre maiore in 
Iuliam familiam adoptato Germanici cognomen as- 
sumpsit. Infans autem relictus a patre ac per omne 
fere pueritiae atque adulescentiae tempus variis et 
tenacibus morbis conflictatus est, adeo ut animo 
simul et corpore hebetato ne progressa quidem 
aetate ulli publico privatoque muneri habilis existi- 
maretur. Diu atque etiam post tutelam receptam 
alieni arbitrii et sub paedagogo fuit; quem barbarum 
et olim superiumentarium ex industria sibi appositum, 


1 Tullo, Zhm ; Iulio, 0 ; Iulo, Pulmann. 


a C. and L. Caesar; see Tib. xxiii. and Index. 

v That is, on the anniversary of the dedication, which was 
in 13 B.C. 

¢ That is, the age at which one was ordinarily freed from 
tutelage. The usual formula is in suam tutelam venire, Cic. 
De Orat. i. 39. 180. 


6 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


I have mentioned, rather not to pass it by, than that 
I think it true or even probable ; for as a matter of 
fact Augustus loved him so dearly while he lived that 
he always named him joint-heir along with his sons, 
as he once declared in the senate ; and when he was 
dead, he evlogized him warmly before the people, 
. praying the gods to make his Caesars? like Drusus, 
and to grant him, when his time came, as glorious a 
death as they had given that hero. And not content 
with carving a laudatory inscription on his tomb in 
verses of his own composition, Augustus also wrote a 
memoir of his life in prose. 

Drusus had several children by the younger 
Antonia, but was survived by only three, Germanicus, 
Livilla, and Claudius. 

II. Claudius was born at Lugdunum on the 
Kalends of August in the consulship of Iullus 
Antonius and Fabius Africanus, the very day when an 
altar was first dedicated to Augustus in that town, 
and he received the name of Tiberius Claudius 
Drusus. Later, on the adoption of his elder brother 
into the Julian family, he took the surname 
Germanicus. He lost his father when he was still 
an infant, and throughout almost the whole course of 
his childhood and youth he suffered so severely from 
various obstinate disorders that the vigour of both his 
mind and his body was dulled, and even when he 
reached the proper age he was not thought capable 
of any public or private business." Fora long time, 
even after he reached the age of independence,’ he was 
in a state of pupillage and under a guardian, of whom 
he himself makes complaint in a book of his, saying 
that he was a barbarian and a former chief of 
muleteers, put in charge of him for the express 


7 


Aug. 1, 
10 B.C. 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


ut se quibuscumque de causis quam saevissime 
coerceret, ipse quodam libello conqueritur. Ob hanc 
eandem valitudinem et gladiatorio munere, quod 
simul cum fratre memoriae patris edebat, palliolatus 
novo more praesedit ; et togae virilis die circa mediam 
noctem sine sollemni officio lectica in Capitolium 
latus est. 

III. Disciplinis tamen liberalibus ab aetate prima 
non mediocrem operam dedit ac saepe experimenta 
cuiusque etiam publicavit. Verum ne sic quidem 
quicquam dignitatis assequi aut spem de se com- 
modiorem in posterum facere potuit. 

Mater Antonia portentum eum hominis dictitabat, 
nec absolutum a natura, sed tantum incohatum ; ac 
si quem socordiae argueret, stultiorem aiebat filio 
suo Claudio. Avia Augusta pro despectissimo semper 
habuit, non affari nisi rarissime, non monere nisi 
acerbo et brevi scripto aut per internuntios solita. 
Soror Livilla cum audisset quandoque imperaturum, 
tam iniquam et tam indignam sortem p. R. palam 
et clare detestata est. Nam avunculus maior 
Augustus quid de eo in utramque partem opinatus 
sit, quo certius cognoscatur, capita ex ipsius epistulis 
posui. 

IV. “Collocutus sum cum Tiberio, ut mandasti, 
mea Livia, quid nepoti tuo Tiberio faciendum esset 
ludis Martialibus. Consentit autem uterque nostrum, 
semel nobis esse statuendum, quod consilium in illo 
sequamur. Nam si est artius, ut ita dicam, holocleros, 


-= ~~ 


« Of relatives and friends. 
> The future emperor. ¢ Claudius. 
4 Celebrated by Augustus in 12 a.D. in honour of Mars 
Ultor; cf. Aug. xxix. l and 2. 


8 


^ 


pou PAEER RD | 


e a Aia a |= c S 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


purpose of punishing him with all possible severity 
for any cause whatever. It was also because of his 
weak health that contrary to all precedent he wore a 
cloak when he presided at the gladiatorial games 
which he and his brother gave in honour of their 
father; and on the day when he assumed the gown 
of manhood he was. taken in a litter to the Capitol 
about midnight without the usual escort.^ 

III. Yet he gave no slight attention to liberal 
studies from his earliest youth, and even published 
frequent specimens of his attainments in each line. 
But even so he could not attain any public position 
or inspire more favourable hopes of his future. 

His mother Antonia often called him “a monster 
of a man, not finished but merely begun by Dame 
Nature" ; and if she accused anyone of dulness, she 
used to say that he was “a bigger fool than her son 
Claudius." His grandmother Augusta always treated 
him with the utmost contempt, very rarely speaking 
to him ; and when she admonished him, she did so in 
short, harsh letters, or through messengers. When 
his sister Livilla heard that he would one day be 
emperor, she openly and loudly prayed that the 
Roman people might be spared so cruel and 
undeserved a fortune. Finally to make it clearer what 
opinions, favourable and otherwise, his great uncle 
Augustus had of him, I have appended extracts from 
his own letters : 

IV. “I have talked with Tiberius," my dear Livia, 
as you requested, with regard to what is to be done 
with your grandson Tiberius? at the games of Mars.? 
Now we are both agreed that we must decide once 
for all what plan we are to adopt in his case. For if 


9 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


quid est quod dubitemus, quin per eosdem articulos 
et gradus producendus sit, per quos frater eius 
productus sit? Sin autem jAarrücÓoi! sentimus 
eum et fjeBAádÜa. xai eis ryv Tov coparos kai eis 
viv THS Wuxns? dprirgra, praebenda materia deri- 
dendi et illum et nos non est hominibus rà Toubra 
ckoTTéw kal puxtypifev eiwOcow.2 Nam semper 
aestuabimus, si de singulis articulis temporum deli- 
berabimus, uù) TpovUTokeuiévov piv posse arbitremur 
eum gerere honores necne. [In praesentia tamen 
quibus de rebus consulis, curare eum ludis Martialibus 
triclinium sacerdotum non displicet nobis, si est 
passurus se ab Silvani filio homine sibi affini admoneri, 
ne quid faciat quod conspici et derideri possit. 
Spectare eum circenses ex pulvinari non placet 
nobis ; expositus enim in fronte prima spectaculorum 
conspicietur. In Albanum montem ire eum non 
placet nobis aut esse Romae Latinarum diebus. Cur 
enim non praeficitur urbi, si potest sequi fratrem 
suum in montem ? Habes nostras, mea Livia, senten- 
tias, quibus placet semel de tota re aliquid constitui, 
ne semper inter spem et metum fluctuemur. Licebit 
autem, si voles, Antoniae quoque nostrae des hanc 
partem epistulae huius legendam." Rursus alteris 
litteris: 

“Tiberium adulescentem ego vero, dum tu 
aberis, cotidie invitabo ad cenam, ne solus cenet cum 


1 4jAarTGco0a,, Beroaldus ; exarrwoo0a« and edatrwoent, maa. 
2 yvxiis, first Roman editions ; WxNS, mss. 
3 ciwbdow, Roman editions ; eniwboou, most of the MRR. 
a The two Greek words, prios and óAókAmpos, mean ‘‘ com- 
plete.” ‘‘ perfect of one’s kind ; ? the meaning therefore is 
i if he have his five senses.’ 
^ See note on Aug. xlv. 1. 


— ——— ————— —— —— — —— 


IO 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


he be sound“ and so to say complete,* what reason 
have we for doubting that he ought to be advanced 
through the same grades and steps through which 
his brother has been advanced? But if we realize 
that he is wanting and defective in soundness of 
body and mind, we must not furnish the means of 
ridiculing both him and us to a public which is wont 
to scoff at and deride suth things, Surely we shall 
always be in a stew, if we deliberate about each 
separate occasion and do not make up our minds in 
advance whether we think he can hold public offices 
or not. However, as to the matters about which 
you ask my present advice, I do not object to his 
having charge of the banquet of the priests at the 
games of Mars, if he will allow himself to be advised 
by his kinsman the son of Silvanus, so as not to do 
anything to make himself conspicuous or ridiculous, 
That he should view the games in the Circus from 
the Imperial box ^ does not meet with my approval; 
for he will be conspicuous if exposed to full view in 
the front of the auditorium. I am opposed to his 
going to the Alban Mount or being in Rome on the 
days of the Latin festival ; for why should he not be 
made prefect of the city, if he is able to attend his 
brother to the Mount? You have my views, my 
dear Livia, to wit that I desire that something be 
decided once for all about the whole matter, to save 
us from constantly wavering between hope and fear. 
Moreover, you may, if you wish, give this part of my 
letter to our kinswoman Antonia also to read.” 
Again in another letter : 

* [ certainly shall invite the young Tiberius to 
dinner every day during your absence, to keep him 


II 


-1 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


suo Sulpicio et Athenodoro. Qui vellem diligentius 
et minus petrewpws deligeret sibi aliquem, cuius 
motum et habitum et incessum imitaretur. Misellus 
árvxé nam év rois omovdaious, ubi non aberravit eius 
animus, satis apparet 7) rìs Yuyys abro) evyévea. 
Item tertiis litteris : 

* Tiberium nepotem tuum placere mihi declaman- 
tem potuisse, peream nisi, mea Livia, admiror. Nam 
qui tam doadas loquatur, qui possit cum declamat 
cadQéós dicere quae dicenda sunt, non video." 

Nec dubium est, quid post haec Augustus consti- 
tuerit, et ! reliquerit eum nullo praeter auguralis sacer- 
dotii honore impertitum ac ne dccem quidem nisi 
inter tertios ac paene extraneos e? parte sexta nun- 
cuparet, legato quoque ? non amplius quam octingen- 
torum sestertiorum prosecutus. 

V. Tiberius patruus petenti honores consularia or- 
namenta detulit ; sed instantius legitimos flagitanti id 
solum codicillis rescripsit, quadraginta aureos in 
Saturnalia et Sigillaria* misisse ei. Tunc demum 
abiecta spe dignitatis ad otium concessit, modo in 
hortis et suburbana domo, modo in Campaniae secessu 
delitescens, atque ex contubernio sordidissimorum ho- 
minum super veterem segnitiae notam ebrietatis 

! et, mss, ; ut, Smilda ; cum, Bentley. 

2 e, second Roman edition; ne, A. 

3 legato quoque, Ernesti ; icuatoques. mas.; legato, Torren- 


lius. 

4 sigillaria, L°>; sigillari, Q 

* See note on Jul. Ixxxiii. 2; the heirs in the third degree 
had little or no prospect of receiving their inheritance. 

* December 21 and 22, an extension of the Saturnalia, 
when it was customary to make presents of little images of 
various kinds (sigilla) ; also the name of a quarter or street 
in Rome, see chap. xvi. 4; Nero, xxviii. 2. 


12 


— -—M _ — D —— M: -— _ —— O 08 "S 


Meee Hee oe m Mm . eee 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


from dining alone with his friends Sulpicius and 
| Athenodorus. I do wish that he would choose more 
carefully and in a less scatter-brained fashion some- 
one to imitate in his movements, bearing, and gait. 
| — The poor fellow is unlucky ; for in important matters, 
| where his mind does not wander, the nobility of his 
character is apparent enough.” Also in a third 
letter : 
* Confound me, dear Livia, if I am not surprised 
that your grandson Tiberius could please me with his 
| declaiming. How in the world anyone who is so 
unclear in his conversation can speak with clearness 
| and propriety when he declaims, is more than I can 
! — pee." 
| There is no doubt at all what: Augustus later 
decided, and that he left him invested with no office 
| — other than the augural priesthood, not even naming 
him as one of his heirs, save in the third degree * and to 
| a sixth part of his estate, among those who were all 
but strangers ; while the legacy that he left him was 
not more than eight hundred thousand sesterces. 
| V. His paternal uncle Tiberius gave him the 
consular regalia, when he asked for office ; but when 
| he urgently requested the actual position, Tiberius 
| merely replied by a note in these words: *I have 
| sent you forty gold-pieces for the Saturnalia and the 
Sigillaria.”® Then at last Claudius abandoned all 
| hope of advancement and gave himself. up to idleness, 
living in obscurity now in his house and gardens in 
the suburbs, and sometimes at a villa in Campania ; 
moreover from his intimacy with the lowest of men he 
incurred the reproach of drunkenness and gambling, 
in addition to his former reputation for dulness. 


| et 13 


_ 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


quoque et aleae infamiam subiit, cum interim, quan- 
quam hoc modo agenti, numquam aut officium 
hominum aut reverentia publice defuit. 

. VI. Equester ordo bis patronum eum perferendae 
pro se legationis elegit, semel cum deportandum 
Romam corpus Augusti umeris suis ab consulibus 
exposceret, iterum cum oppressum Seianum apud 
eosdem gratularetur; quin et spectaculis advenienti 
assurgere et lacernas? deponere solebat. Senatus 
quoque, ut ad numerum sodalium Augustalium sorte 
ductorum extra ordinem adiceretur, censuityet mox 
ut domus ei, quam incendio amiserat; publica impensa 
restitueretur, dicendaeque inter consulares sententiae 
ius esset. Quod decretum abolitum est, excusante 
Tiberio imbecillitatem eius ac damnum liberalitate 
sua resarsurum pollicente. Qui tamen moriens et in 
tertiis heredibus eum ex parte tertia nuncupatum, 
legato etiam circa sestertium vicies prosecutus, 
commendavit insuper exercitibus ac senatui populoque 
R. inter ceteras necessitudines nominatim. 

VII. Sub Gaio demum fratris filio secundam 
existimationem circa initia imperii omnibus lenociniis 
colligente honores auspicatus consulatum gessit una 
per duos menses, evenitque ut primitus ingredienti 
cum fascibus Forum praetervolans aquila dexteriore 
umero consideret. Sortitus est et de altero con- 


1 exposceret, > ; exposceretur, Casaubon ; exposcerent, mss. 
2 lacernas, II*7' ; the other mss. have lucernas. 


^ Founded by Tiberius for the worship of the Deified 
Augustus. 
> Of his house. 


14 F 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


Yet all this time, despite his conduct, he never lacked 
attention from individuals or respect from the 
public. 

VI. The equestrian order twice chose him as their 
patron, to head a deputation on their behalf: 
once when they asked from the consuls the privi- 
lege of carrying the body of Augustus to Rome on 
their shoulders, and again when they offered them 
their congratulations on the downfall of Sejanus. 
They even used to rise when he appeared at the 
public shows and put off their cloaks. The senate too 
voted that he be made a special member of the 
priests of Augustus," who were usually chosen by lot ; 
when he later lost his house by fire, that it should be 
rebuilt at the public expense, and that he should 
have the honour of giving his opinion among the con- 
sulars. This second decree was however repealed,since 
Tiberius urged Claudius's infirmity as a reason, and 
promised that he would make the loss ^ good through 
his own generosity. Yet when Tiberius died, he 
named Claudius only among his heirs in the third 
degree, to a third part of his estate, although he 
gave him in addition a legacy of about two million 
sesterces, and expressly commended him besides to 
the armies and to the senate and people of Rome 
with the rest of his kinsfolk. 

VII. It was only under his nephew Gaius, who in 
the early part of his reign tried to gain popularity 
by every device, that he at last began his official 
career, holding the consulship as his colleague for 
two months ; and it chanced that as he entered the 
Forum for the first time with the fasces, an eagle 
that was flying by lit upon his shoulder. He was 


15 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


sulatu in quartum annum; praeseditque nonnum- 
quam spectaculis in Gai vicem, adclamante populo: 
* Feliciter" partim “patruo imperatoris " 
'* Germanici fratri ! ” 


partim 


VIII. Nec eo minus contumeliis obnoxius vixit. 
Nam et si paulo serius ad praedictam cenae horam 
occurrisset, non nisi aegre et circuito demum triclinio 
recipiebatur, et quotiens post cibum addormisceret, 
quod ei fere accidebat, olearum aut palmularum 
ossibus incessebatur, interdum ferula flagrove velut 
per ludum excitabatur a copreis. Solebant et 
manibus stertentis socci induci, ut repente experge- 
factus faciem sibimet confricaret. 

IX. Sed ne discriminibus quidem caruit. Primum 
in ipso consulatu, quod Neronis et Drusi fratrum 
Caesaris statuas segnius locandas  ponendasque 
curasset, paene honore summotus est; deinde 
extraneo vel etiam domesticorum aliquo deferente 
assidue varieque inquietatus. Cum vero detecta 
esset Lepidi et Gaetulici coniuratio, missus in 
Germaniam inter legatos ad gratulandum etiam vitae 
periculum adiit, indignante ac fremente Gaio patruum 
potissimum ad se missum quasi ad puerum regendum, 
adeo ut non defuerint, qui traderent praecipitatum 
quoque in flumen, sic ut vestitus advenerat. Atque 


* Gaius appointed a number of consuls at once, who drew 
lots for the year when they were to hold the oftice. 
v See Calig. viii. 1 and xxiv. 3. e The Rhine. 


16 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


also allotted a second consulship, to be held four 
years later," and several times he presided at the 
shows in place of Gaius, and was greeted by the 
people now with “Success to the emperor's uncle!" 
and now with * All hail to the brother of German- 
icus!” 

VIII. But all this did not save him from constant 
insults; for if he came to dinner a little after 
the appointed time, he took his place with difficulty 
and only after making the round of the dining-room. 
Whenever he went to sleep after dinner, which was 
a habit of his, he was pelted with the stones of 
olives and dates, and sometimes he was awakened by 
the jesters with a whip or cane, in pretended sport. 
They used also to put slippers en his hands as he lay 
snoring, so that when he was suddenly aroused he 
might rub his face with them. 

IX. But he was exposed also to actual dangers. 
First in his very consulship, when he was all but 
deposed, because he had been somewhat slow 
in contracting for and setting up the statues of Nero 
and Drusus, the emperor's brothers. Afterwards he 
was continually harassed by all kinds of accusations, 
brought against him by strangers or even by 
the members of his household. Finally, when the 
conspiracy of Lepidus and Gaetulicus ^ was detected 
and he was sent to Germany as one of the envoys to 
congratulate the emperor, he was really in peril of 
his life, since Gaius raged and fumed because his 
uncle of all men had been sent to him, as if to a child 
in need of a guardian. So great, indeed, was his wrath 
that some have written that Claudius was even thrown 
into the river? clothes and all, just as he had come. 
Moreover, from that time on he always, gave 


I7 
VOL. II. C 


M 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


ex eo numquam non in senatu novissimus consularium 
sententiam dixit, ignominiae causa post omnis inter- 
rogatus. Etiam cognitio falsi testamenti recepta est, 


in quo et ipse signaverat. Postremo sestertium . 
octogies pro introitu novi sacerdotii coactus impen- - 


dere, ad eas rei familiaris angustias decidit, ut cum 
obligatam aerarid fidem liberare) non posset, in 
vacuum lege praediatoria venalis pependerit sub 
edicto praefectorum. 

X: Per haec ac talia maxima aetatis parte 
transacta quinquagesimo anno imperium cepit 
quantumvis mirabili casu. Exclusus inter ceteros 
ab insidiatoribus Gai, cum quasi secretum eo 
desiderante! turbam ‘submoverent, in diaetam, cui 
nomen est Hermaeum, recesserat; neque multo 
post rumore caedis exterritus prorepsit ad solarium 
proximum interque praetenta foribus vela se ab- 
didit. Latentem discurrens forte gregarius miles, ani- 
madversis pedibus, studio? sciscitandi quisnam esset, 
adgnovit? extractumque et prae metu ad genua sibi 
accidentem imperatorem salutavit. Hinc ad alios 
desiderante, Y; the other mss. have desideranti. 


studio, G ; the other mss. have e studio (ex, T). 
adgnovit] agnovit, Tg; the other mss. have adcognovit. 


w N m 


a See Calig. xxii. 3. 

^ He had borrowed money from the public treasury for his 
entrance fee into the new priesthood, and pledged his estates 
as security. 

c That is, the prefects of the treasury, chosen from the 
praetors and ex-practors (sce Aug. xxxvi) Claudius later 
restored the charge of the treasury to the quaestors (see chap. 
xxiv. 2), 


18 


eee) i, lai — c Ót" — p m N o—Q— — 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


his opinion in the senate last among the consulars, 
having the question put to him after all the rest by 
way of humiliation. A case involving the forgery 
of a will was even admitted, in which Claudius 
himself was one of the signers. At last he was 
forced to pay eight million sesterces to enter a new 
priesthood,* which reduced him to such straitened 
circumstances that he was unable to meet the 
obligation incurred to the treasury ^; whereupon by 
edict of the prefects^ his property was advertised for 
sale to meet the deficiency,? in accordance with the 
law regulating confiscations. 

X. Having spent the greater part of his life 
under these and like circumstances, he became 
emperor in his fiftieth year by a remarkable freak of 
fortune. When the assassins of Gaius shut out the 
crowd under pretence that the emperor wished to be 
alone, Claudius was ousted with the rest and with- 
drew to an apartment called the Hermaeum ; and a 
little later, in great terror at the news of the murder, 
he stole away to a balcony hard by and hid among the 
curtains which hung before the door. Ashe cowered 
there, a common soldier, who was prowling about at 
random, saw his feet, and intending to ask who he 
was, pulled him out and recognized him; and when 
Claudius fell at his feet in terror, he hailed him 
as emperor. Then he took him to the rest of 


d in vacuum ; the meaning is uncertain. It perhaps means 
that the advertisement was merely a matter of form, though 
none the less humiliating. 


19 
c 2 


41 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


commilitones fluctuantis nec quicquam adhuc quam 
frementis perduxit. Ab his lecticae impositus et, 
quia sui diffugerant, vicissim succollantibus in castra 
delatus est tristis ac trepidus, miserante obvia turba 
quasi ad poenam raperetur insons. Receptus intra 
vallum inter excubias militum pernoctavit, aliquanto 
minore spe quam fiducia. Nam consules cum senatu 
et cohortibus urbanis Forum Capitoliumque occu- 
paverant asserturi communem libertatem ; accitusque 
et ipse per tr. pl in curiam ad suadenda quae 
viderentur, vi se et necessitate teneri respondit. 
Verum postero die et senatu segniore in exsequendis 
conatibus per taedium ac dissensionem diversa 
censentium et multitudine, quae circumstabat, unum 
rectorem iam et nominatim exposcente, armatos ! pro 
contione iurare in nomen suum passus est promisit- 
que singulis quina dena sestertia, primus Caesarum 
fidem militis etiam praemio pigneratus. 

Xl. Imperio stabilito nihil antiquius duxit quam 


id biduum, quo de mutando rei p. statu haesitatum 


erat, memoriae eximere. Omnium itaque factorum 
dictorumque in eo veniam et oblivionem in per- 
petuum sanxit ac praestitit, tribunis modo ac 
centurionibus paucis e  coniuratorum in Gaium 
numero interemptis, exempli simul causa et quod 


! armatos, TIQ ; ihe other mse. have armatus. 


* * Hope" of becoming emperor; “ confidence” that he 
had escaped death. 
> By restoring the republic. 


20 


w- 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


his comrades, who were as yet in a condition of un- 
certainty and purposeless rage. These placed him 
in a litter, took turns in carrying it, since his 
own bearers had made off, and bore him to the 
Camp in a state of despair and terror, while the 
throng that met him pitied him, as an innocent man 
who was being hurried-off to execution. Received 
within the rampart, he spent the night among the 
sentries with much less hope than confidence; 
for the consuls with the senate and the city cohorts 
had taken possession of the Forum and the Capitol, 
resolved on maintaining the public liberty." When he 
too was summoned to the House by the tribunes of the 
commons, to give his advice on the situation, he 
sent word that “he was detained by force and com- 
pulsion.” But the next day, since the senate was 
dilatory in putting through its plans because of the 
tiresome bickering of those who held divergent views, 
while the populace, who stood about the hall, called 
for one ruler and expressly named Claudius, he 
allowed the armed assembly of the soldiers to swear 
allegiance to him, and promised each man fifteen 
thousand sesterces ; being the first of the Caesars who 
resorted to bribery to secure the fidelity of the troops. 

XI. As soon as his power was firmly established, 
he considered it of foremost importance to ob- 
literate the memory of the two days when men had 
thought of changing the form of government. 
Accordingly he made a decree that all that had been 
done and said during that period should be pardoned 
and forever forgotten ; he kept his word too, save 
only that a few of the tribunes and centurions who 
had conspired against Gaius were put to death, both 
to make an example of them and because he knew 


2l 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


suam quoque caedem  depoposcisse cognoverat. 
Conversus hinc ad officia pietatis ius iurandum neque 
sanctius sibi neque crebrius instituit quam per 
Augustum.  Aviae Liviae divinos honores et circensi 
pompa currum elephantorum Augustino similem 
decernenda curavit ; parentibus inferias publicas, et 
hoc amplius patri circenses annuos natali die, matri 
carpentum, quo per Circum duceretur, et cognomen 
Augustae ab viva! recusatum. At in fratris memoriam? 
per omnem occasionem celebratam comoediam quo- 
que Graecam Neapolitano certamine docuit ac de 
sententia iudicum coronavit. Ne Marcum quidem 
Antonium inhonoratum ac sine grata mentione trans- 
misit, téstatus quondam per edictum, tanto impensius 
petere se ut natalem patris Drusi celebrarent, quod 
idem esset et avi sui Antoni. Tiberio marmoreum 
arcum iuxta Pompei theatrum, decretum quidem 
olim a senatu verum omissum, peregit. Gai quoque 
etsi acta omnia rescidit, diem tamen necis, quamvis 
exordium principatus sui, vetuit inter festos referri. 
XII. At in semet augendo parcus atque civilis 
praenomine Imperatoris abstinuit, nimios honores 
recusavit, sponsalia filiae natalemque geniti nepotis 
silentio ac tantum domestica religione transegit. 
Neminem exsulum nisi ex senatus auctoritate restituit. 


1 viva, Lipsius; avia, A. 

D Li . . T 

2 At in fratris memoriam, suggested by Ihm; a fratris 
memoria, MGX ; ad fratris memoriam, T. 


a For carrying her image ; see Calig. xv. 1, and cf. Tib. li. 2. 
è Germanicus. 


c See Aug. xcviii. 5. The comedy was doubtless written 
by Germanicus ; see Calig. iii. 2. 
d See Jul, Ixxvi. 1. 


22 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


that they had also demanded his own death. Then 
turning to the duties of family loyalty, he adopted 
as his most sacred and frequent oath “ By Augustus." 
He had divine honours voted his grandmother Livia 
and a chariot drawn by elephants in the procession 
at the Circus,* like that of Augustus; also public 
offerings to the shades of his parents and in addition 
annual games in the Circus on his father’s birthday 
and for his mother a carriage to bear her image 
through the Circus and the surname of Augusta, 
which she had declined during her lifetime. In 
memory of his brother,? whom he took every oppor- 
tunity of honouring, he brought out a Greek comedy 
in the contest at Naples^ and awarded it the 
crown in accordance with the decision of the 
judges. Hedid not leave even Mark Antony un- 
honoured or without grateful mention, declaring 
once in a proclamation that he requested the more 
earnestly that the birthday of his father Drusus 
be celebrated because it was the same as that of his 
grandfather Antony. He completed the marble 
arch to Tiberius near Pompey’s theatre, which had 
been voted some time before by the senate, but left 
unfinished. Even in the case of Gaius, while he 
annulled all his acts, yet he would not allow the day 
of his death to be added to the festivals, although it 
was also the beginning of his own reign. 

XII. But in adding to his own dignity he was modest 
and unassuming, refraining from taking the forename 
Imperator,’ refusing excessive honours, and passing 
over the betrothal of his daughter and the birthday of 
a grandson in silence and with merely private cere- 
monies. He recalled no one from exile except with 
the approval of the senate. He obtained from the 


23 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


Ut sibi in curiam praefectum praetori tribunosque 
militum secum inducere liceret utque rata essent 
quae procuratores sui in iudicando statuerent, 
precario exegit. Ius nundinarum in privata praedia 
a consulibus petit. Cognitionibus magistratuum ut 
unus e consiliariis frequenter interfuit; eosdem 
spectacula edentis surgens et ipse cum cetera turba 
voce ac manu veneratus est. Tribunis plebis adeun- 
tibus se pro tribunali excusavit, quod propter 
angustias non posset audire eos nisi stantes. Quare 
in brevi spatio tantum amoris favorisque collegit, ut 
cum profectum eum Ostiam perisse, ex insidiis 
nuntiatum esset, magna consternatione populus et 
militem quasi proditorem et senatum quasi parricidam 
diris exsecrationibus incessere non ante destiterit, 
quam unus atque alter et mox plures a magistratibus 
in rostra producti salvum et appropinquare con- 
firmarent. 

XIII. Nec tamen expers insidiarum usque quaque 
permansit, sed et a! singulis et per factionem et 
denique civili bello infestatus est. E plebe homo 
nocte media iuxta cubiculum eius cum pugione 
deprehensus est; reperti et equestris ordinis duo in 
publico cum dolone ac venatorio cultro praestolantes, 
alter ut egressum theatro, alter ut sacrificantem apud 
Martis aedem adoreretur. Conspiraverunt autem ad 
res novas Gallus Asinius et Statilius Corvinus, 


1 sed et a, T; etaeta, M ; et a, GX. 
24 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


members as a favour the privilege of bringing into the 
House with him the prefect of the praetorian guard 
and the tribunes of the soldiers, and the ratification 
of the judicial acts of his agents in the provinces. 
He asked the consuls for permission to hold fairs on 
his private estates. He often appeared us one of 
the advisers at cases tried before the magistrates ; 
and when they gave games, he also arose with the 
rest of the audience and showed his respect by 
acclamations and applause. When the tribunes of 
the commons appeared before him as he sat upon 
the tribunal, he apologised to them because for lack 
of room he could not hear them unless they stood 
up. ` 

By such conduct he won so much love and devotion 
in a short time, that when it was reported that he 
had been waylaid and killed on a journey: to Ostia, 
the people were horror stricken and with dreadful 
execrations continued to assail the soldiers as traitors, 
and the senate as murderers, until finally one or two 
men, and later several, were brought forward upon 
the rostra by the magistrates and assured the people 
that Claudius was safe and on his way to the city. 

XIII. Yet he did not remain throughout without 
experience of treachery, but he was attacked by 
individuals, by a conspiracy, and finally by a civil 
war. A man of the commons was caught near his 
bed-chamber in the middle of the night, dagger in 
hand; and two members of the equestrian order 
were found lying in wait for him in public places, 
one ready to attack him with a sword-cane as he 
eame out of the theatre, the other with a hunting 
knife as he was sacrificing in the temple of Mars. 
Asinius Gallus and Statilius Corvinus, grandsons 


3 .25 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


Pollionis ac Messalae oratorum nepotes, assumptis 
compluribus libertis ipsius atque servis.’ Bellum 
civile movit Furius Camillus Scribonianus Delmatiae 
legatus; verum intra quintum diem oppressus est 
legionibus, quae sacramentum  mutaverant, in 
paenitentiam religione conversis, postquam denun- 
tiato ad novum imperatorem itinere casu quodam ac 
divinitus neque aquila ornari neque signa convelli 
moverique potuerunt. 

XIV. Consulatus super pristinum quattuor gessit ; 
ex quibus duos primos iunctim, sequentis per inter- 
vallum quarto quemque anno, semenstrem novissimum, 
bimenstris ceteros, tertium autem novo circa princi- 
pem exemplo in locum demortui suffectus. Ius et 
consul et extra honorem laboriosissime dixit, etiam 
suis suorumque diebus sollemnibus, nonnumquam 
festis quoque antiquitus et religiosis. Nec Semper 
praescripta legum secutus duritiam lenitatemve 
multarum ex bono et aequo, perinde ut adficeretur, 
moderatus est ; nam et iis, qui apud privatos iudices 
plus petendo formula excidissent, restituit actiones 
et in maiore fraude convictos legitimam poenam 
supergressus ad bestias condemnavit. 

XV. In cognoscendo autem ac decernendo mira 
varietate animi fuit, modo circumspectus et sagax, 
interdum inconsultus ac praeceps, nonnumquam 
frivolus amentique similis: Cum decurias rerum 


^ With garlands and perfumes; cf. note on Tib. xlviii. 2. 
ò See note on Jul. lxii. It was considered a bad omen if 
it was difficult to pull the standards from the ground. 
* Before his own tribunal. 


26 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


of the orators Pollio and Messala, conspired to 
overthrow him, aided by a number of his own 
freedmen and slaves. The civil war was set on 
foot by Furius Camillus Scribonianus, governor of 
Dalmatia; but his rebellion was put down within 
five days, since the legions which had changed their 
allegiance were turned from their purpose by super- 
stitious fear ; for when the order was given to march 
to their new commander, by some providential chance 
the eagles could not be adorned * nor the standards 
pulled up and moved.^ 

XIV. He held four consulships i in addition to his 
original one. Of these the first two were in successive 
years, while the other two followed at intervals of 
four years each, the last for six months, the others 
for two ; and in his third he was substituted for one 
of the consuls who had died, a thing which was 
without precedent in the case of an emperor. He 
administered justice most conscientiously both as 
consul and when out of office, even on his own 
anniversaries and those of his family, and sometimes 
even on festivals of ancient date and days of ill- 
omen. He did not always follow the letter of the 
laws, but modified their severity or lenity in many 
cases according to his own notions of equity and 
justice ; for he allowed a new trial to those who had 
lost their cases before private judges by demanding 
more than the law prescribed, while, overstepping the 
lawful penalty, he condemned to the wild beasts those 
who were convicted of especially heinous crimes. 

XV. But in hearing and deciding cases* he showed 
strange inconsistency of temper, for he was now care- 
ful and shrewd, sometimes hasty and inconsiderate, 
occasionally silly and like a crazy man. In revising 


27 


42, 43, 
47, 91 
A.D, 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


actu expungeret, eum, qui dissimulata vacatione 
quam beneficio liberorum habebat  responderat, 
ut cupidum iudicandi dimisit ; alium interpellatum 
ab adversariis de propria lite negantemque cogni- 
tionis rem sed ordinarii iuris esse, agere causam 
confestim. apud se coegit, proprio negotio documen- 
tum daturum, quam aequus iudex in alieno negotio 
futurus esset. Feminam non agnoscentem filium 
suum dubia utrimque argumentorum fide ad con- 
fessionem compulit indicto matrimonio iuvenis. 
Absentibus secundum praesentes facillime dabat, 
nullo dilectu culpane quis an! aliqua necessitate 
cessasset. Proclamante quodam praecidendas fal- 
sario manus, carnificem statim acciri cum machaera 
mensaque lanionia flagitavit. ^ Peregrinitatis reum 
orta inter advocatos levi contentione, togatumne an 
palliatum dicere causam oporteret, quasi aequitatem 


integram ostentans, mutare habitum saepius et prout 


accusaretur defendereturve, iussit. De quodam 
etiam negotio ita ex tabella pronuntiasse creditur, 
secundum eos se sentire, qui vera proposuissent. 
Propter quae usque eo eviluit, ut passim ac propalam 
contemptui esset. Excusans quidam testem e 


! an, Stephanus ; in, Q. 


——————————————————————— 


^ More literally **the decuries for court duty," to dis- 
tinguish them from the decuries of knights, scribes, etc. 
> That is, he enjoyed the privileges of the ius trium 


liberorum, one of which was freedom from jury duty. 


* Cf. Dio, 60. 28. 
4 Only a Roman citizen had the right to wear the toga. 


28 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


the lists of the divisions of jurors^ he disqualified 
a man who had presented himself without mentioning 
that he was immune because of the number of his 
children,’ on the ground that he had a passion for 
jury-duty. Another, who was challenged by his oppo- 
nents about a suit of his own, said that it did not come 
before Caesar's tribunal, but the ordinary courts; 
whereupon Claudius compelled him at once to bring 
the case before him, saying that the man would 
show in a case affecting his own interests how just 
a juror he would be in the affairs of others. When 
a woman refused to recognise her son, and the 
evidence on both sides was conflicting, he forced her 
to admit the truth by ordering her to marry the 
young man. Whenever one party to a suit was 
absent, he was prone to decide in favour of the one 
who was present, without considering whether his 
' opponent had failed to appear through his own fault 
or from a necessary cause.^ On a man's being con- 
victed of forgery, some one cried out that his hands 
ought to be cut off; whereupon Claudius insisted 
that an executioner be summoned at once with knife 
and block. In a case involving citizenship a fruitless 
dispute arose among the advocates as to whether the 
defendant ought to make his appearance in the 
toga 4 or in a Greek mantle, and the emperor, with 
the idea of showing absolute impartiality, made him 
change his garb several times, according as he was 
accused or defended. In one case he is credited 
with having rendered the following decision, which 
he had actually written out beforehand : * I decide 
in favour of those who have told the truth." By 
such acts as these he so discredited himself that he 
was held in general and open contempt. One man 

29 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


provincia ab eo vocatum negavit praesto esse posse 
dissimulata diu causa; ac post longas demum 


29 


interrogationes: * Mortuus est,” inquit, “puto, 
licuit." Alius gratias agens quod reum defendi 
pateretur, adiecit: * Et tamen fieri solet." Illud 
quoque a maioribus natu audiebam, adeo causidicos 
patientia eius solitos abuti, ut discedentem e 
tribunali non solum voce revocarent, sed et lacinia 
togae retenta, interdum pede apprehenso detinerent. 
Ac ne cui haec mira sint, litigatori Graeculo vox in 
 altercatione excidit: Kai ot yépov ef xal pwpds. 
Equitem quidem Romanum obscaenitatis in feminas 
reum, sed falso et ab impotentibus inimicis conficto 
crimine, satis constat, cum scorta meritoria citari 
adversus se et audiri pro testimonio videret, graphium 
et libellos,*quos tenebat in manu, ita cum magna 
stultitiae et saevitiae exprobratione iecisse in faciem 
eius, ut genam non leviter perstrinxerit. 

XVI. Gessit et censuram intermissam diu post 


Plancum  Paulumque censores, sed hanc quoque 


inaequabiliter varioque et animo et eventu. Recog- 
nitione equitum iuvenem probri plenum, sed quem 
pater probatissimum sibi atfirmabat, sine ignominia 
dimisit, habere dicens censorem suum; alium 
corruptelis adulteriisque famosum nihil amplius 


^ On these see Aug. xxxix. 


30 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


in making excuses for a witness that the emperor 
had summoned from one of the provinces, said that 
he could not appear, but for a long time would give 
no reason ; at last, after a long series of questions, he 
said : * He's dead ; I think the excuse is a lawful one." 
Another in thanking the emperor for allowing him 
to defend his client added “ After all, it is usual." 
I myself used to hear older men say that the 
pleaders took such advantage of his good-nature, 
that they would not only call him back when he 
left the tribunal, but would catch hold of the fringe 
of his robe, and sometimes of his foot, and thus detain 
him. To prevent any surprise at this, I may add that a 
common Greek pettifogger let slip this remark in a 
hot debate : ** You are both an old man and a fool." 
All the world knows that a Roman knight who was 
tried for improper conduct towards women, but on a 
false charge trumped up by unscrupulous enemies, 
seeing common strumpets called as witnesses against 
him and their testimony admitted, hurled the stylus 
and tablets which he held in his hand into the 
emperor's face with such force as to badly cut his 
cheek, at the same time loudly reviling his cruelty 
and stupidity. 

XVI. He also assumed the censorship, which had 
long been discontinued, ever since the term of 
Plancus and Paulus, but in this office too he was 
variable, and both his theory and his practice were 
inconsistent. In his review of the knights he 
let off a young man of evil character, whose father 
said that he was perfectly satisfied with him, without 
any public censure, saying * He has a censor of his 
own." Another who was notorious for corruption 
and adultery he merely admonished to be more 


31 


48 A.D. 


22 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


quam monuit, ut aut parcius aetatulae indulgeret 
aut certe cautius ; addiditque : * Quare enim ego scio, 
quam amicam habeas?" Et cum orantibus familiari- 
bus dempsisset cuidam appositam notam: ** Litura 
tamen,” inquit, * exstet." Splendidum virum Grae- 
ciaeque provinciae principem, verum Latini sermonis 
ignarum, non modo albo iudicum erasit, sed in 
peregrinitatem redegit. Nec quemquam nisi sua 
voce, utcumque quis posset, ac sine patrono rationem 
vitae passus est reddere. Notavitque multos, et 
quosdam inopinantis et ex causa novi generis, quod 
se inscio ac sine commeatu Italia excessissent; quen- 
dam vero et quod comes regis in provincia fuisset, 
referens maiorum temporibus Rabirio Postumo 


. Ptolemaeum Alexandriam crediti servandi causa 


secuto crimen maiestatis apud iudices motum. 
Plures notare conatus, magna inquisitorum negle- 
gentia sed suo maiore dedecore, innoxios fere 
repperit, quibuscumque caelibatum aut orbitatem 
aut egestatem obiceret, maritos, patres, opulentos se 
probantibus; eo quidem, qui sibimet vim ferro in- 
tulisse arguebatur, inlaesum corpus veste deposita 
ostentante. Fuerunt et illa in censura eius notabilia, 
quod essedum argenteum sumptuose fabricatum ac 
venale ad Sigillaria redimi concidique coram impera- 
vit; quodque uno die XX edicta proposuit, inter 
quae duo, quorum altero admonebat; ut uberi 
vinearum proventu bene dolia picarentur; altero, 


« By affixing the nota, or mark of disgrace, to their names 
on the census-list. 
^ Referring to the street or quarter ; see note on chap. v. 


32 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


restrained in his indulgence, or at any rate more 
circumspect, adding, “ For why should I know what 
mistress you keep?" When he had removed the 
mark of censure affixed to one man’s name, yielding 
to the entreaties of the latter’s friends, he said: 
“ But let the erasure be seen.” He not only struck 
from the list of jurors a man of high birth, a leading 
citizen of the province of Greece, because he did not 
know Latin, but even deprived him of the rights of 
~ citizenship; and he would not allow anyone to 
render an account of his life save in his own words, 
as well as he could, without the help of an advo- 
cate. And he degraded many, some contrary to their 
expectation and on the novel charge that they had 
left Italy without consulting him and obtaining leave 
of absence ; one man merely because he had been 
companion to a king in his province, citing the case 
of Rabirius Postumus, who in bygone days had been 
tried for treason because he had followed Ptolemy to 
Alexandria, to recover a loan. When he attempted 
to degrade still more, he found them in most cases 
blameless ; for owing to the great carelessness of his 
agents, but to his own greater shame, those whom he 
accused of celibacy, childlessness, or lack of means 
proved that they were married, or fathers, or well- 
to-do. In fact, one man, who was charged with 
having stabbed himself, stripped off his clothing and 
showed a body without a scar. Other noteworthy 
acts of his censorship were the following: he had a 
"silver chariot of costly workmanship, which was 
offered for sale in the Sigillaria, bought and cut 
to pieces in his presence ; in one single day he made 
twenty proclamations, including these two: “ As the 
yield of the vineyards is bountiful, the wine jars 


33 
VOL. II. D 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK: V 


nihil aeque facere ad viperae morsum quam taxi 
arboris sucum. 

XVII. Expeditionem | unam omnino suscepit 
eamque modicam. Cum decretis sibi a senatu 
ornamentis triumphalibus leviorem maiestati prin- 
cipali ! titulum arbitraretur velletque iusti triumphi 
decus, unde adquireret Britanniam potissimum elegit, 
neque temptatam ulli post Divum Iulium et tunc 
tumultuantem ob non redditos transfugas. Hue 
cum ab Ostia navigaret, vehementi circio bis paene 
demersus est, prope Liguriam iuxtaque Stoechadas? 
insulas. Quare a Massilia Gesoriacum usque 
pedestri itinere confecto inde transmisit ac sine ullo 
proelio aut sanguine intra paucissimos dies parte 
insulae in deditionem recepta, sexto quam profectus 
erat mense Romam rediit triumphavitque maximo 
apparatu. Ad cuius spectaculum commeare “in 
urbem non solum praesidibus provinciarum permisit, 
verum etiam exsulibus quibusdam; atque inter 
hostilia spolia navalem coronam fastigio Palatinae 
domus iuxta civicam fixit, traiecti et quasi domiti- 
Oceani insigne. Currum eius Messalina uxor car- 
pento secuta est; secuti et triumphalia ornamenta 
eodem bello adepti, sed ceteri pedibus et in prae- 
texta, M.3 Crassus Frugi equophalerato et in veste 
palmata, quod eum honorem iteraverat. 

XVIII. Urbis annonaeque curam sollicitissime 


1 principali, >; principalem, N. 

2 Stoechadas, > ; Stochadas, n. 

3 praetexta M., G; praetextam, M ; pretexta, X; eodem 
.-. palmata, omitted by T. 


a Suetonius is vague. Dio, 60. 19, says that one Bericus, 
who had been expelled from the island during a revolution, 


34 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS - 


should be well pitched" ; and “ Nothing is so effective 
a cure for snake-bite as the juice of the yew tree." 
=< XVII. He made but one campaign and that of 

little importance. When the senate voted him the 
triumphal regalia, thinking the honour beneath the 
imperial dignity and desiring the glory of a legitimate 
triumph, he chose Britain as the best place for gaining 
it, a land that had been attempted by no one since 
the Deified Julius and was just at that time in a state 
of rebellion because of the refusal to return certain 
deserters.” On the voyage thither from Ostia he was 
nearly cast away twice in furious north-westers, off 
Liguria and near the Stoechades islands. Therefore 
he made the journey from Massilia all the way to 
Gesoriacum by land, crossed from there, and without 
any battle or bloodshed received the submission of 
a part of the island, returned to Rome within six 
months after leaving the city, and celebrated a 
triumph of great splendour. To witness the sight 
he allowed not only the governors of the provinces 
to come to Rome, but even some of the exiles; and 
among the tokens of his victory he set a naval crown 
_on the gable of the Palace beside the civic crown, as 
a sign that he had crossed and, as it were, subdued 
the Ocean. His wife Messalina followed his chariot 
in a carriage, as did also those who had won the 
triumphal regalia in the same war; the rest marched 
on foot in fringed togas, except Marcus Crassus Frugi, 
who rode a caparisoned horse and wore a tunic 
embroidered with palms, because he was receiving 
the honour for the second time. 

XVIII. He always gave scrupulous attention to 
persuaded Claudius to send troops there. Possibly the refer- 
ence is to the deserters mentioned in Calig. xliv. 

35 
D 2 


44 a.D. 


XIX. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


semper egit. Cum Aemiliana pertinacius arderent, 
in diribitorio duabus noctibus mansit ac deficiente 
militum ac familiarum turba auxilio plebem per 
magistratus ex omnibus vicis convocavit ac positis 
ante se cum pecunia fiscis ad subveniendum hortatus 
est, repraesentans pro opera dignam cuique merce- 
dem.  Artiore autem annona ob assiduas sterilitates 
detentus quondam medio Foro, a turba conviciisque 
et simul fragminibus panis ita infestatus, ut aegre 
nec nisi postico evadere in Palatium valuerit, nihil 
non excogitavit! ad invehendos etiam tempore 
hiberno commeatus. Nam et negotiatoribus certa 
lucra proposuit suscepto in se damno, si cui quid 
per tempestates accidisset, et naves mercaturae 
causa fabricantibus magna commoda constituit pro 
condicione cuiusque : civi? vacationem legis Papiae 
Poppaeae, Latino ius Quiritium, feminis ius IIII 
liberorum ; quae constituta hodieque servantur. 

XX. Opera magna potius et necessaria? quam 
multa perfecit, sed vel praecipua : ductum aquarum 
a Gaio incohatum, item emissarium Fucini lacus 
portumque Ostiensem, quanquam sciret ex iis 


! excogitavit, T's; the other mas. have ex eo cogitavit ; ex 
eo agitavit, Bentley. 

2 civi, Turnebus ; civis, 0 ; civibus, zc. 

3 magna potius et necessaria, suggested by Ihm; magna 
potius quam n., mss. The second quam is omitted by ITQ. 


——— — — — — —Ó—— ——— ——— 


a A suburb of Rome, lying north of the city, outside of the 
Servian wall. 3 

> A large building in the campus Martius, where the votes 
cast in the elections were sorted and counted ; according to 
Dio, 55. 8, the largest building ever covered by a single roof. 

e Passed in 9 A.D., after the failure of Augustus’ law de 
maritandis ordinibus ; see Aug. xxxiv. 


36 


— MÀ M ee ee LH m - 


Lnd ee A ee ae ae eee 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


the care of the city and the supply of grain. On the 
occasion of a stubborn fire in the Aemiliana® he 
remained in the Diribitorium ? for two nights, and 
when a body of soldiers and of his own slaves could 
not give sufficient help, he summoned the commons 
from all parts of the city through the magistrates, 
and placing bags full of money before them, urged 
them to the rescue, paying each man on the spot a 
suitable reward for his services. When there was a 
scarcity of grain because of long-continued droughts, 
he was once stopped in the middle of the Forum by 
a mob and so pelted with abuse and at the same 
time with pieces of bread, that he was barely able to 
make his escape to the Palace by a back door; and 
after this experience he resorted to every possible 
means to bfing grain to Rome, even in the winter 
season. To the merchants he held out the certainty 
of profit by assuming the expense of any Joss that 
they might suffer from storms, and offered to those 
who would build merchant ships large bounties, 


. adapted to the condition of each: to a citizen 


exemption from the lex Papia Poppaea^ ; to a Latin4 
the rights of Roman citizenship; to women the 
privileges allowed the mothers of four children.¢ And 
all these provisions are in force to-day. 

XX. The public works which he completed were 
great and essential rather than numerous ; they were 
in particular the following: an aqueduct begun by 
Gaius ; also the outlet of Lake Fucinus and the har- 
bour at Ostia, although in the case of the last two he 


4 See note on Aug. xlvii. 
* These were numerous and varied ; cf. Dio, 55. 2. 


37 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


alterum ab Augusto precantibus assidue Marsis 


negatum, alterum a Divo Iulio saepius destinatum ac 
propter difficultatem | omissum. Claudiae aquae 
gelidos et uberes fontes, quorum alteri Caeruleo, 
alteri Curtio et Albudigno nomen est, simulque 
rivum  Ánienis novi lapideo opere in urbem 
perduxit divisitque in plurimos et ornatissimos lacus. 
Fucinum adgressus est non minus compendii spe 
quam gloriae, cum quidam privato sumptu emissuros 
se repromitterent, si sibi siccati agri concederentur. 
Per tria autem passuum ! milia partim effosso ? monte 
partim exciso canalem absolvit aegre et post 
undecim annos, quamvis continuis XXX hominum 
milibus sine intermissione operantibus. Portum 
Ostiae exstruxit cireumducto dextra sinistraque 
brachio et ad introitum profundo iam solo? mole 
obiecta; quam quo stabilius fundaret, navem ante 
demersit, qua magnus obeliscus ex Aegypto fuerat 
advectus, congestisque pilis superposuit altissimam 
turrem in exemplum Alexandrini Phari, ut ad 
nocturnos ignes cursum navigia dirigerent. 

XXI. Congiaria populo saepius distribuit. Specta- 
cula quoque complura et magnifica edidit, non usitata 
modo ac solitis locis, sed et commenticia et ex 
antiquitate repetita, et ubi praeterea nemo ante 


1 passus, MGL. 

2 effosso, Sz; exfossa, M; the other mss. have exfosso 
except T, which omits etfosso monte partim ; ecfosso, Roth. 

3 aes ee . 


4 » This had been brought by Gaius from Heliopolis and set 
up in the spina of his circus, near the Vatican hill. It now 
stands before the cathedral of St. Peter. The great ship in 
which it was transported to Rome from Alexandria is de- 
scribed by Pliny, N.H. 16. 201. 


38 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


knew that Augustus had refused the former to the 
Marsians in spite of their frequent requests, and that 
the latter had often been thought of by the Deified 
Julius, but given up because of its difficulty. He 
brought to the city on stone arches the cool and 
abundant founts of the Claudian aqueduct, one of 
which is called Caeruleus and the other Curtius and 
Albudignus, and at the same time the spring of the 
new Anio, distributing them into many beautifully 
ornamented pools. He made the attempt on the 
Fucine Lake as much in the hope of gain as of glory, 
inasmuch as there were some who agreed to drain it 
at their own cost, provided the land that was 
uncovered be given to them. He finished the 
outlet, which was three miles in length, partly 
by levelling and partly by tunnelling a mountain, 
a work of great difficulty and requiring eleven years, 
although he had thirty thousand men at work all the 
time without interruption. .He constructed the 
harbour at Ostia by building curving breakwaters 
on the right and left, while before the entrance 
he placed a mole in deep water. To give this 
mole a firmer foundation, he first sank the ship in 
which the great obelisk® had been brought from 
Egypt, and then securing it by piles, built upon it 
a very lofty tower after the model of the Pharos at 
Alexandria, to be lighted at night and guide the 
course of ships. | 

XXI. He very often distributed largesses to the 
people. He also gave several splendid shows, not 
. merely the usual ones in the customary places, but 
some of a new kind and some revived from ancient 
times, and in places where no one had ever given 


= 39 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


eum. Ludos dedicationis Pompeiani theatri, quod 
ambustum restituerat, e tribunali posito in orchestra 
commisit, cum prius apud superiores aedes supplicasset 
perque mediam caveam sedentibus ac silentibus 
cunctis descendisset. Fecit et saeculares, quasi 
anticipatos ab Augusto nec legitimo tempori reser- 
vatos, quamvis ipse in historiis suis prodat, inter- 
missos eos Augustum multo post diligentissime 
annorum ratione subducta in ordinem redegisse. 
Quare vox praeconis irrisa est invitantis more 
sollemni ad ludos, quos nec spectasset quisquam 
nec spectaturus esset, cum superessent adhuc qui 
spectaverant, et quidam histrionum producti olim 
tune quoque producerentur. Circenses frequenter 
etiam in Vaticano commisit, nonnumquam interiecta 
per quinos missus venatione. Circo vero Maximo 
marmoreis carceribus auratisque metis, quae utraque 
et tofina ac lignea antea fuerant, exculto propria 
senatoribus constituit loca promiscue spectare solitis ; 
ac super quadrigarum certamina Troiae lusum 
exhibuit et Africanas, conficiente turma equitum 
praetorianorum, ducibus tribunis ipsoque praefecto ; 
praeterea Thessalos equites, tui feros tauros per 


a Pompey placed the double temple of Venus and Victory 
at the top of his theatre, so that the seats of the auditorium 
formed an approach to it. b See Aug. xxxi. 4. 

¢ Built by Gaius; see note on chap. xx. 3 and Index s.v. 
Vaticanum. 

4 The carceres were compartments closed by barriers, one 
for each chariot. They were probably twelve in number aud 
were so arranged as to be at an equal distance from the 
starting point of the race. When the race began, the barriers 
were removed. The metae, or ** goals," were three conical 
pillars at each end of the spina, or low wall which ran down 
the middle of the arena, about which the chariots had to run 
a given number of times, usually seven; see Dom. iv. 3. 


40 


~ 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


them before. He opened the games at the dedi- 
cation of Pompey’s theatre, which he had restored 
when it was damaged by a fire, from a raised seat 
in the orchestra, after first offering sacrifice at the 
temples? in the upper part of the auditorium and 
coming down through the tiers of seats while 
all sat in silence. He also celebrated secular 
games, alleging that they had been given too 
early by Augustus and not reserved for the 
regular time ; although he himself writes in his own 
History that when they had been discontinued for 
a long time, Augustus restored them to their proper 
place after a very careful calculation of the inter- 
vals. Therefore the herald's proclamation was 
greeted with laughter, when he invited the people 
in the usual formula to games “which no one 
had ever seen or would ever see again"; for 
some were still living who had seen them before, 
and some actors who had appeared at the former 
performance appeared at that time as well. He 
often gave games in the Vatican Circus* also, at 
times with a beast-baiting between every five races. 
But the Great Circus he adorned with barriers of 
marble and gilded goals,4 whereas before they had 
been of tufa and wood, and assigned special 
seats to the senators, who had been in the habit 
of viewing the games with the rest of the people. 
In addition to the chariot races he exhibited the 
game called Troy and also panthers, which were 
hunted down by a squadron of the praetorian cavalry 
under the lead of the tribunes and the prefect 
himself; likewise Thessalian horseman, who drive 
wild bulls all over the arena, leaping upon them 


4I 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


spatia circi agunt insiliuntque defessos et ad terram 
cornibus detrahunt. 

Gladiatoria munera plurifariam! ac multiplicia 
exhibuit: anniversarium in castris praetorianis sine 
venatione apparatuque, iustum atque legitimum in 
Saeptis; ibidem extraordinarium et breve dierum- 
que paucorum, quodque appellare coepit “ sportulam,’ 
quia primum daturus edixerat,? velut ad subitam 
condictamque cenulam invitare se populum. Nec 
ullo spectaculi genere communior aut remissior erat, 
adeo ut oblatos victoribus aureos prolata sinistra 
pariter cum vulgo voce digitisque numeraret ac saepe 
hortando rogandoque ad hilaritatem homines pro- 
vocaret, dominos identidem appellans, immixtis 
interdum frigidis et arcessitis iocis; qualis est ut 
cum Palumbum postulantibus daturum se promisit, 
si captus esset. lllud plane quantumvis salubriter 
et in tempore: cum essedario, pro quo quattuor fili 
deprecabantur, magno omnium favore indulsisset 
rudem, tabulam ilico misit admonens populum, 
quanto opere liberos suscipere deberet, quos videret 
et gladiatori praesidio gratiaeque esse. Edidit et in 
Martio campo expugnationem direptionemque oppidi 
ad imaginem bellicam et deditionem Britanniae 


1 plurifariam, Rç ; plurifaria, Q (multifaria, G). 
? daturus edixerat, Basle ed. of 1533; daturum se dixerat, 
Q (dixerant, t). 


a See note on Aug. lxxiv. 

^ [nstead of keeping it covered with his toga, an un- 
dignified performance for an emperor. 

ce « The Dove,” nickname of a gladiator. 

4 The symbol of discharge ; cf. Hor. Epist. 1. 1. 2. 

e See note on Calig. xxxv. 3. 


42 


oí m s SGH, y ee — — a oe, o—X . a— oe RU a CE, 


gy -— 8 I o — ———— (Á—— a ee o 


+ 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


. when they are tired out and throwing them to the 


ground by the horns. 


He gave many gladiatorial shows and in many 


. places: one in yearly celebration of his accession, in 


TA EC. 


the Praetorian Camp without wild beasts and fine 
equipment, and one in the Saepta of the regular and 
usual kind; another in the same place not in 
the regular list, short and lasting but a few days, to 
which he was the first to apply the name of sportula,* 
because before giving it for the first time he made 
proclamation that he invited the people “as it were 


* to an extempore meal, hastily prepared." Now there 
© was no form of entertainment at which he was more 


familiar and free, even thrusting out his left hand, 
as the commons did, and counting aloud on his 


- fingers the gold pieces which were paid to the 
` victors; and ever and anon he would address the 


audience, and invite and urge them to merriment, 


" calling them “ masters” from time to time, and 
‘ interspersing feeble and far-fetched jokes. For 
^ example, when they called for Palumbus* he 
* promised that they should have him, “if he could be 
= caught.” The following, however, was both ex- 


ceedingly timely and salutary ; when he had granted 
the wooden sword ^ to an essedarius, for whose dis- 
charge four sons begged, and the act was received 
with loud and general applause, he at once cir- 
culated a note, pointing out to the people how 
greatly they ought to desire children, since they 
saw that they brought favour and protection 
even to a gladiator. He gave representations in the 
Campus Martius of the storming and sacking of 
a town in the manner of real warfare, as well as of 
the surrender of the kings of the Britons, and 


43 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


regum praeseditque paludatus. Quin et emissurus 
Fucinum lacum naumachiam ante commisit. Sed 
cum proclamantibus naumachiariis: “Have imperator, 
morituri te salutant!" respondisset: “ Aut non,” ?! 
neque post hanc vocem quasi venia data quisquam 
dimicare vellet, diu cunctatus an omnes igni ferroque 
absumeret, tandem e sede sua prosiluit ac per 
ambitum lacus non sine foeda vacillatione ? discurrens 
partim minando partim adhortando ad pugnam 
compulit. Hoc spectaculo classis Sicula et Rhodia 
concurrerunt, duodenarum triremium singulae, ex- 
ciente? bucina Tritone argenteo, qui e medio lacu 
per machinam emerserat. 

XXII. Quaedam circa caerimonias civilemque et 
militarem morem, item circa omnium ordinum statum 
domi forisque aut correxit aut exoleta revocavit aut 
etiam nova instituit. In cooptandis per collegia 
sacerdotibus neminem nisi iuratus nominavit; ob- 
servavitque sedulo, ut quotiens terra in urbe movisset, 
ferias advocata contione praetor indiceret, utque dira 
ave* in Capitolio visa obsecratio haberetur, eamque 
ipse iure maximi pontificis pro rostris populo praeiret 
summotaque operariorum servorumque turba. 

XXIII. Rerum actum divisum antea in hibernos 
aestivosque menses coniunxit. [Iuris dictionem de 

l aut non] avete vos, c 

2 vacillatione, ¢; bacillatione, A. 

3 exciente, IR ; the other mss. have eiciente (eitiente, G). 


+ ave, Roth (avi, Turnebus); aut, MGLP ; aut in urbe 
aut, Y'O. 


5 About to die; one of Claudius's feeble jokes, which the 
combatants pretended to understand as meaning that they 
need not risk their lives in battle. è See chap. xxx. below. 

c That those whom he had selected were worthy of the 
honour. 


44 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


presided clad in a generals cloak. Even when 
he was on the point of letting out the water from 
Lake Fucinus he gave a sham sea-fight first. But 
when the combatants cried out: “ Hail, emperor, 
they who are about to die salute thee,” he replied, 
* Or not," ^ and after that all of them refused to 
fight, maintaining that they had been pardoned. 
Upon this he hesitated for some time about des- 
troying them all with fire and sword, but at last 
leaping from his throne and running along the edge 
of the lake with his ridiculous tottering gait,’ he 
induced them to fight, partly by threats and partly 
by promises. At this performance a Sicilian and a 
Rhodian fleet engaged, each numbering twelve 
triremes, and the signal was sounded on a horn by a 
silver Triton, which was raised from the middle of 
the lake by a mechanical device. 

XXII. Touching religious ceremonies and civil 
and military customs, as well as the condition of all. 
classes at home and abroad, he corrected various 
abuses, revived some old customs or even estab- 
lished new ones. In admitting priests into the 
various colleges he never named anyone until he 
had first taken oath,° and he scrupulously observed 
the custom of having the praetor call an assembly 
and proclaim a holiday, whenever there was an 
earthquake within the city ; as well as that of offer- 
ing up a supplication whenever a bird ot ill-omen was 
seen on the Capitol. This last he himself conducted 
in his capacity of chief priest, first reciting the form 
of words to the people from the rostra, after all 
mechanics and slaves had been ordered to withdraw. 

XXIII. The season for holding court, formerly 
divided into a winter and a summer term, he made 


45 


t 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


fidei commissis quotannis et tantum in urbe delegari 
magistratibus solitam in perpetuum atque etiam: per 
provincias potestatibus demandavit. Capiti Papiae 
Poppaeae legis a Tiberio Caesare, quasi sexagenarii 
generare non possent, addito obrogavit. Sanxit ut 
pupillis extra ordinem tutores a consulibus darentur, 
utque ii, quibus a magistratibus provinciae inter- 
dicerentur, urbe quoque et Italia summoverentur. 
Ipse quosdam novo exemplo relegavit, ut ultra 
lapidem tertium vetaret egredi ab urbe. 

De maiore negotio acturus in curia medius inter 
consulum sellas tribuniciove! subsellio sedebat. 
Commeatus a senatu peti solitos benefici sui fecit. 

XXIV. Ornamenta consularia etiam procuratoribus 
ducenariis indulsit. Senatoriam dignitatem recus- 
antibus equestrem quoque ademit. Latum clavum, 
quamvis initio affirmasset non lecturum se senatorem 
nisi civis R. abnepotem, etiam libertini filio tribuit, 
sed sub condicione si prius ab equite R. adoptatus 
esset; ac sic quoque reprehensionem verens, et 
Appium Caecum censorem, generis sui proauctorem, 


1 tribuniciove, Mommsen; sella vel tribunicio, Smilda ; 
tribunicio, mas. 


* See Galla xiv. 3, from which it appears that Claudius 
made the summer and autumn seasons continuous, and did 
away with the winter term. 

» The relegatio was a milder form of exile, without loss of 
citizenship or confiscation of property, but in this case the 
offenders were not banished, but confined to the city and its 
immediate vicinity. 

c The procuratores were the emperor's agents, who per- 
formed various &dministrative duties throughout the empire. 
They were meinbers of the equestrian order and were ranked 
on the basis of their annual stipend as trecenarii, ducenarii, 


46 


py eer ; 


Ld 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


continuous.* Jurisdiction in cases of trust, which it 
had been usual to assign each year and only to 
magistrates in the city, he delegated for all time and 
extended to the governors of the provinces. He 
annulled a clause added to the lex Papia Poppaea by 
Tiberius, implying that men of sixty could not beget 
children. He made a law that guardians might be 
appointed for orphans by the consuls, contrary to 
the usual procedure, and that those who were ban- 
ished from a province by its magistrates should also 
be debarred from the city and from Italy. He 
himself imposed upon some a new kind of punish- 
ment, by forbidding them to go more than three 
miles outside of the city. 

When about to conduct business of special impor- 
tance in the House, he took his seat between the 
two consuls or on the tribynes’ bench. He reserved 
to himself the granting of permission to travel, 
which had formerly been requested of the senate. 

XXIV. He gave the consular regalia even to the 
second grade of stewards.° If any refused senatorial 
rank,? he took from them that of knight also. 
Though he had declared at the beginning of his 
reign that he would choose no one as a senator 
who did not have a Roman citizen for a great- 
great-grandfather, he gave the broad stripe even 
to a freedman’s son, but only on condition that 
he should first be adopted by a. Roman knight. 
Even then, fearful of criticism, he declared that 
the censor Appius Caecus, the ancient founder of his 


centenarit, and sexagenarü, receiving respectively 300,000, 
200,000, 100,000, and 60,000 sesterces. 

4 A common reason for this was the desire to engage in 
business, which senators were not allowed to do. 


47 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


libertinorum filios in senatum adlegisse docuit, ignarus 
temporibus Appi et deinceps aliquamdi libertinos 
dictos non ipsos, qui manu emitterentur, sed ingenuos 
ex his procreatos. Collegio quaestorum pro stratura 
viarum gladiatorium munus iniunxit detractaque 
Ostiensi et Gallica provincia curam aerari Saturni 
reddidit, quam medio tempore praetores aut, uti nunc, 
praetura functi sustinuerant. 

Triumphalia ornamenta Silano, filiae suae sponso, 
nondum puberi dedit, maioribus vero natu tam multis 
tamque facile, ut epistula communi ! legionum nomine 
exstiterit petentium, ut legatis consularibus simul cum 
exercitu et triumphalia darentur, ne causam belli { 
quoquo modo quaererent. Aulo Plautio etiam 
ovationem decrevit ingressoque urbem obviam pro- 
gressus et in Capitolium eunti et inde rursus rever- 
tenti latus texit. Gabinio Secundo Cauchis gente | 
Germanica superatis cognomen Cauchi * ? usurpare | 
concessit. 

XXV. Equestris militias ita ordinavit, ut post 
cohortem alam, post alam tribunatum legionis 
daret; stipendiaque instituit et imaginariae militiae 
genus, quod vocatur * supra numerum," quo absentes 
et titulo tenus fungerentur. Milites domus sena- 
torias salutandi causa ingredi etiam patrum decreto 
prohibuit. Libertinos, qui se pro equitibus 

| 
| 


1 communi, Basle ed. of 1533 (7?) ; communis, Q. 
2 Cauchi, suggested auch sgt ty Am g CARR odis Ihm; Casas mss. 
^ The state treasury, "aate treasury, located in the temple of. Saturn in in the temple of Saturn in 
the Forum ; cf. Aug. xxxvi. 
: According to Tac., Ann. 11. 20, this was done by the: 
legions in Germany. 


48 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


family, had chosen the sons of freedmen into the 
senate; but he did not know that in the days of 
Appius and for some time afterwards the term 
libertin: designated, not those who were themselves 
manumitted, but their freeborn sons. He obliged 
the college of quaestors to give a gladiatorial show 
in place of paving the roads; then depriving 
them of their officia] duties at Ostia and in Gaul, 
he restored to them the charge of the treasury 
of Saturn," which had in the meantime been ad- 
ministered by praetors, or by ex-praetors, as in our 
time. 

He gave the triumphal regalia to Silanus, his 
daughter's affianced husband, who was still a boy, 
and conferred them on older men so often and so 
readily, that a joint petition was circulated in the 
name of the legions,? praying that those emblems 
be given the consular governors at the same time 
with their armies, to prevent their seeking all sorts 
of pretexts for war. To Aulus Plautius he also 
granted an ovation, going out to meet him when he 
entered the city, and walking on his left as he went 
to the Capitol and returned again. He allowed 
Gabinius Secundus to assume the surname of 
Cauchius because of his conquest of the Cauchi, 
a German nation. 

XXV. He rearranged the military career of the 
knights, assigning a divisiom of cavalry after a cohort, 
and next the tribunate of a legion. He also insti- 
tuted a fictitious kind of paid military career, which 
is called * supernumerary " and could be performed 
in absentia and in name only. He even had the 
Fathers pass a decree forbidding soldiers to enter the 
houses of senators to pay their respects. He con- 


49 
VOL. Il E 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


agerent, publicavit, ingratos et de quibus patroni 
quererentur revocavit in servitutem advocatisque 
eorum negavit se adversus libertos ipsorum ius 
dicturum. Cum quidam aegra et adfecta mancipia 
in insulam Aesculapi taedio medendi exponerent, 
omnes qui exponerentur liberos esse sanxit, nec 
redire in dicionem domini, si convaluissent ; quod si 
quis necare quem mallet quam exponere, caedis 
crimine teneri. Viatores ne per Italiae oppida nisi 
aut pedibus aut sella aut lectica transirent, monuit 
edicto. Puteolis et Ostiae singulas cohortes ad 
arcendos incendiorum casus collocavit. 

Peregrinae condicionis homines vetuit usurpare 
Romana nomina dum taxat gentilicia. Civitatem R. 
usurpantes in campo Esquilino! securi percussit. 
Provincias Achaiam et Macedoniam, quas Tiberius 
ad curam suam transtulerat, senatui reddidit. Lyciis 
ob exitiabiles inter se discordias libertatem ademit, 
Rhodiis ob paenitentiam veterum delictorum reddidit. 
Iliensibus quasi Romanae gentis auctoribus tributa 
ih perpetuum remisit recitata vetere epistula Graeca 


1 Esquilino, GQT ; the other mss. have Esquilinio. 

a That is, if their own freedmen proved ungrateful and 
they wished to bring suit against them. 

òè [n the Tiber at Rome, so-called from its temple of 
Aesculapius. A à 

¢ That is, the gentile names such as Claudius, Cornelius, 
etc. ; apparently forenames (Gaius, Lucius, and the like) and 
surnames (Lentulus, Nasica) might be assumed, although a 
foreigner often retained his native name as a surname. 

4 The part of the Esquiline hill on both sides of the 
Servian wall ; occupied in part by the Gardens of Maecenas ; 
see Hor. Serm. 1. 8. The place of execution seems to have 
been outside of the Porta Esquilina. 


50 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


fiscated the property of those freedmen who passed 
as Roman knights, and reduced to slavery again such 
as were ungrateful and a cause of complaint to their 
patrons, declaring to their advocates that he would 
not entertain a suit against their own freedmen." 
When certain men were exposing their sick and 
worn out slaves on the Island of Aesculapius? 
because of the trouble of treating them, Claudius 
decreed that all such slaves were free, and that if 
they recovered, they should not return to the control 
of their master; but if anyone preferred to kill 
Such a slave rather than to abandon him, he was 
liable to the charge of murder. He provided by an 
edict that travellers should not pass through the 
towns of Italy except on foot, or in a chair or litter. 
He stationed a cohort at Puteoli and one at Ostia, 
to guard against the danger of fires. 

He forbade men of foreign birth to use the Roman 
names so far as those of the clans^ were concerned, 
Those who usurped the privileges of Roman 
citizenship he executed in the Esquiline field.? 
He restored to the senate the provinces of Achaia 
and Macedonia, which Tiberius had taken into his 
own charge. He deprived the Lycians of their 
independence because of deadly intestine feuds, and 
restored theirs to the Rhodians, since they had given 
up their former faults. He allowed the people of 
Ilium perpetual exemption from tribute, on the 
ground that they were the founders of the Roman race, 
reading an ancient letter of the senate and people of 

51 
E2 


c 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


senatus populique R. Seleuco regi amicitiam et 
societatem ita demum pollicentis, si consanguineos 
suos Ilienses ab omni onere immunes praestitisset. 
Iudaeos impulsore Chresto assidue tumultuantis 
Roma expulit. Germanorum legatis in orchestra 
sedere permisit, simplicitate eorum et fiducia 
commotus, quod in popularia deducti, cum animad- 
vertissent Parthos et Armenios sedentis in senatu, 
ad eadem loca sponte transierant, nihilo deteriorem 
virtutem aut condicionem suam praedicantes. Drui- 
darum! religionem apud Gallos dirae immanitatis 
et tantum civibus sub Augusto interdictam penitus 
abolevit; contra sacra Eleusinia etiam transferre 
ex Attica Romam conatus est, templumque in 
Sicilia Veneris Erycinae vetustate conlapsum ut ex 
aerario pop. R. reficeretur, auctor fuit. Cum regibus 
foedus in Foro icit? porca caesa ac vetere fetialium 
praefatione adhibita. Sed et haec et cetera to- 
tumque adeo ex parte magna principatum non tam 
suo quam uxorum libertorumque arbitrio adminis- 
travit, talis ubique plerumque, qualem esse eum aut 
expediret illis aut liberet. 

XXVI. Sponsas admodum adulescens duas habuit: 
Aemiliam Lepidam Augusti proneptem, item Liviam 


1 Druidarum, Ng; Driadarum, Q. 
2 icit, Sabellicus ; iecit, Q. 


^ Another form of Christus ; see Tert. Apol. 3 (at the end). 
It is uncertain whether Suetonius is guilty of an error in 
chronology or is referring to some Jew of that name. The 
former seems probable because of the absence of quodam. 
Tacitus, Ann. 15. 44, uses the correct form, Christus, and 
states that He was executed in the reign of Tiberius. 

? The gender is not significant; cf. Livy 1. 24; Varr. 
R.R. 2. 49. ¢ See Livy 1. 24. 


52 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


Rome written in Greek to king Seleucus, in which they 
promised him their friendship and alliance only on 
condition that he should keep their kinsfolk of Ilium 
free from every burden. Since the Jews constantly 
made disturbances at the instigation of Chrestus,* he 
expelled them from Rome. He allowed the envoys 
of the Germans to sit in the orchestra, led by their 
naive self-confidence ; for when they had been taken 
to the seats occupied by the common people and 
saw the Parthian and Armenian envoys sitting with 
the senate, they moved of their own accord to the 
same part of the theatre, protesting that their merits 
and rank were no whit inferior He utterly 
abolished the cruel and inhuman religion of the 
Druids among the Gauls, which under Augustus had 
merely been prohibited to Roman citizens ; on the 
other hand he even attempted to transfer the 
Eleusinian rites from Attica to Rome, and had the 
temple of Venus Erycina in Sicily, which had fallen 
to ruin through age, restored at the expense of the 
treasury of the Roman people. He struck his 
treaties with foreign princes in the Forum, sacrificing 
a pig? and reciting the ancient formula of the fetial 
priests. But these and other acts, and in fact 
almost the whole conduct of his reign, were dictated 
not so much by his own judgment as that of his 
wives and freedmen, since he nearly always acted in 

accordance with their interests and desires. 
XXVI. He was betrothed twice at an early age: 
to Aemilia Lepida, great-granddaughter of Augustus, 
53 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


Medullinam, cui et cognomen Camillae erat, e genere 
antiquo dictatoris Camilli. Priorem, quod parentes 
eius Augustum offenderant, virginemadhuc repudiavit, 
posteriorem ipso die, qui erat nuptiis destinatus, ex 
valitudine amisit. Uxores deinde duxit Plautiam 
Urgulanillam ! triumphali et mox Aeliam Paetinam 
consulari patre. Cum utraque divortium fecit, sed 
cum Paetina ex levibus offensis, cum Urgulanilla ? ob 
libidinum probra et homicidii suspicionem. Post has 
Valeriam Messalinam, Barbati Messalae consobrini 
sui filiam, in matrimonium accepit. Quam cum 
comperisset super cetera flagitia atque dedecora C. 
Silio etiam nupsisse dote inter auspices consignata, 


supplicio adfecit confirmavitque pro contione apud 


praetorianos, quatenus sibi matrimonia male cederent, 
permansurum se in caelibatu, ac nisi permansisset, 
non recusaturum confodi manibus ipsorum. Nec 
durare valuit quin de condicionibus continuo trac- 
taret, etiam de Paetinae, quam olim exegerat, deque 
Lolliae Paulinae, quae C. Caesari nupta fuerat. 
Verum inlecebris Agrippinae, Germanici fratris 
sui filiae, per ius osculi et blanditiarum occasiones 
pellectus in amorem, subornavit proximo senatu qui 
censerent, cogendum se ad ducendum eam uxorem, 


quasi rei p. maxime interesset, dandamque ceteris 


veniam talium coniugiorum, quae ad id tempus 
incesta habebantur. Ac vix uno interposito die 


1 Urgulanilla, M; the other mss. have Ergulanilla (erc-, 
Gn). 
2 Ergulanilla, 2 (erc-, GTQ). 


54 


— p————D——— OP — 0n mnl 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


and to Livia Medullina, who also had the surname of 
Camilla and was descended. from the ancient family 
of Camillus the dictator. He put away the former 
before their marriage, because her parents had 
offended Augustus; the latter was taken ill and died 
on the very day which had been set for the wedding. 
He then married Plautia Urgulanilla, whose father 
had been honoured with a triumph, and later Aelia 
Paetina, daughter of an ex-consul. He divorced 
both these, Paetina for trivial offences, but Urgulanilla 
because of scandalous lewdness and the suspicion of 
murder. Then he married Valeria Messalina, daughter 
of his cousin Messala Barbatus. But when he learned 
that besides other shameful and wicked deeds she 
had actually married Gaius Silius, and that a formal 
contract had been signed in the presence of 
witnesses, he put her to death and declared before 
the assembled praetorian guard that inasmuch as his 
marriages did not turn out well, he would remain a 
widower, and if he did not keep his word, he would 
not refuse death at their hands. Yet he could not 
refrain from at once planning another match, even 
with Paetina, whom he had formerly discarded, and 
with Lollia Paulina, who had been the wife of Gaius 
Caesar. But his affections were ensnared by the wiles 
of Agrippina, daughter of his brother Germanicus, 
aided by the right of exchanging kisses and the 
opportunities for: endearments offered by their 
relationship; and at the next meeting of the senate 
he induced some of the members to propose that he 
be compelled to marry Agrippina, on the ground that 
it was for the interest of the State; also that others 
be allowed to contract similar marriages, which up to 
that time had been regarded as incestuous. And he 


55 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


confecit nuptias, non repertis qui sequerentur 
exemplum, excepto libertino quodam et altero 
primipilari, cuius nuptiarum officium et ipse cum 
Agrippina celebravit. 

XXVII. Liberos ex tribus uxoribus tulit: ex 
Urgulanilla? Drusum et Claudiam, ex Paetina 
Antoniam, ex Messalina Octaviam et quem primo 
Germanicum, mox Britannicum cognominavit. Dru- 
sum prope iam ? puberem amisit piro per lusum in 
sublime iactato et hiatu oris excepto strangulatum, 
cum ei ante paucos dies filiam Seiani despondisset. 
Quo magis miror fuisse qui: traderent fraude a 
Seiano necatum. Claudiam ex liberto suo Botere 
conceptam, quamvis ante quintum mensem divortii 
natam alique coeptam, exponi tamen ad matris 
ianuam et nudam iussit abici. Antoniam Cn. Pom- 
peio Magno, deinde Fausto Sullae, nobilissimis 


iuvenibus, Octaviam Neroni privigno suo collocavit, - 


Silano ante desponsam. Britannicum vicesimo im- 
perii die inque secundo consulatu, natum sibi parvu- 
lum etiam tum, et militi pro contione manibus suis 
gestans et plebi per spectacula gremio aut ante se 
retinens assidue commendabat faustisque ominibus 3 
cum adclamantium turba prosequebatur. E generis 
Neronem adoptavit, Pompeium atque Silanum non 
recusavit modo, sed et interemit. 


1 Kreulanilla, Q (here-, L ; erg-, ST). 

? prope iam, Bentley; prope tum, Biicheler; Pompeis 
impuberem, Lipsius; pompeium, mss. 

3 ominibus, c; omnibus, Q. 


* Of Claudius from Urgulanilla. 

^ Either Suetonius is in error here, or the text is corrupt, 
since Claudius! second consulship did not begin until 42, and 
he began to reign Jan. 25, 41. 


56 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


married her with hardly a single day’s delay; but 
none were found to follow his example save a 
freedman and a chief centurion, whose marriage 
ceremony he himself attended with Agrippina. 

XXVII. He had children by three of his wives: 
by Urgulanilla, Drusus, and Claudia; by Paetina, 
Antonia; by Messalina, Octavia and a son, at first 
called Germanicus and later Britannicus. He lost 
Drusus just before he came to manhood, for he was 
strangled by a pear which he had thrown in the air in 
play and caught in his open mouth. A few days before 
this he had betrothed him to the daughter of Sejanus, 
which makes me wonder all the more that some 
say that Drusus was treacherously slain by Sejanus. 
Claudia was the offspring of his freedman Boter, and 
although she was born within five months after the 
divorce? and he had begun to rear her, yet he ordered 
her to be cast out naked at her mother's door and 
disowned. He gave Antonia in marriage to Gnaeus 
Pompeius Magnus, and later to Faustus Sulla, both 
young men of high birth, and Octavia to his stepson 
Nero, after she had previously been betrothed to 
Silanus. Britannicus was born on the twenty-second 
day of his reign and in his second consulship. When 
he was still very small, Claudius would often take 
him in his arms and commend him to the assembled 
soldiers, and to the people at the games, holding him 
in his lap or in his outstretched hands, and he would 
wish him happy auspices, joined by the applauding 
throng. Of his sons-in-aw he adopted Nero; 
Pompeius and Silanus he not only declined to adopt, 
but even put to death. 


57 


20 A.D. 


42 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


XXVIII. Libertorum praecipue suspexit Posiden 
spadonem, quem etiam Britannico triumpho inter 
militares viros hasta pura donavit; nec minus 
Felicem, quem cohortibus et alis provinciaeque 
Iudaeae praeposuit, trium reginarum maritum; et 
Harpocran, cui lectica per urbem vehendi spectacu- 
laque publice edendi ius tribuit; ac super hos 
Polybium ab studiis, qui saepe inter duos consules 
ambulabat; sed ante omnis Narcissum ab epistulis 
et Pallantem a rationibus, quos decreto quoque 
senatus non praemiis modo ingentibus, sed et 
quaestoriis praetoriisque ornamentis honorari libens 
passus est; tantum praeterea adquirere et rapere, ut 
querente eo quondam de fisci exiguitate non absurde 
dictum sit, abundaturum, si a duobus libertis in con- 
sortium reciperetur. 

XXIX. His, ut dixi, uxoribusque addictus, non 
principem,! sed ministrum egit, compendio cuiusque 
horum vel etiam studio aut libidine honores exerci- 
tus impunitates supplicia largitus est, et quidem 
insciens plerumque et ignarus. Ac ne singillatim 
minora quoque enumerem, revocatas liberalitates 
eius, iudicia rescissa, suppositos aut etiam palam 
immutatos datorum officiorum codicillos: Appium 
Silanum consocerum suum luliasque, alteram Drusi, 


1 The mss. have se after principem. 


a A common military prize. ; 

è Only two of these are known, both named Drusilla. One 
was the daughter of Juba II., king of Mauretania, and the 
other of Herod Agrippa I., of Judaea; the latter was 
previously married to Azizus, king of Emesa. 

¢ Otherwise restricted to knights. 4 Chap. xxv. 


58 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


XXVIII. Of his freedmen he had special regard 
for the eunuch Posides, whom he even presented 
with the headless spear? at his British triumph, 
along with those who had served as soldiers. He 
was equally fond of Felix, giving him the command 
of cohorts and of troops of horse, as well as of the 
province of Judaea ; and he became the husband of 
three queens^ Also of Harpocras, to whom he 
granted the privilege of riding through the city in a 
litter and of giving public entertaiments." Still 
higher was his regard for Polybius, his literary 
adviser, who often walked between the two consuls. 
But most of all he was devoted to his secretary 
Narcissus and his treasurer Pallas, and he gladly 
allowed them to be honoured in addition by a decree 
of the senate, not only with immense gifts, but even 
with the insignia of quaestors and praetors. Besides 
this he permitted them to amass such wealth by 
plunder, that when he once complained of the low 
state of his funds, the witty answer was made that 
he would have enough and to spare, if he were taken 
into partnership by his two freedmen. 

XXIX. Wholly under the control of these and of 
his wives, as I have said, he played the part, not 
of a prince, but of a servant, lavishing honours, 
the command of armies, pardons or punishments, 
according to the interests of each of them, or even 
their wish or whim ; and that too for the most part 
in ignorance and blindly. Not to go into details , 
about less important matters (such as revoking his 
grants, rescinding his decisions, substituting false 
letters patent, or even openly changing those which 
he had issued), he put to death his father-in- 
law Appius Silanus and the two Julias, daughters of 


59 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


sione ulla data occidit, item Cn. Pompeium maioris 
filiae virum et L. Silanum minoris sponsum. Ex qui- 
bus Pompeius in concubitu dilecti adulescentuli con- 
fossus est, Silanus abdicare se praetura ante IIII. 
Kal. Ian. morique initio anni coactus die ipso Claudi 
et Agrippinae nuptiarum. In quinque et triginta 
senatores trecentosque amplius equites R. tanta 
facilitate animadvertit, ut, cum de nece consularis 
viri renuntiante centurione factum esse quod impe- 
rasset, negaret quicquam se imperasse, nihilo minus 
rem comprobaret, affirmantibus libertis officio milites 
functos, quod ad ultionem imperatoris ultro procu- 
currissent. Nam illud omnem fidem excesserit quod 
nuptiis, quas Messalina cum adultero Silio fecerat, 
tabellas dotis et ipse consignaverit, inductus, quasi 
de industria simularentur ad avertendum transferen- 
dumque periculum, quod imminere ipsi per quaedam 
ostenta portenderetur. 

XXX. Auctoritas dignitasque formae non defuit ei, 
verum ! stanti vel sedenti ac praecipue quiescenti, 
nam et prolixo nec exili corpore erat et specie 
canitieque pulchra, opimis cervicibus; ceterum et 
ingredientem destituebant poplites minus firmi, et 
remisse quid vel serio agentem multa dehonestabant: 


l ei verum, Bentley, Oudendorp ; et veterum, MGL P6 (see 
p. vziv.) ; vel, T. 


60 


alteram Germanici filiam, crimine incerto nec defen- | 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


Drusus and Germanicus, on an unsupported charge 
and giving them no opportunity for defence ; also 
Gnaeus Pompeius, the husband of his elder daughter, 
and Lucius Silanus who was betrothed to his younger 
one. Of these Pompey was stabbed in the embraces of 
a favourite youth, while Silanus was compelled to 
abdicate his praetorship four days before the Kalends 
of January and to take his own life at the beginning 
of the year, the very day of the marriage of Claudius 
and Agrippina. He inflicted the death penalty on 
thirty-five senators and more than three hundred 
Roman knights with such easy indifference, that when 
a centurion in reporting the death of an ex-consul 
said that his order had been carried out, he replied 
that he had given no order; but he nevertheless 
approved the act, since his freedmen declared that 
the soldiers had done their duty in hastening to 
avenge their emperor without instructions. But it is 
beyond all belief, that at the marriage which Messalina 
had contracted with her paramour Silius he signed 
the contract for the dowry with his own hand, being 
induced to do so on the ground that the marriage 
was a feigned one, designed to avert and turn upon 
another a danger which was inferred from certain 
portents to threaten the emperor himself. 

XXX. He possessed majesty and dignity of ap- 
pearance, but only when he was standing still or 
sitting, and especially when he was lying down; for 
he was tall but not slender, with an attractive face, 
becoming white hair, and a full neck. But when he 
walked, his weak knees gave way under him and he 
had many disagreeable traits both in his lighter 
moments and when he was engaged in business ; his 
laughter was unseemly and his anger still more dis- 


61 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


risus indecens, ira turpior spumante rictu, umentibus 
naribus, praeterea linguae titubantia caputque cum 
semper tum in quantulocumque actu vel maxime 
tremulum. 

XXXI. Valitudine sicut olim gravi, ita princeps 
prospera usus est excepto stomachi dolore, quo se 
correptum etiam de consciscenda morte cogitasse 
dixit. 

XXXII. Convivia agitavit et ampla et assidua ac 
fere patentissimis locis, ut plerumque sesceni simul 
discumberent. Convivatus est et super emissarium 
Fucini lacus ac paene summersus, cum emissa impetu 
aqua redundasset. Adhibebat omni cenae et liberos 
suos cum pueris puellisque nobilibus, qui! more 
veteri ad fulcra lectorum sedentes  vescerentur. 
Convivae, qui pridie scyphum aureum subripuisse 
existimabatur, revocato in diem posterum calicem 
fictilem apposuit. Dicitur etiam meditatus edictum, 
quo veniam daret flatum crepitumque ventris in 
convivio emittendi, cum periclitatum quendam prae 
pudore ex continentia repperisset. 

XXXIII. Cibi vinique quocumque et tempore et 
loco appetentissimus, cognoscens quondam in Au- 
gusti foro ictusque nidore prandii, quod in proxima 
Martis aede Saliis apparabatur, deserto tribunali 
ascendit ad sacerdotes unaque decubuit. Nec 
temere umquam triclinio abscessit nisi distentus ac 


1 qui, YO ; ut, 5; the other mas. omit the word, except G, 
which has ut after veteri. 


* The fulcra were the ends of the couches on which the 
pillows were placed ; see Class. Rev. 3, pp. 322 ff. 

> Cf. Aug. lxiv. 3. 

* Their feasts were proverbial for luxury ; see Hor. Odes, 
i. 37. 2. 


62 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


gusting, for he would foam at the mouth and trickle 
at the nose; he stammered besides and his head was 
very shaky at all times, but especially when he made 
the least exertion. 

XXXI. Though previously his health was bad, it 
was excellent while he was emperor except for attacks 
of heartburn, which he said all but drove him to 
suicide. 

XXXII. He gave frequent and grand dinner 
parties, as a rule in spacious places, where six 
hundred guests were often entertained at one time. 
He even gave a banquet close to the outlet of the 
Fucine Lake and was well-nigh drowned, when the 
water was let out with a rush and deluged the place. 
He always invited his own children to dinner along 
with the sons and daughters of distinguished men, 
having them sit at the arms“ of the couches as they 
ate, after the old time custom.2 When a guest was 
suspected of having stolen a golden bow] the day 
before, he invited him again the next day, but set 
before him an earthenware cup. He is even said to 
have thought of an edict allowing the privilege 
of breaking wind quietly or noisily at table, having 
learned of a man who ran some risk by restraining 
himself through modesty. 

XXXIII. He was eager for food and drink at all 
times and in all places. Once when he was holding 
court in the forum of Augustus and had caught the 
savour of a meal which was preparing for the Salii ¢ 
in the temple of Mars hard by, he left the tribunal, 
went up where the priests were, and took his place 
at their table. He hardly ever left the dining-room 
until he was stuffed and soaked ; then he went to 
sleep at once, lying on his back with his mouth open, 


63 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


madens, et ut statim supino ac per somnum hianti 
pinna in os inderetur ad exonerandum stomachum. 
Somni brevissimi erat, nam ante mediam noctem 
plerumque vigilabat, ut tamen interdiu! nonnum- 
quam in iure dicendo obdormisceret vixque ab 
advocatis de industria vocem augentibus excitaretur. 
Libidinis in feminas profusissimae, marum omnino 
expers. Aleam studiosissime lusit,de cuius arte librum 
quoque emisit, solitus etiam in gestatione ludere, 
ita essedo alveoque adaptatis ne lusus confunderetur. 

XXXIV. Saevum et sanguinarium natura fuisse, 
magnis minimisque apparuit rebus. Tormenta 
quaestionum poenasque parricidarum repraesentabat 
exigebatque coram. Cum spectare antiqui moris 
supplicium Tiburi concupisset et deligatis ad palum 
noxiis carnifex deesset, accitum ab urbe vesperam 
usque opperiri perseveravit. Quocumque gladiatorio 
munere, vel suo vel alieno, etiam forte prolapsos 
iugulari iubebat, maxime retiarios, ut exspirantium 
facies videret. Cum par quoddam mutuis ictibus 
concidisset, cultellos sibi parvulos ex utroque ferro in 
usum fieri sine mora iussit. Bestiariis meridianisque 
adeo delectabatur, ut et prima luce ad spectaculum 
descenderet et meridie dimisso ad prandium populo 


1 interdiu, ¢ ; interdum, A. 


a See Aug. xxxiii. 1. 

^ See Livy, i. 26. 6 ; Nero, xlix. 2; Dom. xi. 2-3. 

¢ Their faces were not covered by helmets; see Index, s.v. 
ret iarius. 

4 According to Pliny, N.H. 28. 34, game killed with a 
knife with which a man had been slain was a specific for 
epilepsy. 


64 | . 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


and a feather was put down his throat to relieve his 
stomach. He slept but little at a time, for he was 
usually awake before midnight ; but he would some- 
times drop off in the daytime while holding court 
and could hardly be roused when the advocates 
raised their voices for the purpose. He was immod- 
erate in his passion for women, but wholly free from 
unnatural vice. He was-greatly devoted to gaming, 
even publishing a book on the art, and he actually 
used to play while driving, having the board so fitted 
to his carriage as to prevent his game from being 
disturbed. | 

XXXIV. That he was of a cruel and bloodthirsty 
disposition was shown in matters great and small. 
He always exacted examination by torture and the 
punishment of parricides* at once and in his 
presence. When he was at Tibur and wished to see 
an execution in the ancient fashion,? no executioner 
could be found after the criminals were bound to the 
stake. Whereupon he sent to fetch one from 
the city and continued to wait for him until nightfall. 
At any gladiatorial show, either his own or another's, 
he gave orders that even those who fell accidentally 
should be slain, in particularly) the net-fighters,¢ so 
that he could watch their faces as they died. When 
a pair of gladiators had fallen by mutually inflicted 
wounds, he at once had some little knives made 
from both their swords for his use.? He took such 
pleasure in the combats with wild beasts and of those 
that fought at noonday, that he would go down to 
the arena at daybreak and after dismissing the people 


¢ Those who fought during the midday interval, perhaps 
the paegniaris ; see note on Calig, xxvi. 5, with the reference 
to Friedlander there given. 


| 65 
VOL. II. F 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


persederet praeterque destinatos etiam levi subitaque 
de causa quosdam committeret, de fabrorum quoque 
ac ministrorum atque id genus numero, si automatum 
vel pegma vel quid tale aliud parum cessisset. 
Induxit et unum ex nomenculatoribus suis, sic ut erat 
togatus. ( 

XXXV. Sed nihil aeque quam timidus ac diffidens 
fuit. Primis imperii diebus quanquam, ut diximus, 
iactator civilitatis, neque convivia inire ausus est nisi 
ut speculatores cum lanceis circumstarent militesque 
vice ministrorum fungerentur, neque aegrum quem- 
quam visitavit nisi explorato prius cubiculo culcitisque 
et stragulis praetemptatis et excussis.  Reliquo 
autem tempore salutatoribus scrutatores semper 
apposuit, et quidem omnibus et acerbissimos. Sero 
enim ac vix remisit, ne feminae praetextatique pueri 
et puellae contrectarentur et ne cuius comiti aut 


. librario calamariae et graphiariae thecae adimerentur. 


Motu civili cum eum Camillus; non dubitans etiam 
citra bellum posse terreri, contumeliosa et minaci et 
contumaci epistula cedere imperio iuberet, vitamque 
otiosam in privata re ágere, dubitavit acabits 
principibus viris an optemperaret.^ pot 

XXXVI. Quasdam n insidias temere delatas adeo 
expavit, ut deponere imperium temptaverit. Quo- 
dam, ut supra rettuli, cum ferro circa sacrificantem 
se deprehenso, senatum per praecones propere 


* A structure with several movable stories, for show pieces 
and other stage effects ; see Juv. 4. 122, and Mayor's note. 
> See note on Aug. xix. 1. f Chap. xii. 4 Chap. xiii. 


66 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


for. luncheon at midday, he would keep his seat and 
infaddition to the appointed combatants, he would 
for trivial and hasty reasons match others, even of the 
carpenters, the assistants, and men of that class, if any 
automatic device, or pageant,* or anything else of the 
kind, had not worked well. He even forced one of his 

ges^ to enter the arena just as he was, in his toga. 

XXXV. But there was nothing for which he was 
so notorious as timidity and suspicion. Although 
in the early days of his reign, as we have said,° he 
made a display of simplicity, he never ventured to 
go to a banquet without being surrounded by guards 
with lances and having his soldiers wait upon him in 
place of the servants; and he never visited a man 
who was ill without having the patient's room examin- 
ed beforehand and his pillows and bed-clothing felt 
over and shaken out. Afterwards he even subjected 
those who came to pay their morning calls to search, 
sparing none the strictest examination. Indeed, it 
was not until late, and then reluctantly, that he gave 
up having women and young boys and girls grossly 
mishandled, and the cases for pens and styles taken 
from every man's attendant or scribe. When Camil- 
lus began his revolution, he felt sure that Claudius 
could be intimidated without resorting to war ; and 
in fact when he ordered the emperor in an insulting, 
threatening, and impudent letter to give up his 
throne and betake himself to a life of privacy and re- 
tirement, Claudius called together the leading men 
and asked their advice about complying. 

XXXVI. He was so terror-stricken by unfounded 
reports of conspiracies that he had tried to abdicate. 
When, as I have mentioned before,? a man with a 
dagger was caught near him as he was sacrificing, he 

67 
F 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


convocavit lacrimisque et vociferatione miseratus est 
condicionem suam, cui nihil tuti usquam esset, ac 
diu publico abstinuit. Messalinae quoque amorem 
flagrantissimum non tam indignitate contumeliarum 
quam periculi metu abiecit, cum adultero Silio 


adquiri imperium credidisset ; quo tempore foedum 


in modum trepidus ad castra confugit, nihil tota via 


quam essetne sibi salvum imperium requirens. 


XXXVII. Nulla adeo suspicio, nullus auctor tam 


levis exstitit, a quo non mediocri scrupulo iniecto ad 
cavendum ulciscendumque compelleretur. Unus ex 
litigatoribus seducto in salutatione affirmavit, vidisse 
se per quietem occidi eum a quodam; dein paulo 
post, quasi percussorem agnosceret, libellum traden- 
tem adversarium suum demonstravit ; confestimque 
is pro deprenso ad poenam raptus est. Pari modo 
oppressum ferunt Appium Silanum; quem cum 
Messalina et Narcissus conspirassent perdere, divisis 
partibus alter ante lucem similis attonito patroni 
cubiculum inrupit, affirmans somniasse se vim ei ab 
Appio inlatam ; altera in admirationem formata sibi 
quoque eandem speciem aliquot iam noctibus obver- 
sari rettulit ; nec multo post ex composito inrumpere 
Appius nuntiatus, cui pridie ad id temporis ut 
_* Of the pretorian guard, in the north-eastern part of the 
city. 
OS 


S a E 
ARR rE PR RE E E 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


summoned the senate in haste by criers and loudly 
and tearfully bewailed his lot, saying that there was 
no safety for him anywhere ; and for a long time he 
would not appear in public. His ardent love for 
Messalina too was cooled, not so much by her un- 
seemly and insulting conduct, as through fear of 
danger, since he believed that her paramour Silius 
aspired to the throne. On that occasion he made a 
shameful and cowardly flight to the camp,? doing 
nothing all the way but ask whether his throne was 
secure. 

XXXVII. No suspicion was too trivial, nor the 
inspirer of it too insignificant, to drive him on to 
precaution and vengeance, once a slight uneasiness 
entered his mind. One of two parties to a suit, when 
he made his morning call, took Claudius aside, and 
said that he had dreamed that he was murdered by 
someone ; then a little later pretending to recognize 
the assassin, he pointed out his opponent, as he was 
handing in his petition. The latter was immediately 
seized, as if caught red-handed, and hurried off to 
execution. It was in a similar way, they say, that 
Appius Silanus met his downfall. When Messalina 
and Narcissus had put their heads together to destroy 
him, they agreed on their parts and the latter rushed 
into his patron’s bed-chamber before daybreak in 
pretended consternation, declaring that he had 
dreamed that Appius had made an attack on the 
emperor. Then Messalina, with assumed surprise, 
declared that she had had the same dream for 
several successive nights. A little later, as had 
been arranged, Appius, who had received orders the 
day before to come at that time, was reported to be 
forcing his way in, and as it this were proof positive 

69 


Ww 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


adesset praeceptum erat, quasi plane repraesentaretur 
somnii fides, arcessi statim ac mori iussus est. Nec 
dubitavit postero die Claudius ordinem rei gestae 
perferre ad senatum ac liberto gratias agere, quod 
pro salute sua etiam dormiens excubaret. 

XXXVIII. Irae atque" iracundiae "conscius sibi, 
utramque excusavit edicto distinxitque, pollicitus 
alteram quidem brevem et innoxiam, alteram non 
iniustam fore. Ostiensibus, quia sibi subeunti Tiberim 
scaphas obviam non miserint, graviter correptis eaque 
cum invidia, ut in ordinem se coactum conscriberet, 
repente tantum non satis facientis’ modo veniam! 
dedit. Quosdam in publico parum tempestive 
adeuntis manu sua reppulit. Item scribam quae- 
storium itemque praetura functum senatorem in- 
auditos et innoxios relegavit, quod ille adversus 
privatum se intemperantius affuisset, hic in aedilitate 
inquilinos praediorum suorum contra vetitum cocta 
vendentes multasset vilicumque intervenientem fla- 
gellasset. Qua de causa etiam coercitionem popi- 
narum aedilibus ademit. l 

Ac ne stultitiam quidem suam reticuit simulatam- 
que a se ex industria sub Gaio, quod aliter evasurus 
perventurusque ad susceptam stationem non fuerit, 
quibusdam oratiunculis testatus est; nec tamen” 


1 modo veniam, 7; veniam modo, Q. 
2 tamen, J. F. Gronov; ante, N (autem, IT). 


^ Narcissus. ^ See note on chap. xxiii. 2. 

¢ See Tb. xxxiv. l. Claudius apparently allowed greater 
freedom. The restrictions were renewed by Nero (see Nero, 
xvi. 2), and according to Dio, 60. 6, Claudius himself (later ?) 


70 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


of the truth of the dream, his immediate accusation 
and death were ordered. And Claudius did not 
hesitate to recount the whole affair to the senate 
next day and to thank the freedman ^ for watching 
over his emperor's safety even in his sleep. 

XXXVIII. He was conscious of his tendency 
to wrath and resentment and excused both in an 
edict; he also drew a distinction between them, 
promising that the former would be short and 
harmless and the latter not without cause. After 
sharply rebuking the people of Ostia, because they 
had sent no boats to meet him when he entered the 
Tiber, and in such bitter terms that he wrote that 
they had reduced him to the rank of a commoner, he 
suddenly forgave them and all but apologised. He 
repulsed with his own hand men who approached 
him in public at unseasonable times. He also 
banished a quaestor’s clerk without a hearing, as 
well as a senator of praetorian rank, although they 
were blameless: the former for going too far in 
pleading a suit against him before he became 
emperor; the latter, because he had fined the 
tenants of Claudius’s estates for violating the law 
forbidding the selling of cooked victuals, and had 
whipped his bailiff when he remonstrated. And 
with the same motive he took from the aediles the 
regulation of the cook-shops.° 

He did not even keep quiet about his own stupid- 
ity, but in certain brief speeches he declared that he 
had purposely feigned it under Gaius, because other- 
wise he could not have escaped alive and attained 
his present station. But he convinced no one, and 


issued an edict forbidding the sale of dressed meats and hot 
water, as well as abolishing the drinking-booths. 


71 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


persuasit, cum intra breve tempus liber editus sit, cui 
index erat pwpôv éravacracts, argumentum autem 
stultitiam neminem fingere. | 

XXXIX. Inter cetera in eo mirati sunt homines et 
oblivionem et inconsiderantiam, vel ut Graece dicam, 
petewpiav et áBAej(ay. Occisa Messalina, paulo post 
quam in triclinio decubuit, cur domina non veniret 
requisiit. Multos ex iis, quos capite damnaverat, 
postero statim die et in consilium et ad aleae lusum 
admoneri iussit et, quasi morarentur, ut somniculosos 
per nuntium increpuit. Ducturus contra fas Agrip- 
pinam uxorem, non cessavit omni oratione filiam et 
alumnam et in gremio suo natam atque educatam 
praedicare. Adsciturus in nomen Neronem, quasi 
parum reprehenderetur, quod adulto iam filio pri- 
vignum adoptaret, identidem divulgavit neminem 
umquam per adoptionem familiae Claudiae insertum. 

XL. Sermonis vero rerumque tantam saepe neg- 
legentiam ostendit, ut nec quis nec inter quos, quove 
tempore ac loco verba faceret, scire aut cogitare 
existimaretur. Cum de laniis ac vinariis ageretur, 
exclamavit in curia: * Rogo vos, quis potest sine 
offula vivere?" Descripsitque ! abundantiam veterum 
tabernarum, unde solitus esset vinum olim et ipse 
petere. De quaesturae? quodam candidato inter 
causas suffragationis suae posuit, quod pater eius 
frigidam aegro sibi tempestive dedisset. Inducta 
teste in senatu: “ Haec,’ inquit, * matris meae 


1 descripsitque, Torrentius ; descripsit, mss. 
? quaesturae, ¢ (Beroaldus) ; questore, N. 


72 


—— 778 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


within a short time a book was published, the title of 
which was “ The Elevation of Fools” and its thesis, 
that no one feigned folly. 

XXXIX. Among other things men have marvelled 
at his absent-mindedness and blindness, or to use the 
Greek terms, his perewpia and aBAevia. When he 
had put Messalina to death, he asked shortly after 
taking his place at the table why the empress did 
not come. He caused many of those whom he had 
condemned to death to be summoned the very next 
day to consult with him or game with him, and sent 
a messenger to upbraid them for sleepy-heads when 
they delayed to appear. When he was planning his 
unlawful marriage with Agrippina, in every speech 
that he made he constantly called her his daughter 
and nursling, born and brought up in his arms. 
Just before his adoption of Nero, as if it were not 
bad enough to adopt a stepson when he had a grown- 
up son of his own, he publicly declared more than 
once that no one had ever been taken into the 
Claudian family by adoption. 

XL. In short, he often showed such heedlessness 
in word and act that one would suppose that he did 
not know or care to whom, with whom, when, or 
where he was speaking. When a debate was going 
on about the butchers and vintners, he cried out in 
the House: * Now, pray, who can live without a 
snack," and then went on to describe the abundance 
of the old taverns to which he himself used to go for 
wine in earlier days. He gave us u$'one of his reasons 
for supporting a candidate for the quaestorship, that 
the man's father had once given him cold water when 
he was ill and needed it. Once when a witness had 
been brought before the senate, he said: ‘This 


73 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


liberta et ornatrix fuit, sed me patronum semper 
existimavit; hoc ideo dixi, quod quidam sunt adhuc 
in domo mea, qui me patronum non putant." Sed et 
pro tribunali Ostiensibus quiddam publice orantibus 
cum excanduisset, nihil habere se vociferatus est, 
quare eos demereatur ; si quem alium, et se liberum 
esse. Nam illa eius cotidiana et plane omnium 
horarum et momentorum erant: “Quid, ego tibi 
Telegenius videor?" et: AdA«! xal pn Giyyave, multa- 
que talia etiam privatis deformia, nedum principi, 
neque infacundo neque indocto, immo etiam pertina- 
citer liberalibus studiis dedito. 

XLI. Historiam in adulescentia hortante T. Livio, 
Sulpicio vero Flavo etiam adiuvante, scribere 
adgressus est. Et cum primum frequenti auditorio 
commisisset, aegre perlegit refrigeratus saepe a 
semet ipso. Nam cum initio recitationis defractis 
compluribus  subselliis obesitate cuiusdam risus 
exortus esset, ne sedato quidem tumultu temperare 
potuit, quin ex intervallo subinde facti reminisceretur 
cachinnosque revocaret. In principatu quoque et 
scripsit plurimum et assidue recitavit per lectorem. 
Initium autem sumpsit historiae post caedem 
Caesaris dictatoris, sed ? transiit ad inferiora tempora 
coepitque a pace civili, cum sentiret neque libere 
neque vere sibi de superioribus tradendi potestatem 
relictam, correptus saepe et a matre et ab avia. 


1 AdAet, Turnebus; AaAt, mss. 
2 sed et, mss., Miiller struck out sed, Torrentius et. 


" Obviously some man proverbial for his folly; but 
nothing is known about him. è The famous historian. 
* Because he stammered ; see chap. xxx. 


74 


| 


| 


1 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


woman was my -mother’s freedwoman and tire- 
woman, but she always regarded me as her patron ; 
I mention this because there are still some in my 
household now who do not look on me as patron." 
When the people of Ostia made a public petition to 
him, he flew into a rage on the very tribunal and 
bawled out that he had no reason for obliging them ; 
that he was surely free if anyone was. In fact 
every day, and almost every hour and minute, he 
would make such remarks as these ; “ What! do you 
take me fora Telegenius? "^ * Scold me, but hands 
off: " and many others of the same kind which would 
be unbecoming even in private citizens, not to 
mention a prince who lacked neither eloquence nor 
culture, but on the contrary constantly devoted 
himself to liberal pursuits. 

XLI. He began to write a history in his youth 
with the encouragement of Titus Livius^ and the 
direct help of Sulpicius Flavus. But when he gave 
his first reading to a large audience, he had difficulty 
in finishing, since he more than once threw cold water 
on his own performance. For at the beginning or 
the reading the breaking down of several benches 
by a fat man raised a laugh, and even after the 
disturbance was quieted, Claudius could not keep 
from recalling the incident and renewing his guffaws. 
Even while he was emperor he wrote a good deal and 
gave constant recitals through a professional reader.¢ 
He began his history with the death of the dictator 
Caesar, but passed to a later period and took a 
fresh start at the end of the civil war, realising 
that he was not allowed to give a frank or true 
account of the earlier times, since he was often 
taken to task both by his mother and his grand- 


75 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


, Prioris materiae duo volumina, posterioris unum et 
3 quadraginta reliquit. Composuit et “de vita sua" 
octo volumina, magis inepte quam ineleganter ; .item 
* Ciceronis defensionem adversus Asini Galli libros" 
satis eruditam. Novas etiam commentus est litteras 
tres ac numero veterum quasi maxime necessarias 
addidit; de quarum “ratione cum privatus adhuc 
volumen edidisset, mox princeps non «difficulter 
optinuit ut in usu quoque promiscuo essent. Exstat 
talis scriptura in plerisque libris ac diurnis titulisque 
operum. 

XLII. Nec minore cura TT studia secutus est, 
amorem praestantiamque linguae occasioné omni 
professus. Cuidam barbaro Graece ac Latine disse- 
renti: “Cum utroque," inquit, * sermone nostro sis 
paratus:'; et in commendanda patribus conscriptis 
Achaia, gratam sibi provinciam ait communium 
studiorum commercio; ac saepe in senatu legatis 
perpetua oratione. respondit. Multum vero pro 
tribunali etiam  Homericis locutus est versibus. 
Quotiens quidem hostem vel insidiatorem  ültus 
esset, excubitori tribuno signum de more poscenti 
non temere aliud dedit quam : 

a 
E "Avóp. drapivacOat, Gre Tis mpórepos xaAemivg.! | 
2 Denique et Graecas scripsit historias, Tyrrhenicon 
viginti, Carchedoniacon octo. Quarum causa veteri 


! aybpaen, 2; xaAeríy, Torrentius; xadreredwe:, M. 


e His grandmother Octavia was the widow, and his mother 
Antonia the daughter, of Mark Antony. 

> These are to represent the sound between w and i 
in maxumus, maximus, ete. ; J, for the sound of bs as ps; 
E for consonant 2. © See Jul, xx. 1, at the beginning. 

4 i.e. in Greek ; cf. 7*ib, lxxi. 


76 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


mother.^ He left two books of the earlier history, 
but forty-one of the later. He also composed an 
autobiography in eight books, lacking rather in good 
taste than in style, as well as a * Defence of Cicero 
against the Writings of Asinius Gallus," a work of 
no little learning. Besides this he invented three 
new letters and added them to the alphabet, maintain- 
ing that they were greatly needed ;” he published a 
book on their theory when he was still in private 
life, and when he became emperor had no difficulty 
in bringing about their general use. These charac- 
ters may still be seen in numerous books, in the 
daily gazette, and in inscriptions on public buildings. 

XLII. He gave no less attention to Greek studies, 
taking every occasion to declare his regard for 
that language and its superiority. To a foreigner 
who held forth both in Greek and in Latin he said: 
«Since you are ready with both our tongues ” ; and 
in commending Achaia to the senators he declared 
that it was a province dear to him through the associa- 
tion of kindred studies; while he often replied to 
Greek envoys in the senate in a set speech.4 Indeed 
he quoted many Homeric lines from the tribunal, and 
whenever he had punished an enemy or a conspirator, 
he commonly gave the tribune of the guard * this 
verse when he asked for the usual watchword : 


** Ward off stoutly the man whosoever is first to 
assail you." / 
At last he even wrote historical works in Greek, 


twenty books of Etruscan History and eight of 
Carthaginian. Because of these works there was 


* Referring to the cohort on guard at the Palace; cf. 
chap. x. ^ [liad, 24. 369 ; Odyss. 21. 133. 


77 


bo 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


Alexandriae Musio additum ex ipsius nomine novum;! 
institutumque ut quotannis in altero Tyrrhenicon 
libri, in altero Carchedoniacon diebus statutis velut 
in auditorio recitarentur toti a singulis per vices. 

XLIII. Sub exitu vitae signa quaedam nec obscura 
paenitentis de matrimonio Agrippinae deque Neronis 
adoptione dederat, siquidem commemorantibus 
libertis ac laudantibus cognitionem, qua pridie 
quandam adulterii ream condemnarat, sibi quoque in 
fatis esse iactavit omnia impudica, sed non impunita 
matrimonia; et subinde obvium sibi Britannicum 
artius complexus hortatus est, ut cresceret ratio- 
nemque a se omnium factorum acciperet ; Graeca 
insuper voce prosecutus: ó tpwoas iaverar. Cumque 
impubi teneroque adhuc, quando statura permitteret, 
togam dare destinasset, adiecit: “ Ut tandem 
populus R. verum Caesarem habeat.” 

XLIV. Non multoque post testamentum etiam 
conscripsit ac signis omnium magistratuum obsignavit. 
Prius igitur quam ultra progrederetur, praeventus 
est ab Agrippina, quam praeter haec conscientia 
quoque nec minus delatores multorum criminum 
arguebant. 

Et veneno quidem occisum convenit ; ubi autem 
et per quem dato, discrepat. Quidam tradunt 
epulanti in arce cum sacerdotibus per Halotum 
spadonem praegustatorem ; alii domestico convivio 


! novum, added by Drechsler; Roth suggested Claudieum 
after Musio. 


* A proverbial expression, derived from the story of 
Telephus, who when wounded by Achilles was told by the 
oracle that he could be cured only by the one who dealt the 
blow. Achilles cured him by applying rust from his spear 
to the wound. 


78 


- meee o 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


added to the old Museum at Alexandria a new one 
called after his name, and it was provided that in 
the one his Etruscan History should be read each 
year from beginning to end, and in the other his 
Carthaginian, by various readers in turn, in the 
manner of public recitations. 

XLIII. Towards the end of his life he had shown 
some plain signs of repentance for his marriage with 
Agrippina and his adoption of Nero; for when his 
freedmen expressed their approval of a trial in which 
he had the day before condemned a woman for 
adultery, he declared that it had been his destiny 
also to have wives who were all unchaste, but not 
unpunished ; and shortly afterwards meeting Britan- 
nicus, he hugged him close and urged him to grow up 
and receive from his father an account of all that he 
had done, adding in Greek, “He who dealt the 
wound will heal it."" When he expressed his 
intention of giving Britannicus the gown of manhood, 
since his stature justified it though he was still young 
and immature, he added: “ That the Roman people 
may at last have a genuine Caesar.” ^ 

XLIV. Not long afterwards he also made his will 
and sealed it with the seals of all the magistrates. But 
before he could go any farther, he was cut short by 
Agrippina, who was being accused besides of many 
other crimes both by her own conscience and by 
informers. 

That Claudius was poisoned is the general belief, 
but when it was done and by whom is disputed. 
Some say that it was his taster,the eunuch Halotus, as 
he was banqueting on the Citadel’ with the priests ; 


That is, a legitimate heir to the throne. 
¢ The northern spur of the Capitoline Hill. 


79 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


per ipsam Agrippinam, quae boletum medicatum 
avidissimo ciborum talium optulerat. Etiam de 
subsequentibus diversa fama est. Multi statim 
hausto veneno obmutuisse aiunt excruciatumque 
doloribus nocte tota defecisse prope lucem. 'Non- 
nulli inter initia consopitum, deinde cibo affluente 
evomuisse omnia, repetitumque toxico, incertum 
pultine. addito, cum velut exhaustum refici cibo 
oporteret, an immisso per clystera, ut quasi abun- 
dantia laboranti etiam hoc genere egestionis sub- 
veniretur, | 

XLV. Mors eius celata est, donec circa succes- 
sorem omnia ordinarentur. Itaque et quasi pro 
aegro adhuc vota .uscepta sunt et inducti per 
simulationem comoedi, qui velut desiderantem ob- 
lectarent. Excessit III. Id. Octob. Asinio Marcello 
Acilio Aviola coss. sexagesimo quarto aetatis, imperii 
quarto decimo anno, funeratusque est sollemni 
principum pompa et in numerum deorum relatus ; 
quem honorem a Nerone destitutum abolitumque 
recepit mox per Vespasianum. . 

XLVI. Praesagia mortis eius praecipua fuerunt: 
exortus crinitae stellae, quam cometen vocant, 
tactumque de caelo monumentum Drusi patris, et 
quod eodem anno ex omnium magistratuum genere 
plerique mortem obierant. Sed nec ipse ignorasse 
aut dissimulasse ultima vitae suae tempora videtur, 

! clystera, c ; clysteram, MX (clystere, 7); clysterum, G ; 


clysterem, T. of 
2 quam . . . vocant : probably a gloss ; cf. Jul. Ixxxviii. 


8o 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


others that at a family dinner Agrippina served the 
drug to him with her own hand in mushrooms, a dish of 
which he was extravagantly fond. Reports also differ 
as to what followed. Many say that as soon as he 
swallowed the poison he became speechless, and after 
suffering excruciating pain all night, died just before 
dawn. Some say that he first fell into a stupor, then 
vomited up the whole contents of his overloaded 
stomach, and was given a second dose, perhaps in a 
gruel, under pretence that he must be refreshed 
with food after his exhaustion, or administered in 
a syringe, as if he were suffering from a surfeit 
and required relief by that form of evacuation as 
well. 

XLV. His death was kept quiet until all the 
arrangements were made about the succession. 
Accordingly vows were offered for his safety, as if 
he were still ill, and the farce was kept up by 
bringing in comic actors, under pretence that he had 


asked to be entertained in that way. He died on. 


the third day before the Ides of October in the 
consulship of Asinius Marcellus and Acilius Aviola, 
in the sixty-fourth year of his age and the fourteenth 
of his reign. He was buried with regal pomp and 
enrolled among the gods, an honour neglected and 
finally annulled by Nero, but later restored to him by 
Vespasian. 

XLVI. The principal omens of his death were the 
following: the rise of a long-haired star, commonly 
called à comet; the striking of his father Drusus's 
tomb by lightning ; and the fact that many magistrates 
of all ranks had died that same year. There are besides 
some indications that he himself was not unaware of 
of his approaching end, and that he made no secret 


81 
VOL. II. G 


Oct. 13, 
54 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK V 


aliquot quidem argumentis. Nam et cum consules 
designaret, neminem ultra mensem quo obiit 
designavit, et in senatu, cui novissime interfuit, 
multum ad concordiam liberos suos cohortatus, 
utriusque aetatem suppliciter patribus commendavit, 
et in ultima cognitione pro tribunali accessisse ad 
finem mortalitatis, quanquam abominantibus qui 
audiebant, semel atque iterum pronuntiavit. 


82 


THE DEIFIED CLAUDIUS 


it ; for when he was appointing the consuls, he made 
no appointment beyond the month when he died, 
and on his last appearance in the senate, after 
earnestly exhorting his children to harmony, he 
begged the members to watch over the tender years 
of both ; and in his last sitting on the tribunal he 
declared more than once that he had reached the 
end of a mortal career, although all who heard him 
prayed that the omen might be averted. 


a The formula was ‘Di meliora (duint)!” *'May the 
Gods grant better things,” t.e. ** the Gods forbid !" 


83 


BOOK VI 


NERO 


LIBER VI 


NERO 


I. Ex gente Domitia duae familiae claruerunt, 
Calvinorum et Ahenobarborum. Ahenobarbi aucto- 
rem originis itemque cognominis habent L. Domi- 
tium, cui rure quondam revertenti iuvenes gemini 
augustiore forma ex occursu imperasse traduntur, 
nuntiaret senatui ac populo victoriam, de qua 
incertum adhuc erat; atque in fidem maiestatis 
adeo permulsisse malas, ut e nigro rutilum aerique 
adsimilem capillum redderent. Quod insigne mansit 
et in posteris eius, ac magna pars rutila barba 


fuerunt. Functi autem consulatibus septem, tri- ' 


umpho censuraque duplici et inter patricios adlecti 
perseveraverunt omnes in eodem cognomine. Ac 
ne praenomina quidem ulla praeterquam Gnaei et 
Luci usurparunt; eaque ipsa notabili varietate, 
modo continuantes unum quodque per trinas per- 
sonas, modo alternantes per singulas. Nam primum 
secundumque ac tertium Ahenobarborum  Lucios, 
sequentis rursus tres ex ordine Gnaeos accepimus, 
reliquos non nisi vicissim tum Lucios tum Gnaeos. 


a The youths were Castor and Pollux, and the victory that 
at Lake Regillus, in 498 B.C., according to the traditional 
chronology. 


86 


BOOK VI 


NERO 


I. Or the Domitian family two branches have 
acquired distinction, the Calvini and the Ahenobarbi. 
The latter have as the founder of their race and the 
origin of their surname Lucius Domitius, to whom, as 
he was returning from the country, there once ap- 
peared twin youths of more than mortal majesty, so it 
is said, and bade him carry to the senate and people the 
news of a victory," which was as yet unknown. And as 
a token of their divinity it is said that they stroked 
his cheeks and turned his black beard to a ruddy 
hue, like that of bronze. This sign was perpetuated 
in his descendants, a great part of whom had red 
beards. After they had attained seven consulships, 


a triumph, and two censorships, and were enrolled 3, 


among the patricians, they all continued to use the 
same surname. They confined their forenames to 
Gnaeus and Lucius, and used even these with a note- 
worthy variation, now conferring each one on three 
members of the family in succession, and now giving 
them to individual members in turn. Thus the first, 
second, and third of the Ahenobarbi, we are told, 
were called Lucius, the next three in order Gnaeus, 
while all those that followed were called in turn first 
Lucius and then Gnaeus. It seems to me worth 


87 


261, 122, 

96, 94, 54, 
2 B.C. 

82 ALD. 

122 B.C. 

115, 92 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


Pluris e familia cognosci referre arbitror, quo facilius 
appareat ita degenerasse a suorum virtutibus Nero, 
ut tamen vitia cuiusque quasi tradita et ingenita 
rettulerit. | 

II. Ut igitur paulo altius repetam, atavus eius 
Cn. Domitius in tribunatu pontificibus offensior, 
quod alium quam se in patris sui locum cooptassent, 
ius sacerdotum subrogandorum a collegiis ad popu- 
lum transtulit; at in consulatu  Allobrogibus 
Arvernisque superatis elephanto per provinciam 
vectus est turba militum quasi inter sollemnia 
triumphi prosequente. In hunc dixit Licinius 
Crassus orator non esse mirandum, quod aeneam 
barbam haberet, cui os ferreum, cor plumbeum 
esset. Huius filius praetor C. Caesarem abeuntem 
consulatu, quem adversus auspicia legesque gessisse 
existimabatur, ad disquisitionem senatus vocavit; 
mox consul imperatorem ab exercitibus Gallicis 
retrahere temptavit successorque ei per factionem 
nominatus principio civilis belli ad Corfinium captus 
est. Unde dimissus Massiliensis obsidione laborantis 
cum adventu suo confirmasset, repente destituit 
acieque demum  Pharsalica occubuit; vir neque 
satis constans et ingenio truci in desperatione 


a Suetonius is in error here; it was the father of the 
tribune who defeated the Allobroges. 

? Os has about the force of ** cheek " in colloquial English, 

* See Jul. xxxiv. 1. | 


88 


NERO 


while tu give an account of several members of this 
family, to show more clearly that though Nero de- 
generated from the good qualities of his ancestors, 
he yet reproduced the vices of each of them, as if 
transmitted to him by natural inheritance. 

JI. To begin then somewhat far back, his great- 
grandfather's grandfather, Gnaeus Domitius, when 
tribune of the commons, was enraged at the pontiffs 
for choosing another than himself in his father's 
place among them, and transferred the right of filling 
vacancies in the priesthoods from the colleges them- 
selves to the senate. Then having vanquished the 
Allobroges and the Arverni in his consulship, he 
rode through the province on an elephant, attended 
by a throng of soldiers, in a kind of triumphal 
procession.* He it was of whom the orator Licinius 
Crassus said that it was not surprising that he had a 
brazen beard, since he had a face? of iron and a 
heart of lead. His son, who was praetor at the 
time, summoned Gaius Caesar to an investigation 
before the senate at the close of his consulship, 
because it was thought that his administration had 
been in violation of the auspices and the laws. 
Afterwards in his own consulship he tried to deprive 


Caesar of the command of the armies in Gaul, and ' 


being named Caesar's successor by his party, was 
taken prisoner at Corfinium at the beginning of the 
civil war.^ Granted his freedom, he at first gave cour- 
age by his presence to the people of Massilia, who were 
hard pressed by their besiegers, but suddenly aban- 
doned them and at last fell in the battle at Pharsalus. 
He was a man of no great resolution, though he had 
a violent temper, and when he once attempted to 
kill himself in a fit of despair and terror, he so 


89 


54 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


rerum mortem timore appetitam ita expavit, ut 
haustum venenum paenitentia evomuerit medicum- 
que manumiserit, quod sibi prudens ac sciens minus 
noxium temperasset. Consultante autem Cn. Pom. 
peio de mediis ac neutram partem sequentibus solus 
censuit hostium numero habendos. _ 

III. Reliquit filium omnibus gentis suae procul 
dubio praeferendum. Is inter conscios Caesarianae 
necis quamquam insons damnatus lege Pedia, cum 
ad Cassium Brutumque se propinqua sibi cognatione 
iunctos contulisset, post utriusque interitum classem 
olim commissam retinuit, auxit etiam, nec nisi 
partibus ubique profligatis M. Antonio sponte et 
ingentis meriti loco tradidit. Solusque omnium 
ex iis, qui pari lege damnati erant, restitutus in 
patriam amplissimos honores percucurrit; ac subinde 
redintegrata dissensione civili, eidem Antonio lega- 
tus, delatam sibi summam imperii ab iis, quos 
Cleopatrae pudebat, neque suscipere neque recusare 
fidenter propter subitam valitudinem ausus, transiit 
ad Augustum et in diebus paucis obiit, nonnulla 
et ipse infamia aspersus. Nam Antonius eum 
desiderio amicae Serviliae Naidis transfugisse iac- 
tavit. 

IV. Ex hoc Domitius nascitur, quem emptorem 

“ Proposed by Q. Pedius, Caesar's colleague in the consul- 
ghip. ^ The Pedian law. 

9o , 


—  ——-—M— —— a en C 


NERO 


shrank from the thought of death that he changed 
his mind and vomited up the poison, conferring 
freedom on his physician, since, knowing his master, 
he had purposely given him what was not a fatal dose. 
When Gnaeus Pompeius brought forward the question 
of the treatment of those who were neutral and sided 
with neither party, he alone was for regarding them 
as hostile. 

III. He left a son, who was beyond all question 
better than the rest of the family. He was con- 
demned to death by the Pedian law ^ among those 
implicated in Caesar’s death, though he was guiltless, 
and accordingly joined Brutus and Cassius, who were 
his near relatives. After the death of both leaders 
he retained the fleet of which he had previously been 
made commander, and even added to it, and it was 
not until his party had been everywhere routed that 
he surrendered it to Mark Antony, of his own free 
will and as if it were a great favour. He too was 
the only one of those who were condemned by that 
same law? who was allowed to return to his native 
land, where he successively held all the highest offices. 
When the civil strife was subsequently renewed, and 
he was appointed one of Antony’s lieutenants, he 
did not venture, owing to a sudden attack of illness, 
to accept the chief command when it was offered 
him by those who were ashamed of Cleopatra, nor 
yet positively to decline it; but he went over to 
Augustus and a few days later died. Even he did 
not escape with an unblemished reputation, for 
Antony openly declared that he had changed sides 
from desire for the company of his mistress, Servilia 
Nais. 

IV. He was the father of the Domitius who was 


91 


81 B.C. 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


familiae pecuniaeque in testamento Augusti fuisse 
mox vulgo notatum est, non minus aurigandi arte in 
adulescentia clarus quam deinde ornamentis trium- 
phalibus ex Germanico bello. Verum arrogans, 
profusus, immitis censorem L. Plancum via sibi 
decedere aedilis coegit; praeturae consulatusque 
honore equites R. matronasque ad agendum mimum 
produxit in scaenam. Venationes et in Circo et in 
omnibus urbis regionibus dedit, munus etiam gladia- 
torium, sed tanta saevitia, ut necesse fuerit Augusto 
clam frustra monitum edicto coercere. 

V. Ex Antonia maiore patrem Neronis procreavit 
omni parte vitae detestabilem, siquidem comes 
ad Orientem C. Caesaris iuvenis, occiso liberto suo, 
quod potare quantum iubebatur recusaret, dimissus e 
cohorte amicorum nihilo modestius vixit; sed et in 
viae Áppiae vico repente puerum citatis iumentis 
haud ignarus obtrivit et Romae medio Foro cuidam 
equiti R. liberius iurganti oculum eruit; perfidiae 
vero tantae, ut non modo argentarios pretiis rerum 
coemptarum, sed et in praetura mercede palmarum 
aurigarios fraudaverit, notatus ob haec et sororis ioco;! 

1 joco, <3 loco, Q; Some assume a lucuna after ioco, which 


is filled in various ways: quae, Casaubon; qui, Ursinus, 
Oudendorp ; ; et Tiberi edicto qui, Bücheler. 


a That is, as his executor. The maker of a will chose a 
man to whom he made a symbolic sale (per aes et librkgn ; see 
Aug. lxiv. 1) of all his goods in the presence of witnesses. 
The purchaser then made the designated payments to the 
heirs and legatees. ò Aug. lxiv. and lxv. 

¢ Gouging out the eyes seems to have been a favourite 
mode of attack among the Italians; cf. Aug. xxvii. 4, Nero 
xxvi. 2, and the frequent allusions i in comedy. 


92 


Nn e- 


NERO 


later well known from being named in Augustus’ will 
as the purchaser of his goods and chattels,“ a man no 
less famous in his youth for his skill in driving than he 
was later for winning the insignia of a triumph in the 
war in Germany. But he was haughty, extravagant, 
and cruel, and when he was only an aedile, forced the 
censor Lucius Plancus to make way for him on the 
street. While holding the offices of praetor and consul, 
he brought Roman knights and matrons on the stage 
to act a farce. He gave beast-baitings both in the 
Cireus and in all the regions of the city; also a 
gladiatorial show, but with such inhuman cruelty that 
Augustus, after his private warning was disregarded, 
was forced to restrain him by an edict. 

. V. He had by the elder Antonia a son Domitius who 
became the father of Nero, a man hateful in every 
walk of life; for when he had gone to the East on the 
staff of the young Gaius Caesar,’ he slew one of his 
own freedmen for refusing to drink as much as he 
was ordered, and when he was in consequence 
dismissed from the number of Gaius' friends, he lived 
not a whit less lawlessly. On the contrary, in a 
village on the Appian Way, suddenly whipping up 
his team, he purposely ran over and killed a boy; 
and right in the Roman Forum he gouged out the 
eye* of a Roman knight for being too outspoken in 
chiding him. He was moreover so dishonest that he 
not only cheated some bankers of the prices of wares 
which he had bought,’ but in his praetorship he even 
defrauded the victors in the chariot races of the 
amount of their prizes. When for this reason he was 
held up to scorn by the jests of his own sister, and 


4 And pun for through the bankers ; cf. perscriptum fuisset, 
Jul. xlii. 2 


93 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


querentibus dominis factionum repraesentanda prae- 
mia in posterum sanxit. Maiestatis quoque et 
adulteriorum  incestique cum sorore Lepida sub 
excessu Tiberi reus, mutatione temporum evasit 
decessitque Pyrgis morbo aquae intercutis, sublato 
filio Nerone ex Agrippina Germanico genita. 

VI. Nero natus est Anti! post VIIII. mensem 
quam Tiberius excessit, XVIII. Kal. Ian. tantum 
quod exoriente sole, paene ut radiis prius quam terra 
contingeretur. De genitura eius statim multa et 
formidulosa multis coniectantibus praesagio fuit etiam 
Domiti patris vox, inter gratulationes amicorum 
negantis quicquam ex se et Agrippina nisi detestabile 
et malo publico nasci potuisse. Eiusdem futurae in- 
felicitatis signum evidens die lustrico exstitit; nam 
C. Caesar, rogante sorore ut infanti quod vellet 
nomen daret, intuens Claudium patruum suum, a 
quo mox principe Nero adoptatus est, eius se dixit 
dare, neque ipse serio sed per iocum et aspernante 
Agrippina, quod tum Claudius inter ludibria aulae 
erat. 

Trimulus patrem amisit; cuius ex parte tertia 
heres, ne hanc quidem integram cepit correptis per 
coheredem Gaium universis bonis. Et subinde 
matre etiam relegata paene inops atque egens apud 
amitam Lepidam nutritus est sub duobus paedagogis 


1 Anti, Roth; Antii, Turnebus and P in the margin; ante, n. 


* In his capacity as praetor; this was adding insult to 
injury, since the edict did not affect the present case. 

o See note on Tib. vii. 2. 

e See note on Tib. vii. 2 and cf. Aug. v. 

4 Boys on the ninth day after birth, and girls on the eigh 
were purified by a sacrifice and given a name; the ceremony 
was called lustratio. 2m 


94 


— M — Áo À—ÉE—EAQ, o CM— pP eem m—— ge ES, ^ —— M E. — M ———— y, al Opp run ge y, ee 


-———-—— ——— 7 


.t-—^ 


NERO 


the managers of the troupes made complaint, he issued 
an edict^ that the prizes should thereafter be paid 
on the spot. Just before the death of Tiberius he 


was also charged with treason, as well as with acts of — 


adultery and with incest with his sister Lepida, but 
escaped owing to the change of rulers and died of 
dropsy at Pyrgi, after acknowledging è Nero son of 
Agrippina, the daughter of Germanicus. 

VI. Nero was born at Antium nine months after 
the death of Tiberius, on the eighteenth day before 
the Kalends of January, just as the sun rose, so that 
he was touched by its rays almost before he could 
be laid upon the ground.^ Many people at once made 
many direful predictions from his horoscope, and a 
remark of his father Domitius was also regarded as 
an omen ; for while receiving the congratulations of 
his friends, he said that “nothing that was not 
abominable and a public bane could be born of 
Agrippina and himself" Another manifest indication 
of Nero's future unhappiness occurred on the day of 
his purification; ? for when Gaius Caesar was asked 
by his sister to give the child whatever name he liked, 
he looked at his uncle Claudius, who later became 
emperor and adopted Nero, and said that he gave 
him his name. This he did, not seriously, but in 
jest, and Agrippina scorned the proposal, because at 
that time Claudius was one of the laughing-stocks of 
the court. . 

At the age of three he lost his father, being left 
heir to a third of his estate; but even this he did 
not receive in full, since his fellow heir Gaius seized 
all the property. Then his mother was banished too, 
and he was brought up at the house of his aunt 
Lepida almost in actual want, under two tutors, 


95 


Dec. 15, 
97 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


saltatore atque tonsore. Verum Claudio imperium 
adepto non solum paternas opes reciperavit, sed 
et Crispi Passieni vitrici sui hereditate ditatus est. 
Gratia quidem et potentia revocatae restitutaeque 
matris usque eo floruit, ut emnanaret in vulgus missos 
a Messalina uxore Claudi, qui eum meridiantem, 
quasi Britannici aemulum, strangularent. Additum 
fabulae eosdem! dracone e pulvino se proferente 
conterritos refugisse. Quae fabula exorta est de- 
prensis in lecto eius circum cervicalia serpentis 
exuviis; quas tamen aureae armillae ex voluntate 
matris inclusas dextro brachio gestavit aliquamdiu ac 
taedio tandem maternae memoriae abiecit rursusque 
extremis suis rebus frustra requisiit. 

VII. Tener adhuc necdum matura pueritia circen- 
sibus ludis Troiam constantissime favorabiliterque 
lusit. Undecimo aetatis anno a Claudio adoptatus 
est Annaeoque Senecae iam tunc senatori in discipli- 
nam traditus. Ferunt Senecam proxima nocte 
visum sibi per quietem C. Caesari praecipere, et 
fidem somnio Nero brevi fecit prodita immanitate 
naturae quibus primum potuit experimentis. Nam- 
que Britannicum fratrem, quod se post adoptionem 
Ahenobarbum ex consuetudine salutasset, ut sub- 
ditivum apud patrem arguere conatus est. Amitam 


! ad before eosdem, MLP ; at, G ; et, Y; OST omit. 


^ That is, as if the story had a better foundation, and the 
serpent had really saved his life through divine agency. 

^ So the mss., but it should be the twelfth (Lipsius) or 
thirteenth (Oudendorp). 

¢ That is, his adoptive father Claudius. 


96 


NERO 


a dancer and a barber. But when Claudius became 
emperor, Nero not only recovered his father’s pro- 
perty, but was also enriched by an inheritance from 
his stepfather, Passienus Crispus. When his mother 
was recalled from banishment and reinstated, he 
became so prominent through her influence that it 
leaked out that Messalina, wife of Claudius, had sent 
emissaries to strangle him as he was taking his noon- 
day nap, regarding him as a rival of Britannicus. An 
addition to this bit of gossip is, that the would-be 
assassins were frightened away by a snake which 
darted out from under his pillow. The only founda- 
tion for this tale was, that there was found in his 
bed near the pillow the slough of a serpent; but 
nevertheless at his mother's desire he had the skin 
enclosed in a golden bracelet, and wore it for a 
long time on his left arm. But when at last the 
memory of his mother grew hateful to him, he threw 
it away, and afterwards in the time of his extremity 
sought it again in vain. 

VII. While he was still a young, half-grown boy 
he took part in the game of Troy at a perform- 
ance in the Circus with great self-possession and 
success. In the eleventh® year of his age he 
was adopted by Claudius and consigned to the 
training of Annaeus Seneca, who was then already 
a senator. They say that on the following night 
Seneca dreamed that he was teaching Gaius 
Caesar, and Nero soon proved the dream prophetic 
by revealing the cruelty of his disposition at the 
earliest possible opportunity. For merely because his 
brother Britannicus had, after his adoption, greeted 
him as usual as Ahenobarbus, he tried to convince his 
father^ that Britannicus was a changeling. Also 


97 
VOL. II. H 


50 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


autem Lepidam ream testimonio coram afflixit 
gratificans matri, a qua rea premebatur. 

Deductus in Forum tiro populo congiarium, militi 
donativum proposuit indictaque decursione praeto- 
rianis scutum sua manu praetulit; exin patri 
gratias in senatu egit. Apud eundem consulem 
pro Bononiensibus Latine, pro Rhodiis atque Iliensi- 
bus Graece verba fecit. Auspicatus est et iuris dictio- 
nem praefectus urbi sacro Latinarum, celeberrimis 
patronis non tralaticias, ut assolet, et brevis, sed 
maximas plurimasque postulationes certatim ingeren- 
tibus, quamvis interdictum a Claudio esset. Nec 
multo post duxit uxorem Octaviam ediditque pro 
Claudi salute circenses et venationem. 

VIII. Septemdecim natus annos, ut de Claudio 
palam factum est, inter horam sextam septimamque 
processit ad excubitores, cum ob totius diei diritatem 
non aliud auspicandi tempus accommodatius videre- 
tur; proque Palati gradibus imperator consalutatus 
lectica in castra et inde raptim appellatis militibus in 
curiam delatus est discessitque iam vesperi, ex 
immensis, quibus cumulabatur, honoribus tantum 
patris patriae nomine recusato propter aetatem. 

IX. Orsus hinc a pietatis ostentatione Claudium 
apparatissimo funere elatum laudavit et ! consecravit. 


1 et, =; not found in the earlier mss. ; the Roman editiones 
principes have consecravitque. 


a See noted on Claud. i. 3. è See note « e on Claud. xlii. 1. 
* Cf. Tac. Ann. 12. 68. 


98 


NERO 


when his aunt Lepida was accused, he publicly gave 
testimony against her, to gratify his mother, who was 
using every effort to ruin Lepida. 

At his formal introduction into public life he 
announced a largess to the people and a gift of money 
to the soldiers, ordered a drill ^ of the praetorians and 
headed them shield in hand; and thereafter returned 
thanks to his father in the senate. In the latter's con- 
sulship he pleaded the cause ofthe people of Bononia 


before him in Latin, and of those of Rhodes and 


Ilium in Greek. His first appearance as judge was 
when he was prefect of the city during the Latin 
Festival, when the most celebrated pleaders vied 
with one another in bringing before him, not trifling 
and brief cases according to the usual custom, but 
many of the highest importance, though this had 
been forbidden by Claudius. Shortly afterwards he 
took Octavia to wife and gave games and a beast- 
baiting in the Circus, that health might be vouchsafed 
Claudius. 

VIII. When the death of Claudius was made 
public, Nero, who was seventeen years old, went forth 
tothe watch ^ between the sixth and seventh hour, 
since no earlier time for the formal beginning of his 
reign seemed suitable because of bad omens through- 
out the day.“ Hailed emperor on the steps of the 
Palace, he was carried in a litter to the praetorian 
camp, and after a brief address to the soldiers was 
taken from there to the House, which he did not 
leave until evening, of the unbounded honours that 
were heaped upon him refusing but one, the title of 
father of his country, and that because of his youth. 

IX. Then beginning with a display of filial piety, 
he gave Claudius a magnificent funeral, spoke his 


99 
H 2 


54 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


Memoriae Domiti patris honores maximos habuit. 
Matri summam omnium rerum privatarum publicarum- 
que permisit. Primo etiam imperii die signum 
excubanti tribuno dedit * optimam matrem" ac 
deinceps eiusdem saepe lectica per publicum simul 
vectus est.. Antium coloniam deduxit ascriptis 
veteranis e praetorio additisque per domicilii trans- 
lationem ditissimis primipilarium ; ubi et portum 
operis sumptuosissimi fecit. 

X. Atque ut certiorem adhuc indolem ostenderet, 
ex Augusti praescripto imperaturum se professus, 
neque liberalitatis neque clementiae, ne comitatis 
quidem exhibendae ullam occasionem omisit.! Gra- 
viora vectigalia aut abolevit aut minuit. Praemia 
delatorum Papiae legis ad quartas redegit. Divisis 
populo viritim quadringenis nummis senatorum no- 
bilissimo cuique, sed a re familiari destituto annua 
salaria et quibusdam quingena constituit, item prae- 
torianis cohortibus frumentum menstruum gratuitum. 
Et cum de supplicio cuiusdam capite damnati ut ex 
more subscriberet admoneretur: “Quam vellem,” 
inquit, “nescire litteras." Omnis ordines subinde 
ac memoriter salutavit. Agenti senatui gratias re- 
spondit: * Cum meruero.’ Ad campestres exer- 
citationes suas admisit et plebem declamavitque 

! omisit, RL?S?T'N (obm-, T); emisit, à. . 


——— ———— 


« See Claud. xix. > Cf. Vesp. xvii. 
c Cf. Aug. liii. 3, nullo submonente. 


IOO 


NERO 


eulogy, and deified him. He paid the highest honours 
to the memory of his father Domitius. He left to 
his mother the management of all public and private 
business. Indeed, on the first day of his rule he gave 
to the tribune on guard the watchword “ The Best of 
Mothers," and afterwards he often rode with her 
through the streets in her litter. He established a 
colony at Antium, enrolling the veterans of the prae- 
torian guard and joining with them the wealthiest of 
the chief centurions, whom he compelled to change 
their residence; and he also made a harbour there 
at great expense. 

X. To make his good intentions still more evident, 
he declared that he would rule according to the 
principles of Augustus, and he let slip no opportunity 
for acts of generosity and mercy, or even for display- 
ing his affability. The more oppressive sources of 
. revenue he eitherabolished or moderated. He reduced 
the rewards paid to informers against violators of the 
Papian law ? to one fourth of the former amount. He 
distributed four hundred sesterces to each man of 
the people, and granted to the most distinguished of 
the senators who were without means an annual 
salary,? to some as much as five hundred thousand 
sesterces; and to the praetorian cohorts he gave a 
monthly allowance of grain free of cost. When he 
was asked according to custom to sign the warrant for 
the execution of a man who had been condemned to 
death, he said : “ How I wish I had never learned to 
write!" He greeted men of all orders off-hand and 
from memory.^ When the senate returned thanks to 
him, he replied, * When I shall have deserved them." 
He admitted even the commons to witness his exer- 
cises in the Campus, and often declaimed in public. 


IOI 


61 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


saepius publice; recitavit et carmina, non modo domi 
sed et in theatro, tanta universorum laetitia, ut ob 
recitationem supplicatio decreta sit eaque pars car- 
minum aureis litteris Iovi Capitolino dicata. 

XI. Spectaculorum plurima et varia genera edidit : 
iuvenales, circenses, scaenicos ludos, gladiatorium 
munus. luvenalibus senes quoque consulares anusque 
matronas recepit ad lusum. Circensibus loca equiti 
secreta a ceteris tribuit commisitque etiam camelorum 
quadrigas. Ludis, quos pro aeternitate imperii 
susceptos appellari “ maximos" voluit, ex utroque 
ordine et sexu plerique ludicras partes sustinuerunt ; 
notissimus eques R. elephanto supersidens per 
catadromum ! decucurrit ; inducta Afrani togata, quae 
Incendium inscribitur, concessumque ut scaenici 
ardentis domus supellectilem diriperent ac sibi 
haberent; sparsa et populo missilia omnium rerum 
per omnes dies: singula cotidie milia avium ? cuiusque 
generis, multiplex penus, tesserae frumentariae, vestis, 
aurum, argentum, gemmae, margaritae, tabulae pictae, 
mancipia, iumenta atque etiam mansuetae ferae, 
novissime naves, insulae, agri. 

XII. Hos ludos spectavit e proscaeni fastigio. 
Munere, quod in amphitheatro ligneo regione Martii 


! catadromum, c; gatadromum, 0. 
? inscribitur, Erasmus ; scribitur, 2 
3 avium, Go; aulum, 0 ; aurum, ç. 


« An honour previously conferred only on generals after a 
great victory ; cf. Jul. xxiv. 3, at the end. 

> That is, the part which he had read. 

¢ In commemoration of the first shaving of his beard ; see 
chap. xii. 4, below. 

3 This had previously been done only at the theatre (see 


102 


NERO 


He read his poems too, not only at home but in the 
theatre as well, so greatly to the delight of al] that a 
thanksgiving ^ was voted because of his recital, while 
that part? of his poems was inscribed in letters of 
gold and dedicated to Jupiter of the Capitol. 

XI. He gave many entertainments of different 
kinds: the Juvenales, chariot races in the Circus, 
stage-plays, and a gladiatorial show. At the first 
mentioned he had even old men of consular rank 
and aged matrons take part. For the games in the 
Circus he assigned places to the knights apart from 
the rest, and even matched chariots drawn by four 
camels. At the plays which he gave for the * Eter- 
nity of the Empire," which by his order were called 
the Ludi Maximi, parts were taken by several men and 
women of both the orders; a well known Roman 
knight mounted an elephant and rode down a rope ;* 
a Roman play of Afranius, too, was staged, entitled 
s The Fire," and the actors were allowed to carry off 
the furniture of the burning house and keep it. 
Every day all kinds of presents were thrown to the 
people; these included a thousand birds of every 
kind each day, various kinds of food, tickets for 
grain, clothing, gold, silver, precious stones, pearls, 
paintings, slaves, beasts of burden, and even trained 
wild animals; finally, ships, blocks of houses, and 
farms. 

XII. These plays he viewed from the top of the 
proscenium. At the gladiatorial show, which he gave 
in a wooden amphitheatre, erected in the district of 


note on Jul. xxxix. 2) ; senators were first given special seats 
at the Circus by Claudius ; see Claud. xxi. 3. 
* A tight-rope, sloping downwards across the arena ; cf. 


Galba, vi. 
103 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


campi intra anni spatium fabricato dedit, neminem 
occidit, ne noxiorum quidem.  Exhibuit autem ad 
ferrum etiam quadringentos senatores sescentosque 
equites Romanos et quosdam fortunae atque existi- 
mationis integrae, ex isdem ordinibus confectores quo- 
que ferarum et varia harenae ministeria. Exhibuit 
et naumachiam marina aqua innantibus beluis; item 
pyrrichas quasdam e numero epheborum, quibus post 
editam operam diplomata civitatis Romanae singulis 
optulit. Inter pyrricharum argumenta taurus Pasi- 
phaam ligneo iuvencae simulacro abditam iniit, ut 
multi spectantium crediderunt; Icarus primo statim 
conatu iuxta cubiculum eius decidit ipsumque cruore 
respersit. Nam perraro praesidere, ceterum accubans, 
parvis primum foraminibus, deinde toto podio adaperto 
spectare consueverat. 

Instituit et quinquennale certamen primus omnium 
Romae more Graeco triplex, musicum gymnicum 
equestre, quod appellavit Neronia; dedicatisque 
thermis atque gymnasio senatui quoque et equiti 
oleum praebuit. Magistros toto ! certamini praeposuit 
consulares sorte, sede praetorum. Deinde in or- 
chestram senatumque descendit et orationis quidem 


1 toto, Q; toti, y; cf. Caes. B.G. 7. 89; Prop. 3. 11. 57, etc. 


a The musicians, machinists, etc.; cf. Claud. xxxiv. 2. 

^ Cf. Jul. xxxix. 1. Originally war dances, their scope 
was extended to pantomime of all kinds, as appears from 
what follows. ¢ See note on Aug. xcviii. 3. 

4 The podium in the amphitheatre was a raised platform, 
close to the arena, on which the imperial family, the curule 
magistrates, and the Vestal virgins sat on curule chairs. 
Nero reclined there on a couch. | 

* [n the broad sense, including poetry and oratory. 

“ The baths, the Thermae Neronianae, were in the Campus 


104 


NERO 


the Campus Martius within the space of a single year, 58 a.n. 
he had no one put to death, not even criminals. 
But he compelled four hundred senators and six 
hundred Roman knights, some of whom were well 
to do and of unblemished reputation, to fight in the 
arena. Even those who fought with the wild beasts 
and performed the various services in the arena * were 
of the same orders. He also exhibited a naval battle 
in salt water with sea monsters swimming about in 
it; besides pyrrhic dances’ by some Greek youths, 
handing each of them certificates of Roman citizenship 
at the close of his performance. The pyrrhic dances 
represented various scenes. In one a bull mounted 
Pasiphae, who was concealed in a wooden image of 
a heifer ; at least many of the spectators thought so. 
Icarus at his very first attempt fell close by the 
imperial couch and bespattered the emperor wiih his 
blood ; for Nero very seldom presided at the games, 
but used to view them while reclining on a couch, at 
first through small openings, and then with the 
entire balcony ^ uncovered. 

He was likewise the first to establish at Rome a 60 4.». 
quinquennial contest in three parts, after the Greek 
fashion, that is in music,’ gymnastics, aud riding, 
which he called the Neronia; at the same time he 
dedicated his baths and gymnasium/ supplying 
every member of the senatorial and equestrian 
orders with oil. To preside over? the whole con- 
test he appointed ex-consuls, chosen by lot, who 
occupied the seats of the praetors. Then he 
went down into the orchestra among the senators 


Martius, near the Pantheon. The gymnasium, the first per- 
manent building of the kind at Rome, was attached to the 
baths. 7? And to act as judges. 


105 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


carminisque Latini coronam, de qua honestissimus 
quisque contenderat, ipsorum consensu concessam 
sibi recepit, citharae autem a iudicibus ad se delatam 
adoravit ferrique ad Augusti statuam iussit. Gymnico, 
quod in Saeptis edebat, inter buthysiae apparatum 


barbam primam posuit conditamque in auream 


pyxidem et  pretiosissimis margaritis adornatam 


Capitolio consecravit. Ad athletarum spectaculum 
invitavit et virgines Vestales, quia Olympiae quoque 
Cereris sacerdotibus spectare conceditur. 

XIII. Non immerito inter spectacula ab eo edita 
et Tiridatis in urbem introitum rettulerim. Quem 
Armeniae regem magnis pollicitationibus sollicitatum, 
cum destinato per edictum die ostensurus populo 
propter nubilum distulisset, produxit quo opportunis- 
sime potuit, dispositis circa Fori templa armatis 
cohortibus, curuli residens apud rostra triumphantis 
habitu inter signa militaria atque vexilla. Et primo 
per devexum pulpitum subeuntem admisit ad genua 
adlevatumque dextra exosculatus est, dein precanti 
tiara! deducta diadema inposuit, verba supplicis 
interpretata praetorio viro multitudini pronuntiante; 
perductum inde in theatrum ac rursus supplicantem 


1 tiara deducta, >; diariam deductam, Q. 


a Cf. Aug. xliv. 3. ^ Of Pompey. 
106 


menm Ý, n — a rd Le, PE d 


NERO 


and accepted the prize for Latin oratory and verse, 
for which all the most eminent men had contended 
but which was given to him with their unanimous 
consent; but when that for lyre-playing was also 
offered him by the judges, he knelt before it and 
ordered that it be laid at the feet of Augustus’ 
statue. At the gymnastic contest, which he gave in 
the Saepta, he shaved his first beard to the accom- 
paniment of a splendid sacrifice of bullocks, put it 
in a golden box adorned with pearls of great price, 
and dedicated it in the Capitol. He invited the 
Vestal virgins also to witness the contests of the 
athletes," because at Olympia the priestesses of Ceres 
were allowed the same privilege. 

XIII. I may fairly include among his shows the 
entrance of Tiridates into the city. He was a king 
of Armenia, whom Nero induced by great promises 
to come to Rome; and since he was prevented by 
bad weather from exhibiting him to the people on 
the day appointed by proclamation, he produced him 
at the first favourable opportunity, with the prae- 
torian cohorts drawn up in full armour about the 
temples in the Forum, while he himself sat in a 
curule chair on the rostra in the attire of a 
triumphing general, surrounded by military ensigns 
and standards. As the king approached along a 
sloping platform, the emperor at first let him fall at 
his feet, but raised him with his right hand and 
kissed him. Then, while the king made supplication, 
Nero took the turban from his head and replaced it 
with a diadem, while a man of praetorian rank trans- 
lated the words of the suppliant and proclaimed them 
to the throng. From there the king was taken to the 
theatre, and when he had again done obeisance, 


107 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


iuxta se latere dextro conlocavit. Ob quae imperator 
consalutatus, laurea in Capitolium lata, lanum 
geminum clausit, tamquam nullo! residuo bello. 

XIV. Consulatus quattuor gessit: primum bimen- 
strem, secundum et novissimum semenstres, tertium 
quadrimenstrem ; medios duos continuavit, reliquos 
inter annua spatia variavit. 

XV. In iuris dictione postulatoribus nisi sequenti 
die ac per libellos non temere respondit. Cognoscendi 
morem eum tenuit, ut continuis actionibus omissis 
singillatim quaeque per vices ageret. Quotiens autem 
ad consultandum secederet, neque in commune 
quicquam neque propalam deliberabat, sed et con- 
scriptas ab uno quoque sententias tacitus ac secreto 
legens, quod ipsi libuisset perinde atque pluribus 
idem videretur pronuntiabat. 

In curiam libertinorum filios diu non admisit ; 
admissis a prioribus principibus honores denegavit. 
Candidatos, qui supra numerum essent, in solacium 
dilationis ac morae legionibus praeposuit. Consulatum 
in senos plerumque menses dedit. Defunctoque circa 
Kal. Ian. altero e consulibus neminem substituit 
improbans exemplum vetus Canini Rebili uno die 
consulis. Triumphalia ornamenta etiam quaestoriae 


! tamquam nullo, Faernus and Lipsius ; tam nullo quam, 2. 
? ageret, 1’; omitted by MGLP ; quaereret, Bücheler. 


« See note on Aug. xiii. 2. 

^ This was usual only when a triumph was celebrated. 

¢ See note on Aug. xxii. 

i He assumed a fifth consulship in 68; see chap. xliii. below. 

e See Jul. Ixxvi. 2, where, however, the man's name is not 
mentioned. 


108 


NERO 


Nero gave him a seat at his right hand. Because of 
all this Nero was hailed as Imperator,* and after 
depositing a laurel wreath in the Capitol, he closed 
the two doors of the temple of Janus, as a sign that 
no war was left anywhere. 

XIV. He held four consulships, the first for two 
months, the second and the last for six months each, 
the third for four months. The second and third 
were in successive years, while a year intervened 
between these and each of the others.¢ 

XV. In the administration of justice he was 
reluctant to render a decision to those who presented 
cases, except on the following day and in writing. 
The procedure was, instead of continuous pleadings, 
to have each point presented separately by the 
parties in turn. Furthermore, whenever he with- 
drew for consultation, he did not discuss any matter 
with all his advisers in a body, but had each of them 
give his opinion in written form; these he read 
silently and in private and then gave a verdict 
according to his own inclination, as if it were the 
view of the majority. 

For a long time he would not admit the sons of 
freedmen to the senate and he refused office to those 
who had been admitted by his predecessors. 
Candidates who were in excess of the number of 
vacancies received the command of a legion as 
compensation for the postponement and delay. 
He commonly appointed consuls for a period of six 
months. When one of them died just before the 
Kalends of January, he appointed no one in his 
place, expressing his disapproval of the old-time case 
of Caninius Rebilus, the twenty-four hour consul. 
He conferred the triumphal regalia even on men of the 


109 


55, 57, 58, 
60 A. D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


dignitatis et nonnullis ex equestri ordine tribuit nec 
utique de causa militari. De quibusdam rebus 
orationes ad senatum missas praeterito quaestoris 
officio per consulem plerumque recitabat. 

XVI. Formam aedificiorum urbis novam excogitavit 
et ut ante insulas ac domos porticus essent, de 
quarum ! solariis incendia arcerentur ; easque sumptu 
suo exstruxit. Destinarat etiam Ostia tenus moenia 
promovere atque inde fossa mare veteri urbi in- 
ducere. 

Multa sub eo et animadversa severe et coercita nec 
minus institwta: adhibitus sumptibus modus; publicae 
cenae ad sportulas redactae; interdictum ne quid in 
popinis cocti praeter legumina aut holera veniret, cum 
antea nullum non obsonii genus proponeretur ; afflicti 
suppliciis Christiani, genus hominum superstitionis 
novae ac maleficae; vetiti quadrigariorum lusus, qui- 
bus inveterata licentia passim vagantibus fallere ac 
furari per iocum ius erat; pantomimorum factiones 
cum ipsis simul relegatae. 

XVII. Adversus falsarios tunc primum repertum, 
ne tabulae nisi pertusae ac ter lino per foramina 
traiecto obsignarentur ; cautum ut testamentis primae 


) quarum, MQ ; quorum, A. 


a See Aug. lxv. 2. 

è This was undoubtedly after the great fire; see chap. 
xxxviii. 

* Various attempts had however been made to check this 
form of luxury ; see note on Claud. xl. 1. 

4 Because of their disorderly conduct; see chap xxvi. 2, 
and Tac. Ann. 13. 25. 

* The tablets consisted of three leaves, two of which were 
bound together and sealed. The contract was written twice, 
on the open leaf and on the closed ones. In cases of dispute 


IIO 


—— o — ee pu dit mad 


— — —H A——— <r, eee a a a aaa — N 


NERO 


rank of quaestor, as well as on some of the knights, 
and sometimes for other than military services. 
As regards the speeches which he sent to the senate 
on various matters, he passed over the quaestors, 
whose duty it was to read them," and usually had 
them presented by one of the consuls. 

XVI. He devised a new form for the buildings of 
the city and in front of the houses and apartments 
he erected porches, from the flat roofs of which fires 
could be fought ; ^ and these he put up at his own 
cost. He had also planned to extend the walls as 
far as Ostia and to bring the sea from there to Rome 
by a canal. 

During his reign many abuses were severely 
punished and put down, and no fewer new laws 
were made: a limit was set to expenditures; the 
publie banquets were confined to a distribution of 
food; the sale of any kind of cooked viands in the 
taverns was forbidden, with the exception of pulse 
and vegetables, whereas before every sort of dainty 
was exposed for sale.^ Punishment was inflicted a 
the Christians, a class of men given to a new and 
mischievous superstition. He put an end to the 
diversions of the chariot drivers, who from immunity 
of long standing claimed the right of ranging at 
large and amusing themselves by cheating and 
robbing the people. The pantomimic actors and 
their partisans were banished from the city.? 

XVII. It was in his reign that a protection 
against forgers was first devised, by having no tablets 
signed that were not bored with holes through 
which a cord was thrice passed.^ In the case of 


the seals were broken in the presence of the signers and the 
two versions compared. 


III 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


duae cerae testatorum modo nomine inscripto vacuae 
signaturis ostenderentur, ac ne qui alieni testamenti 
scriptor legatum sibi ascriberet ; item ut litigatores 
pro patrociniis certam iustamque mercedem, pro sub- 
sellis nullam omnino darent praebente aerario gratuita ; 
utque rerum actu ab aerario causae ad Forum ac re- 
ciperatores transferrentur et ut omnes appellationes a 
iudicibus ad senatum fierent. 

XVIII. Augendi propagandique imperii neque 
voluntate ulla neque spe motus umquam, etiam ex 
Britannia deducere exercitum cogitavit, nec nisi 
verecundia, ne obtrectare parentis gloriae videretur, 
destitit. Ponti modo regnum concedente Polemone, 
item Alpium defuncto Cottio in provinciae formam 
redegit. 

XIX. Peregrinationes duas omnino suscepit, Alex- 
andrinam et Achaicam; sed Alexandrina ipso pro- 
fectionis die destitit turbatus religione simul ac 
periculo. Nam cum circumitis templis in aede 
Vestae resedisset, consurgenti ei primum lacinia 
obhaesit, dein tanta oborta caligo est, ut dispicere! non 
posset. In Achaia Isthmum perfodere adgressus 
praetorianos pro contione ad incohandum opus co- 


! dispicere, >; despicere, N. 


a As witnesses. The testator afterwards wrote the names 
of the heirs on these leaves. 

b The Cincian law of 204 s.c. forbade fees. Augustus 
renewed the law in 17 B.c. (Dio, 54. 18). Claudius limited fees 
to 10,000 sesterces (Tac. Ann. 11. 5-6). The senate again 
abolished fees at the beginning of Nero’s reign (Tac. Ann. 
13. 5), but Nero apparently revived the law of Claudius, 
with a provision against the addition of ‘‘ costs." 

* Instead of coming before the prefects of the treasury ; 
cf. Claud. ix. 2. 


I12 


NERO 


wills it was provided that the first two leaves 
should be presented to the signatories ¢ with only the 
name of the testator written upon them, and that no 
one who wrote a will for another should put down 
a legacy for himself; further, that clients should pay 
a fixed and reasonable fee for the services of their 
advocates but nothing at all for benches, which 
were to be furnished free of charge by the public 
treasury ; finally as regarded the pleading of cases, 
that those connected with the treasury should be 
transferred to the Forum and a board of arbiters, 
and that any appeal from the juries should be made 
to the senate. 

XVIII. So far from being actuated by any wish or 
hope of increasing or extending the empire, he even 
thought of withdrawing the army from Britain and 
changed his purpose only because he was ashamed to 
seem to belittle the glory of his father.? He in- 
creased the provinces only by the realm of Pontus, 
when it was given up by Polemon, and that of Cottius 
in the Alps on the latter's death. 

XIX. He planned but two foreign tours, to Alex- 
andria and Achaia; and he gave up the former 
on the very day when he was to have started, 
disturbed by a threatening portent. For as he was 
making the round of the temples and had sat 
down in the shrine of Vesta, first the fringe of his 
garment caught when he attempted to get up, and 
then such darkness overspread his eyes that he could 
see nothing. In Achaia he attempted to cut 
through the Isthmus * and called together the prae- 
torians and urged them to begin the work; then 


4 That is, his adoptive father Claudius. 
e Of Corinth; cf. Jul. xliv. 3. 


II3 


VOL. 1I. I 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


hortatus est tubaque signo dato primus fastello 
humum effodit et corbulae congestam umeris extulit. 
Parabat et ad Caspias portas expeditionem conscripta 
ex Italicis senum pedum tironibus nova legione, quam 
Magni Alexandri phalanga appellabat. 

Haec partim nulla reprehensione, partim etiam 
non mediocri laude digna in unum contuli, ut 
secernerem a probris ac sceleribus eius, de quibus 
dehinc dicam. 

XX. Inter ceteras disciplinas pueritiae tempore 
imbutus et musica, statim ut imperium adeptus est, 
Terpnum citharoedum vigentem tunc praeter alios 
 arcessiit diebusque continuis post cenam canenti in 
multam noctem assidens paulatim et ipse meditari 
exercerique coepit neque eorum quicquam omittere, 
quae generis eius artifices vel conservandae vocis 
causa vel augendae factitarent; sed et plumbeam 
chartam supinus pectore sustinere et clystere vomitu- 
que purgari et abstinere pomis cibisque officientibus ; 
donec blandiente profectu, quamquam exiguae vocis 
et fuscae, prodire in scaenam concupiit, subinde inter 
familiares Graecum proverbium iactans occultae 
musicae nullum esse respectum. Et prodit Neapoli ! 
primum ac ne concusso quidem repente motu terrae 
theatro ante cantare destitit, quam incohatum absol- 

! Neapoli, IIQ ; the other mss. have Neapolim. 


^ Roman measure ; a little over 5ft. 8in. English. 

è Cf. Gell. 13. 31. 3. 

* It collapsed in consequence, but not until the audience 
had dispersed ; see Tac. Ann. 15. 34. 


114 


NERO 


at a signal given on a trumpet he was first to 
break ground with a mattock and to carry off a 
basketful of earth upon his shoulders. He also 
prepared for an expedition to the Caspian Gates, 
after enrolling a new legion of raw recruits of Italian 
birth, each six feet tall? which he called the 
* phalanx of Alexander the Great." 

I have brought together these acts of his, some of 
which are beyond criticism, while others are even 
deserving of. no slight praise, to separate them from 
his shameful and criminal deeds, of which I shall 
proceed now to give an account. 

XX. Having gained some knowledge of music in 
addition to the rest of his early education, as soon as 
he became emperor he sent for Terpnus, the greatest 
master of thelyre in those days, and after listening 
to him sing after dinner for many successive days 
until late at night, he little by little began to 
practise himself, neglecting none of the exercises 
which artists of that kind are in the habit of 
following, to preserve or strengthen their voices. 
For he used to lie upon his back and hold a leaden 
plate on his chest, purge himself by the syringe and 
by vomiting, and deny himself fruits and all foods 
injurious to the voice. Finally encouraged by his 
progress, although his voice was weak and husky, he 
began to long to appear on the stage, and every 
now and then in the presence of his intimate friends 
he would quote a Greek proverb meaning * Hidden 
music counts for nothing." ^ And he made his début 
at Naples, where he did not cease singing until he 
‘had finished the number which he had begun, even 
though the theatre was shaken by a sudden earth- 
quake shock.^ In the same city he sang frequently 


IIS 
12 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


veret nomon. Ibidem saepius et per complures 
cantavit dies; sumpto etiam ad reficiendam vocem 
brevi tempore, impatiens secreti a balineis in theatrum 
transiit mediaque in orchestra frequente populo 
epulatus, si paulum subbibisset, aliquid se sufferti ! 
tinniturum Graeco sermone promisit. Captus autem 
modulatis Alexandrinorum laudationibus, qui de novo 
commeatu Neapolim confluxerant, plures Alexandria 
evocavit. Neque eo segnius adulescentulos equestris 
ordinis et quinque amplius milia e plebe robustissimae 
iuventutis undique elegit, qui divisi in factiunes 
plausuum genera condiscerent—bombos et imbrjces 
et testas vocabant—operamque navarent cantanti sibi, 
insignes pinguissima coma et excellentissimo cultu, 
puris ? ac sine anulo laevis,’ quorum duces quadringena 
milia sestertia * merebant. 

XXI. Cum magni aestimaret cantare etiam Romae, 
Neroneum agona ante praestitutam diem revocavit 
flagitantibusque cunctis caelestem vocem respondit 
quidem in hortis se copiam volentibus facturum, sed 
adiuvante vulgi preces etiam statione militum, quae 
tunc excubabat, repraesentaturum se pollicitus est 
libens; ac sine mora nomen suum in albo profitentium 
citharoedorum iussit ascribi sorticulaque in urnam 
cum ceteris demissa intravit ordine suo, simul praefecti 


1 sufferti, first Venetian ed.; sufferi, MG; the other mss. 
have sutferri. 

2 puris, P? (Bentley); pueris, M X5; pueri, GT. 

3 laevis, G, and P ina later hand; laeviis, M ; levis, Y. 

4 sestertia, 2; sestertium zs commonly read. 


a Literally, ‘‘full-packed,” i.e. full of sound, sonorous. 
v The first seems to have derived its name from the sound, 
which was like the humming of bees, the second and third 


116 


———— — A te a a cd 


NERO 


and for several successive days. Even when he took 
a short time to rest his voice, he could not keep out 
of sight but went to the theatre after bathing and 
dined in the orchestra with the people all about 
him, promising them in Greek, that when he had 
wetted his whistle a bit, he would ring out something 
good and loud. ^ He was greatly taken too with 
the rhythmic applause of some Alexandrians, who 
had flocked to Naples from a fleet that had lately 
arrived, and summoned more men from Alexandria. 
Not content with that, he selected some young men 
of the order of knights and more than five thousand 
sturdy young commoners, to be divided into groups 
and learn the Alexandrian styles of applause (they 
called them “the bees," “ the roof-tiles," and “the 
bricks ”), and to ply them vigorously whenever 
he sang. These men were noticeable for their thick 
hair and fine apparel ; their left hands were bare and 
without rings, and the leaders were paid four 
hundred thousand sesterces each. 

XXI. Considering it of great importance to appear 
in Rome as well, he repeated the contest of the Ne- 
ronia © before the appointed time, and when there was 
a general call for his “ divine voice,” he replied that if 
any wished to hear him, he would favour them in the 
gardens; but when the guard of soldiers which was 
then on duty seconded the entreaties of the people, 
he gladly agreed to appear at once. So without 
delay he had his name added to the list of the lyre- 
players who entered the contest, and casting his own 
lot into the urn with the rest, he came forward in his 
turn, attended by the prefects of the Guard carry- 


irom clapping with the hands rounded or hollowed, like roof- 
tiles, or flat, like bricks or flat tiles. ¢ See chap. xii. 3. 


117 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


praetorii citharam sustinentes, post tribuni militum 
iuxtaque amicorum intimi. Utque constitit, peracto 
principio, Niobam ! se cantaturum per Cluvium Rufum 
consularem pronuntiavit et in horam fere decimam 
perseveravit coronamque eam et reliquam certaminis 
partem in annum sequentem distulit, ut saepius 
canendi occasio esset. Quod cum tardum videretur, 
non cessavit identidem se publicare. Dubitavit etiam 
an privatis spectaculis operam inter scaenicos daret 
quodam praetorum sestertium decies offerente. 
Tragoedias quoque cantavit personatus heroum 
deorumque, item heroidum ac dearum, personis 
effectis ad similitudinem oris sui et feminae, prout 
quamque diligeret. Inter cetera cantavit Canacen 
parturientem, Oresten matricidam, Oedipodem? ex- 
caecatum, Herculem insanum. In qua fabula fama 
est tirunculum militem positum ad custodiam aditus, 
cum eum ornari ac vinciri catenis, sicut argumentum 
postulabat, videret, accurrisse ferendae opis gratia. 
XXII. Equorum studio vel praecipue ab ineunte 
aetate flagravit plurimusque illi sermo, quanquam 
vetaretur, de circensibus erat; et quondam tractum 
prasinum ? agitatorem inter condiscipulos querens, 
obiurgante paedagogo, de Hectore se loqui ementitus 
! Nioba, G ; Nioban, MT ; Niobem, X. 


2 edipodé, G ; the other mss. have Oedipoden. 
3 prasinum, c; prasim, LST ; prasü, P ; prasiniü, G. 


* Probably asking for the favourable attention of the 
audience ; cf. Dio, 61. 20 and chap. xxiii. 3. 
ò That is, those given by the magistrates; under the 


118 


n Je—————————— ——(!———————M— o —Ó——À———Ó 


NERO . 


ing his lyre, and followed by the tribunes of the 
soldiers and his intimate friends. Having taken his 
place and finished his preliminary speech,” he announ- 
ced through the ex-consul Cluvius Rufus that “he 
would sing Niobe " ; and he kept at it until late in the 
afternoon, putting off the award of the prize for that 
event and postponing the rest of the contest to the 
next year, to have an excuse for singing oftener. 
But since even that seemed too long to wait, he 
did not cease to appear in public from time to time. 
He even thought of taking part in private perform- 
ances č among the professional actors, when one of 
the praetors offered him a million sesterces. He 
also put on the mask and sang tragedies representing 
gods and heroes and even heroines and goddesses, 
having the masks fashioned in the likeness' of his 
own features or those of the women of whom he 
chanced to be enamoured. Among other themes he 

* Canace in Labor," “ Orestes the Matricide,” 
*'The Blinding of Oedipus" and the * Frenzy of 
Hercules." At the last named performance they 
say that a young recruit, seeing the emperor in 
mean attire and bound with chains, as the subject 
required, rushed forward to lend him aid. 

XXII. From his earliest years he had a special 
passion for horses and talked constantly about the 
games in the Circus, though he was forbidden to do 
so.^ Once when he was lamenting with his fellow 
pupils the fate of a charioteer of the * Greens," 4 who 
was dragged by his horses, and his preceptor scolded 
him, he told a lie and pretended that he was 


Empire all but the emperor were privati, regardless of their 
official positions. c By his guardian and teachers. 
4 See note on Calig. lv. 2. 


119 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


est. Sed cum inter initia imperii eburneis quadrigis 
cotidie in abaco luderet, ad omnis etiam minimos 
circenses e secessu commeabat, primo clam, deinde 
propalam, ut nemini dubium esset eo die utique 
affuturum. Neque dissimulabat velle se palmarum 
numerum ampliari ; quare spectaculum multiplicatis 
missibus in serum protrahebatur, ne dominis quidem 
iam factionum dignantibus nisi ad totius diei cursum 
greges ducere. Mox et ipse aurigare atque etiam 
spectari saepius voluit positoque in hortis inter servitia 
et sordidam plebem rudimento universorum se oculis 
in Circo Maximo praebuit, aliquo liberto mittente 
mappam unde magistratus solent. Nec contentus 
harum artium experimenta Romae dedisse, Achaiam, 
ut diximus, petit hinc maxime motus. Instituerant 
civitates, apud quas musici agones edi solent, omnes 
citharoedorum coronas ad ipsum mittere. Eas adeo 
grate recipiebat, ut legatos, qui pertulissent, non 
modo primos admitteret, sed etiam familiaribus epu- 
lis interponeret. A quibusdam ex his rogatus ut 
cantaret super cenam, exceptusque effusius, solos scire 
audire Graecos solosque se et studiis suis dignos ait. 


Nec profectione dilata, ut primum Cassiopen traiecit, 


a The signal for the start. è? Chap. xix. 1. 
120 


NERO 


talking of Hector. At the beginning of his reign he 
used to play every day with ivory chariots on a board, 
and he came from the country to all the games, even 
the most insignificant, at first secretly, and then so 
openly that no one doubted that he would be in Rome 
on that particular day. He made no secret of his 
wish to have the number of prizes increased, and in 
consequence more races were added and the per- 
formance was continued to a late hour, while the 
managers of the troupes no longer thought it worth 
while to produce their drivers at all except for a full 
day's racing. He soon longed to drive a chariot 
himself and even to show himself frequently in 
public ; so after a trial exhibition in his gardens before 
his slaves and the dregs of the populace, he gave all 
an opportunity of seeing him in the Circus Maximus, 
one of his freedmen dropping the napkin? from 


the place usually occupied by the magistrates. we 


Not content with showing his proficiency in these 
arts at Rome, he went to Achaia, as I have said,’ in- 
fluenced especially by the following consideration. 
The cities in which it was the custom to hold contests 
in music had adopted the rule of sending all the lyric 
prizes to him. These he received with the greatest 
delight, not only giving audience before all others to 
the envoys who brought them, but even inviting 
them to his private table. When some of them 
begged him to sing after dinner and greeted his 
performance with extravagant applause, he declared 
that “the Greeks were the only ones who had an 
ear for music and that they alone were worthy 
of hB efforts." So he took ship without delay 
and immediately on arriving at Cassiope made a 
preliminary appearance as a singer at the altar of 


12I 


N 


\ 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


statim ad aram Iovis Cassii cantare auspicatus 
certamina deinceps obiit omnia. 

XXIII. Nam et quae diversissimorum temporum 
sunt, cogi in unum annum, quibusdam etiam iteratis, 
iussit et Olympiae quoque praeter consuetudinem 
musicum agona commisit. Ac ne quid circa haec 
occupatum avocaret detineretve, cum praesentia eius 
urbicas res egere a liberto Helio admoneretur, 
rescripsit his verbis: * Quamvis nunc tuum consilium 
sit et votum celeriter reverti me, tamen suadere et 
optare potius debes, ut Nerone dignus revertar.” 

Cantante eo ne necessaria quidem causa excedere 
theatro licitum est. Itaque et enixae quaedam in 
spectaculis dicuntur et multi taedio audiendi laudan- 
dique clausis oppidorum portis aut furtim desiluisse 
de muro aut morte simulata funere elati. Quam 
autem trepide anxieque certaverit, quanta adver- 
sariorum aemulatione, quo metu iudicum, vix credi 
potest. Adversarios, quasi plane condicionis eiusdem, 
observare, captare, infamare secreto, nonnumquam 
ex occursu maledictis incessere ac, si qui arte prae- 
cellerent, conrumpere etiam solebat. Iudices autem 
prius quam inciperet reverentissime adloquebatur, 
omnia se facienda fecisse, sed eventum in manu esse 


^ Cf. Juv. viii. 224 ff. 

? Of the theatre; for a similar use of murus see chap. 
xxxviii. l. 

c Oppida, the term applied to the towers and other 
structures at the entrance to the Circus, seems to be used 
here of the corresponding part of the theatre. 


122 


NERO 


Jupiter Cassius, and then went the round of all the 
contests.” 

XXIII. To make this possible, he gave orders that 
even those which were widely separated in time 
should be brought together in a single year, so that 
some had even to be given twice, and he introduced 
a musical competition at Olympia also, contrary to 
custom. To avoid being distracted or hindered in any 
way while busy with these contests, he replied to his 
freedman Helius, who reminded him that the affairs 
of the city required his presence, in these words: 
* However much it may be your advice and your 
wish that I should return speedily, yet you ought 
rather to counsel me and to hope that I may return 
worthy of Nero." 

While he was singing no one was allowed to 
leave the theatre even for the most urgent reasons. 
And so it is said that some women gave birth to 
children there, while many who were worn out with 
listening and applayding, secretly leaped from the 
wall,’ since the gates at the entrance ^ were closed, or 
feigned death and were carried out as if for burial. 
The trepidation and anxiety with which he took part 
in the contests, his keen rivalry of his opponents and 
his awe of the judges, can hardly be credited. As if 
his rivals were of quite the same station as himself, he 
used to show respect to them and try to gain their 
favour, while he slandered them behind their backs, 
sometimes assailed them with abuse when he met 
them, and even bribed those who were especially 
proficient. 

Before beginning, he would address the judges in 
the most deferential terms, saying that he had 
done all that could be done, but the issue was in the 


123 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


Fortunae ; illos ut sapientis et doctos viros fortuita 
debere excludere; atque, ut auderet hortantibus, 
aequiore animo recedebat, ac ne sic quidem sine solli- 
citudine, taciturnitatem pudoremque quorundam pro 
tristitia et malignitate arguens suspectosque sibi 
dicens. 

XXIV. In certando vero ita legi oboediebat, ut 
numquam exscreare ausus sudorem quoque frontis 
brachio detergeret; atque etiam in tragico quodam 
actu, cum elapsum baculum cito resumpsisset, pavidus 
et metuens ne ob delictum certamine summoveretur, 
non aliter confirmatus est quam adiurante hypocrita 
non animadversum id inter exsultationes succlama- 
tionesque populi. Victorem autem se ipse pronun- 
tiabat ; qua de causa et praeconio ubique contendit. 
Ac ne cuius alterius hieronicarum memoria aut 
vestigium exstaret usquam, subverti et unco trahi 
abicique in latrinas omnium statuas et imagines 
imperavit. Aurigavit quoque plurifariam, Olympiis 
vero etiam decemiugem, quamvis id ipsum in rege 
Mithradate! carmine quodam suo reprehendisset ; 
sed excussus curru ac rursus repositus, cum  per- 
durare non posset, destitit ante decursum ; neque eo 
setius coronatus est. Decedens deinde provinciam 
universam libertate donavit simulque iudices civitate 


1 Mithradate, M; the other mss. have Mithridate or 
Mitridate. 


@ The use of a handkerchief was not allowed; see also 
Tac. Ann. 16. 4. 

* The hypocrites (hypocrita) made the gestures and accom- 
panied the tragic actor on the flute, as he spoke his lines. 

¢ The heralds for the great festivals were selected by 
competition among the rival candidates. 

4 The Greek term A?eron?ces, ** victor in the sacred games," 
indicates the religious nature of the festivals. 


I24 


| 


NERO 


hands of Fortune; they however, being men of 
: wisdom and experience, ought to exclude what was 
fortuitous. When they bade him take heart, he 
withdrew with greater confidence, but not even then 
without anxiety, interpreting the silence and modesty 
of some as sullenness and ill-nature, and declaring 
that he had his suspicions of them. 

XXIV. In competition he observed the rules most 
scrupulously, never daring to clear his throat and even 
wiping the sweat from his brow with his arm.^ Once 
indeed, during the performance of a tragedy, when 
he had dropped his sceptre but quickly recovered it, 
he was terribly afraid that he might be excluded 
from the competition because of his slip, and his 
confidence was restored only when his accompanist ^ 
swore that it had passed unnoticed amid the delight 
and applause of the people. When the victory was 
won, he made the announcement himself; and for 
that reason he always took part in the contests of 
the heralds. To obliterate the memory of all other 
victors in the games? and leave no trace of them, 
their statues and busts were all thrown down by his 
order, dragged off with hooks, and cast into privies. 

He also drove a chariot in many places, at Olympia 
even a ten-horse team, although in one of his own 
poems he had criticised Mithridates for just that 
thing. But after he had been thrown from the car 
and put back in it, he was unable to hold out and 
gave up before the end of the course; but he 
received the crown just the same. On his departure 
he presented the entire province with freedom * and 
at the same time gave the judges Roman citizenship 

* That is, with local self-government, not with actual 
independence. 

125 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


Romana et pecunia grandi. Quae beneficia e medio 
stadio Isthmiorum die sua ipse voce pronuntiavit. 
XXV. Reversus e Graecia Neapolim, quod in ea 
primum artem protulerat, albis equis introiit disiecta 
parte muri, ut mos hieronicarum est; simili modo 
Antium, inde Albanum, inde Romam; sed et 
Romam eo curru, quo Augustus olim triumphaverat, 
et in veste purpurea distinctaque stellis aureis 
chlamyde coronamque capite gerens Olympiacam, 
dextra manu Pythiam, praeeunte pompa ceterarum 
cum titulis, ubi et quos quo cantionum quove 
fabularum argumento vicisset; sequentibus currum 
ovantium ritu plausoribus, Augustianos militesque se 
triumphi eius clamitantibus. Dehinc diruto Circi 
Maximi arcu per Velabrum Forumque Palatium et 
Apollinem petit. Incedenti passim victimae caesae 
sparso per vias identidem croco ingestaeque aves ac 
lemnisci et bellaria. Sacras coronas in cubiculis 
circum lectos posuit, item statuas suas citharoedico 
habitu, qua nota etiam nummum percussit. Ac 
post haec tantum afuit a remittendo laxandoque 
studio, ut conservandae vocis gratia neque milites 
umquam, nisi absens aut alio verba pronuntiante, 


^ See note d on chap. xxiv. > See chap. xx. 3. 

¢ To make more room for the procession, which passed 
through the Circus (Dio, 63. 20). The reference is probably 
to the gateway at the eastern end, through which the pro- 
cession entered and passed out. again, after marching around 
the spina (see note on Claud. xxi. 3). Suetonius mentions 
only the exit from the Circus. In his time the gateway was 
formed by the Arch of Vespasian and Titus, erected by 
Domitian in 81 A.D. 

4 That is, song-birds, as a compliment to Nero’s voice; 
the other offerings were also typical of his art and his 
triumph. 


126 


EE ee. ee Ke A eee, ee ee eee. |. ae, ee 


NERO 


and a large sum of money. These favours he 
announced in person on the day of the Isthmian 
Games, standing in the middle of the stadium. 

XXV. Returning from Greece, since it was at 
Naples that he had made his first appearance, he 
entered that city with white horses through a part of 
the wall which had been thrown down, as is customary 
with victors in the sacred games.” In like manner 
he entered Antium, then Albanum, and finally Rome ; 
but at Rome he rode in the chariot which Augustus 
had used in his triumphs in days gone by, and wore 
a purple robe and a Greek cloak adorned with stars 
of gold, bearing on his head the Olympic crown and - 
in his right hand the Pythian, while the rest were 
carried before him with inscriptions telling where 
he had won them and against what competitors, and 
giving the titles of the songs or the subject of the 
plays. His car was followed by his claque? as by the 
escort of a triumphal procession, who shouted that 
they were the attendants of Augustus and the 
soldiers of his triumph. Then through the arch of 
the Circus Maximus, which was thrown down, he 
made his way across the Velabrum and the Forum to 
the Palatine and the temple of Apollo. All along 
the route victims were slain, the streets were 
sprinkled from time to time with perfume, while 
birds,? ribbons, and sweetmeats were showered upon 
him. He placed the sacred crowns in his bed- 
chambers around his couches, as well as statues 
representing him in the guise of a lyre-player; and 
he had a coin too struck with the same device. So 
far from neglecting or relaxing his practice of the 
art after this, he never addressed the soldiers except 
by letter or in a speech delivered by another, to save 


127 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


appellaret neque quicquam serio iocove egerit, nisi 
astante phonascó, qui moneret parceret arteriis ac 
sudarium ad os applicaret ; multisque vel amicitiam 
suam optulerit vel simultatem  indixerit, prout 
quisque se magis parciusve laudasset. 

XXVI. Petulantiam, libidinem, luxuriam, avaritiam, 
crudelitatem sensim quidem primo et occulte et velut 
iuvenili errore exercuit, sed ut tunc quoque dubium 
nemini foret naturae illa vitia, non aetatis esse. Post 
crepusculum statim adrepto pilleo vel galero popinas 

inibat cireumque vicos vagabatur ludibundus nec sine 
l pernicie tamen, siquidem redeuntis a ena verberare 
ac repugnantes vulnerare cloacisque demergere 
assuerat, tabernas etiam effringere et expilare ; quin- 
tana domi constituta, ubi partae et ad licitationem 
dividendae praedae pretium absumeretur. Ac saepe 
in eius modi rixis oculorum et vitae periculum adiit, 
a quodam laticlavio, cuius uxorem adtrectaverat, prope 
ad necem caesus. Quare numquam postea publico 
se illud horae sine tribunis commisit procul et occulte 
subsequentibus.  Interdiu quoque clam gestatoria 
sella delatus in theatrum seditionibus pantomimorum 
e parte proscaeni superiore signifer simul ac spectator 
aderat; et cum ad manus ventum esset lapidibusque 
et subselliorum fragminibus decerneretur, multa et 


a Of. Aug. Ixxxiv. 2. 

^ Qwintana is really the market of à camp, named from 
the Quintana via, one of the streets of a Roman camp, on 
which the market was regularly placed. 

¢ See note on chap. v. 1. 

4 Julius Montanus ; see Tac. Ann. 13. 25. 

* And their bands of partisans ; see chap. xvi. 2, 


128 


NERO 


his voice; and he never did anything for amusement 
or in earnest without an elocutionist ^ by his side, 
to warn him to spare his vocal organs and hold 
a handkerchief to his mouth. To many men he 
offered his friendship or announced his hostility, 
according as they had applauded him lavishly or 
grudgingly. 

XXVI. Although at first his acts of wantonness, 
lust, extravagance, avarice and cruelty were gradual 
and secret, and might be condoned as follies of 
youth, yet even then their nature was such that no 
one doubted that they were defects of his character 
and not due to his time of life. No sooner was 
twilight over than he would catch up a cap or a wig 
and go to the taverns or range about the streets 
playing pranks, which however were very far from 
harmless; for he used to beat men as they came 
home from dinner, stabbing any who resisted him 
and throwing them into the sewers. He would even 
break into shops and rob them, setting up a market ^ 
in the Palace, where he divided the booty which he 
took, sold it at auction, and then squandered the 
proceeds. In the strife which resulted he often ran 
the risk of losing his eyes^ or even his life, for he 
was beaten almost to death by a man of the senatorial 
order,?? whose wife he had maltreated. Warned by 
this, he never afterwards ventured to appear in 
public at that hour without having tribunes follow 
him at a distance and unobserved. Even in the day- 
time he would be carried privately to the theatre in 
a sedan, and from the upper part of the proscenium 
would watch the brawls of the pantomimic actors * 
and egg them on; and when they came to blows 
and fought with stones and broken benches, he 


129 
VOL. II. K 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


ipse iecit in populum atque etiam praetoris caput 
consauciavit. 

XXVII. Paulatim vero invalescentibus vitiis iocu- 
laria et latebras omisit nullaque dissimulandi cura ad 
maiora palam erupit. 

Epulas a medio die ad mediam noctem pro- 
trahebat, refotus saepius calidis piscinis ac tempore 
aestivo nivatis; cenitabatque nonnumquam et in 
publico, naumachia praeclusa vel Martio campo vel 
Circo Maximo, inter scortorum totius urbis et 
ambubaiarum ministeria. Quotiens Ostiam Tiberi 
deflueret aut Baianum sinum  praeternavigaret, 
dispositae per litora et ripas deversoriae tabernae 
parabantur insignes ganea ! et matronarum institorio 
copas imitantium atque hinc inde hortantium ut 
appelleret. Indicebat et familiaribus cenas, quorum 
uni mitellita quadragies sestertium constitit, alteri 
pluris aliquanto rosaria. /’ 

XXVIII. Super ingenuorum paedagogia et nupta- 
rum concubinatus Vestali virgini Rubriae vim intulit. 
Acten libertam paulum afuit quin iusto sibi 
matrimonio coniungeret, summissis consularibus viris 
qui regio genere ortam peierarent. Puerum Sporum 
exsectis testibus etiam in muliebrem naturam trans- 
figurare conatus cum dote et flammeo per sollemnia ? 
nuptiarum celeberrimo officio deductum ad se pro 
uxore habuit ; exstatque cuiusdam non inscitus iocus 

1 ganea, Salmasius ; ganeae, mss. 
2 sollemnia, c; sollemne, Turnebus; sollemni, 0. 

a Made for sea-fights ; see Aug. xliii. 1; Tib. lxxii. 1. 

> With mitellita and rosaria we may supply cena; the 
130 


NERO 


himself threw many missiles at the people and even 
broke a praetor's head. 

XXVII. Little by little, however, as his vices 
grew stronger, he dropped jesting and secrecy and 
with no attempt at disguise openly broke out into 
worse crime. He prolonged his revels from midday 
to midnight, often livening himself by a warm 
plunge, or, if it were summer, into water cooled with 
snow. Sometimes too he closed the inlets and 
banqueted in public in the great tank* in the 
Campus Martius, or in the Circus Maximus, waited 
on by harlots and dancing girls from all over the 
city. Whenever he drifted down the Tiber to Ostia, 
or sailed about the Gulf of Baiae, booths were set 
up at intervals along the banks and shores, fitted 
out for debauchery, while bartering matrons played 
the part of inn-keepers and from every hand solicited 
him to come ashore. He also levied dinners on his 
friends, one of whom spent four million sesterces 
for a banquet at which turbans were distributed, and 
another a considerably larger sum for a rose dinner.? 

XXVIII. Besides abusing freeborn boys and 
seducing married women, he debauched the vestal 
virgin Rubria. The freedwoman Acte he all but 
made his lawful wife, after bribing some ex-consuls 
to perjure themselves by swearing that she was 
of royal birth. He castrated the boy Sporus and 
actually tried to make a woman of him; and bh. 
married him with all the usual ceremonies, inclue‘, 
a dowry and a bridal veil, took him to his house 
attended by a great throng, and treated him as his 
wife. And the witty jest that someone made is still 
former means a banquet at which silken turbans were a 
distinguishing feature. 

131 
K 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


bene agi potuisse cum rebus humanis, si Domitius 
pater talem habuisset uxorem. Hunc Sporum, 
Augustarum ornamentis excultum lecticaque vectum, 
et circa conventus mercatusque Graeciae ac mox 
Romae circa Sigillaria comitatus est identidem 
exosculans. Nam matris concubitum appetisse et 
ab! obtrectatoribus eius, ne ferox atque impotens 
mulier et hoc genere gratiae praevaleret, deterritum 
nemo dubitavit, utique postquam meretricem, quam 
fama erat Agrippinae simillimam, inter concubinas 
recepit. Olim etiam quotiens lectica cum matre 
veheretur, libidinatum inceste ac maculis vestis prodi- 
tum affirmant. | 

XXIX. Suam quidem pudicitiam usque adeo 
prostituit, ut contaminatis paene omnibus membris 
novissime quasi genus lusus excogitaret, quo ferae 
pelle contectus emitteretur e cavea virorumque ac 
feminarum ad stipitem deligatorum inguina invaderet 
et, cum affatim desaevisset, conficeretur a Doryphoro 
liberto ; cui etiam, sicut ipsi Sporus, ita ipse denupsit, 
voces quoque et heiulatus vim patientium virginum 
imitatus. Ex nonnullis comperi persuasissimum 
habuisse eum neminem hominem pudicum aut ulla 
corporis parte purum esse, verum plerosque dis- 
simulare vitium et callide optegere ; ideoque professis 
apud se obscaenitatem cetera quoque concessisse 
delicta. 

XXX. Divitiarum et pecuniae fructum non alium 

! ab, Qc; ad, M (struck out by a later hand); the other 
mss. omit the word. 

* Cf. Claud. xvi. 4. è Used in a double sense. 


132 


NERO 


current, that it would have been well for the world 
if Nero’s father Domitius had had that kind of wife. 
This Sporus, decked out with the finery of the 
empresses and riding in a litter, he took with him 
to the assizes and marts of Greece, and later at 
Rome through the Street of the Images,* fondly 
kissing him from time to time. That he even 
desired illicit relations with his own mother, and was 
kept from it by her enemies, who feared that such 
a relationship might give the reckless and insolent 
woman too great influence, was notorious, especially 
after he added to his concubines a courtesan who 
was said to look very like Agrippina. Even before 
that, so they say, whenever he rode in a litter with 
his mother, he had incestuous relations with her, 
which were betrayed by the stains on his clothing. 

XXIX. He so prostituted his own chastity that 
after defiling almost every part of his body, he 
at last’ devised a kind of game, in which, covered 
with the skin of some wild animal, he was let loose 
from a cage and attacked the private parts of men 
and women, who were bound to stakes, and when h: 
had sated his mad lust, was dispatched è by his fre: 
man Doryphorus ; for he was even married to this 
man in the same way that he himself had married 
Sporus, going so far as to imitate the cries and 
lamentations of a maiden being deflowered. I have 
heard from some men that it was his unshaken con- 
viction that no man was chaste or pure in any part 
of his body, but that most of them concealed their 
vices and cleverly drew a veil over them; and 
that therefore he pardoned all other faults in those 
who confessed to him their lewdness. 

XXX. He thought that there was no other way of 


133 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


putabat quam profusionem, sordidos ac deparcos 
esse quibus impensarum ratio constaret, praelautos 
vereque magnificos qui abuterentur ac perderent. 
Laudabat mirabaturque avunculum Gaium nullo 
magis nomine, quam quod ingentis a Tiberio relictas 
opes in brevi spatio prodegisset. Quare nec largiendi 
nec absumendi modum tenuit. In Tiridatem, quod 
vix credibile videatur, octingena nummum milia 
diurna erogavit abeuntique super sestertium milies 
contulit. Menecraten citharoedum et Spiculum ! 
murmillonem  triumphalium virorum  patrimoniis 
aedibusque donavit. Cercopithecum Panerotem 
faeneratorem et urbanis rusticisque praediis locuple- 
tatum prope regio extulit funere. Nullam vestem 
bis induit. Quadringenis in punctum sestertiis 
aleam lusit. ^ Piscatus est rete aur&to? et purpura 
coccoque funibus nexis Numquam minus mille 
carrucis fecisse iter traditur, soleis mularum argenteis, 
canusinatis mulionibus, armillata phalerataque Maza- 
cum ? turba atque cursorum. 

XXXI. Non in alia re tamen damnosior quam in 
aedificando domum a Palatio Esquilias usque fecit, 
quam primo transitoriam, mox incendio absumptam 
restitutamque auream nominavit. De cuius spatio 
atque cultu suffecerit haec rettulisse. Vestibulum 

1 Spiculum, Beroaldus ; speculum, 0. 

? rete aurato, T; veste aurato, M; the other mas. have 
veste aurata. 


3 falerataque Mazacum, Salmasius (Mazycum, Roth); pha- 
lerata (phalera, G) cimazacum, GX R ; falerata cimazacum, M. 


a That is, could balance the account of their expenditures. 
> See chap. xiii. 

e That is, for each pip of the winning throw. 

4 Celebrated horseman of Mauretania. 

* See note on Aug. xxv. 3. 


134 


NERO 


enjoying riches and money than by riotous extrava- 
gance, declaring that only stingy and niggardly 
fellows kept a correct account of what they spent,? 
while fine and genuinely magnificent gentlemen 
wasted and squandered. Nothing in his uncle 
Gaius so excited his envy and admiration as the 
fact that he had in so short a time run through 
the vast wealth which Tiberius had left him. 
Accordingly he made presents and wasted money 
without stint. On Tiridates, though it would seem 
hardly within belief, he spent eight hundred 
thousand sesterces a day, and on his departure 
presented him with more than a hundred millions. 
He gave the lyre-player Menecrates and the 
gladiator Spiculus properties and residences equal to 
those of men who had celebrated triumphs. He en- 
riched the monkey-faced usurer Panerotes with 
estates in the country and in the city and had him 
buried with almost regal splendour. He never wore 
the same garment twice. He played at dice for 
four hundred thousand sesterces a point.^ He fished 
with a golden net drawn by cords woven of purple 
and scarlet threads. It is said that he never made 
a journey with less than a thousand carriages, his 
mules shod with silver and their drivers clad in wool 
of Canusium, attended by a train of Mazaces? and 
couriers with bracelets and trappings.* 

XXXI. There was nothing however in which he was 
more ruinously prodigal than in building. He made a 
palace extending all the way from the Palatine to 
the Esquiline, which at first he called the House of 
Passage, but when it was burned shortly after its 
completion and rebuilt, the Golden House. Its size 
and splendour will be sufficiently indicated by the 


135 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


eius fuit, in quo colossus CXX pedum staret ipsius 
effigie; tanta laxitas, ut porticus triplices miliarias 
haberet ; item stagnum maris instar, cireumsaeptum 
aedificiis ad urbium speciem ; rura insuper arvis atque 
vinetis et pascuis silvisque varia, cum multitudine 
omnis generis pecudum ac ferarum. In ceteris 
partibus cuncta auro lita, distincta gemmis unionum- 
que conchis erant; cenationes Jaqueatae tabulis 
eburneis versatilibus, ut flores, fistulatis, ut unguenta 
desuper spargerentur ; praecipua cenationum rotunda, 
quae perpetuo diebus ac noctibus vice mundi cir- 
cumageretur; balineae marinis et albulis fluentes 
aquis. Eius modi domum cum absolutam dedicaret, 
hactenus comprobavit, ut se diceret quasi hominem 
tandem habitare coepisse. 

Praeterea  incohabat piscinam a  Miseno ad 
Avernum lacum contectam porticibusque conclusam, 
quo quidquid totis Baiis calidarum aquarum esset 
converteretur; fossam ab Averno Ostiam usque, ut 
navibus nec tamen mari iretur, longitudinis per 
centum sexagintà milia, latitudinis, qua contrariae 
quinqueremes commearent. Quorum operum per- 
ficiendorum gratia quod ubique esset custodiae in 
Italiam deportari, etiam scelere convictos non nisi ad 
opus damnari praeceperat. 


^ That is, with three parallel rows of columns. 

^ One may compare Hadrian's villa at Tibur (Tivoli) with 
its Canopus, its Vale of Tempe, and the like. 

¢ Suetonius’ brevity is here inexact ; it was evidently the 
spherical ceiling which revolved. 


136 


NERO 


. following details. Its vestibule was large enough to 
contain a colossal statue of the emperor a hundred and 
twenty feet high; and. it was so extensive that it had 
a triple colonnade ^ a mile long. There was a pond 
too, like a sea, surrounded with buildings to represent 
cities, besides tracts of country, varied by tilled fields, 
vineyards, pastures and: woods, with great numbers 
of wild and domestic animals. In the rest of the 
house all parts were overlaid with gold and adorned 
with gems and mother-of-pearl. There were dining- 
rooms with fretted ceilings of ivory, whose panels 
could turn and shower down flowers and were fitted 
with pipes for sprinkling the guests with perfumes. 
The main banquet hall was circular and constantly 
revolved day and night, like the heavens.^ He had 
baths supplied with sea water and sulphur water. 
When the edifice was finished in this style and he 
dedicated it, he deigned to say nothing more in the 
way of approval than that he was at last beginning 
to be housed like a human being. 

He also began a pool, extending from Misenum 
to the lake of Avernus, roofed over and enclosed in 
colonnades, into which he planned to turn all the ` 
hot springs in every part of Baiae; a canal from 
Avernus all the way to Ostia, to enable the journey 
to be made by ship yet not by sea ; its length was 
to be a hundred and sixty miles and its breadth 
sufficient to allow ships with five banks of oars to 
pass each other. For the execution of these projects 
he had given orders that the prisoners all over the 
empire should be transported to Italy, and that those 
who were convicted even of capital crimes should be 
punished in no other way than by sentence to this 
work. 


137 


4 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


Ad hunc impendiorum furorem, super fiduciam im- 
perii, etiam spe quadam repentina immensarum et 
reconditarum opum impulsus est ex indicio equitis 
R. pro comperto pollicentis thesauros antiquissimae 
gazae, quos Dido regina fugiens Tyro secum extulisset, 
esse in Africa vastissimis specubus abditos ac posse 
erui parvula molientium opera. 

XXXII. Verum ut spes fefellit, destitutus atque 
ita iam exhaustus et egens ut stipendia quoque 
militum et commoda veteranorum protrahi ac differri 
necesse esset, calumniis rapinisque intendit animum. 
. Ante omnia instituit, ut e libertorum defunctorum 
bonis pro semisse dextans ei cogeretur, qui sine pro- 
babili causa eo nomine essent, quo fuissent ullae 
familiae quas ipse contingeret; deinde, ut ingra- 
torum in principem testamenta ad fiscum pertinerent, 
ac ne impune esset studiosis iuris, qui scripsissent 
vel dictassent ea; tunc ut lege maiestatis facta 
dictaque omnia, quibus modo delator non deesset, 
tenerentur. Revocavit et praemia coronarum, quae 
umquam sibi civitates in certaminibus detulissent. 
Et cum interdixisset usum amethystini ac Tyrii 
coloris summisissetque qui nundinarum die pauculas 
uncias venderet, praeclusit cunctos negotiatores. 
Quin etiam inter canendum animadversam matronam 
in spectaculis vetita purpura cultam demonstrasse 
procuratoribus suis dicitur detractamque ilico non 


a That is, had left him nothing in their wills, or an 
insufficient amount. > See chap. xxiv. 2. 
¢ Of course confiscating their property. 


138 


Ņ ar 


NERO 


He was led to such mad extravagance, in addition 
to his confidence in the resources of the empire, by 
the hope of a vast hidden treasure, suddenly inspired 
by the assurance of a Roman knight, who declared 
positively that the enormous wealth which queen 
Dido had taken with her of old in her flight from 
Tyre was hidden away in huge caves in Africa and 
could be recovered with but trifling labour. 

XXXII. When this hope proved false, he resorted 
to false accusations and robbery, being at the end of 
his resources and so utterly impoverished that he 
was obliged to postpone and defer even the pay of 
the soldiers and the rewards due to the veterans: 

First of all he made a law, that instead of one- 
half, five-sixths of the property of deceased freed- 
men should be made over to him, if without good 
and sufficient reason they bore the name of any 
family with which he himself was connected ; further, 
that the estates of those who were ungrateful 
to their emperor should belong to the privy purse, 
and that the advocates who had written or dictated 
such wills should not go unpunished. Finally, that 
any word or deed on which an informer could base 
an action should be liable to the law against lese- 
majesty. He demanded the return of the rewards? 
which he had given in recognition of the prizes 
conferred on him by any city in any competition. 
Having forbidden the use of amethystine or Tyrian 
purple dyes, he secretly sent a man to sell a few 
ounces on a market day and then closed the shops of 
all the dealers. It is even said that when he saw a 
matron in the audience at one of his recitals clad in 
the forbidden colour, he pointed her out to his agents, 
who dragged her out and stripped her on the spot, 


139 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


4 veste modo sed et bonis exuit. Nulli delegavit 


to 


officium ut non adiceret: * Scis quid mihi opus sit," 
et: “Hoc agamus, ne quis quicquam habeat.” 
Ultimo templis compluribus dona detraxit simulacra- 
que ex auro vel argento fabricata conflavit, in iis 
Penatium deorum, quae mox Galba restituit. 

XXXIII. Parricidia et caedes a Claudio exorsus 
est; cuius necis etsi non auctor, at conscius fuit, 
neque dissimulanter, ut qui boletos, in quo cibi 
genere venenum is acceperat, quasi deorum cibum 
posthac proverbio Graeco conlaudare sit solitus. 
Certe omnibus rerum verborumque contumeliis mor- 
tuum insectatus est, modo stultitiae modo saevitiae 
arguens; nam et morari eum desisse inter homines. 
producta prima syllaba iocabatur multaque decreta 
et constituta, ut insipientis atque deliri, pro irritis 
habuit; denique bustum eius consaepiri nisi humili 
levique maceria ! neglexit. 

Britannicum non minus aemulatione vocis, quae 
illi iucundior suppetebat, quam metu ne quandoque 
apud hominum gratiam paterna memoria praevaleret, 
veneno adgressus est. Quod acceptum a quadam 
Lucusta, venenariorum indice, cum opinione tardius 
cederet ventre modo Britannici moto, accersitam 


! maceria, Gutherius ; materia, 2. 


a According to Dio, 60. 35 (at the end) the saying was 
original with Nero; but as Dio calls it **a remark not 
unworthy of record," it perhaps became proverbial among 
the Greeks. > But of. chap. ix. 

* The pun on morari, ‘‘to linger, remain” and morari, 
*' to play the fool,” seems untranslatable, 


140 


NERO 


not only of her garment, but also of. her property. 
He never appointed anyone to an office without 
adding : * You know what my needs are," and “ Let 
us see to it that no one possess anything." At last 
he stripped many temples of their gifts and melted 
down the images of gold and silver, including those 
of the Penates, which however Galba soon afterwards 
restored. 

XXXIII. He began his career of parricide and 
„murder with Claudius, for even if he was not the 
-instigator of the emperor’s death, he was at least 
privy to it, as he openly admitted ; for he used after- 
wards to laud mushrooms, the vehicle in which the 
poison was administered to Claudius, as “ the food of 
the gods," as the Greek proverb has it.^ At any rate, 
after Claudius's death he vented on him every kind 
of insult, in act and word, charging him now with 
folly and now with cruelty ; for it was a favourite joke 
of his to say that Claudius had ceased “to play the 
fool" ^ among mortals, lengthening the first syllable 
of the word morari, and he disregarded many of his 
decrees and acts as the work of à madman and a 
dotard. Finally, he neglected to enclose the place 
where his body was burned except with a low and 
mean wall. 

He attempted the life of Britannicus by poison, 
not less from jealousy of his voice (for it was more 
agreeable than his own) than from fear that he 
might sometime win a higher place than himself in the 
people's regard because of the memory of his father. 
He procured the potion from an archpoisoner, one 
Locusta, and when the effect was slower than he 
anticipated, merely physicing Britannicus, he called 
the woman to him and flogged her with his own 


I4I 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


mulierem sua manu verberavit arguens pro veneno 
remedium dedisse; excusantique minus datum ad 
occultandam facinoris invidiam: “Sane,” inquit, 
“legem Iuliam timeo," coegitque se coram in 
cubiculo quam posset velocissimum ac praesentaneum 
coquere. Deinde in haedo expertus, postquam is 
quinque horas protraxit, iterum ac saepius recoctum 
porcello obiecit; quo statim exanimato inferri in 
triclinium darique cenanti secum Britannico impe- 
ravit. Et cum ille ad primum gustum concidisset, 
comitiali morbo ex consuetudine correptum apud 
convivas ementitus postero die raptim inter maximos 
imbres tralaticio extulit funere. Lucustae pro na- 
vata opera impunitatem praediaque ampla, sed et 
discipulos dedit. 

XXXIV. Matrem facta dictaque sua exquirentem 
acerbius et corrigentem hactenus primo gravabatur, 
ut invidia identidem oneraret quasi cessurus imperio 
Rhodumque abiturus, mox et honore omni et potes- 
tate privavit abductaque militum et Germanorum 
statione contubernio quoque ac Palatio expulit; 
neque in divexanda quicquam pensi habuit, sum- 
missis qui et Romae morantem litibus et in secessu 
quiescentem per convicia et iocos terra marique 
praetervehentes inquietarent. "Verum minis eius ac 

^ Against assassination (De sicaris), including poisoning, 
passed by Sulla and renewed by Julius Caesar. 


> For her past offences ; see Tac. Ann. 12. 66. 
* See Juv. i. 71f. 


142 


NERO 


hand, charging that she had administered a medicine 
instead of a poison; and when she said in excuse 
that she had given a smaller dose to shield him 
from the odium of the crime, he replied: “ It’s 
likely that I am afraid of the Julian law *;" and he 
forced her to mix as swift and instant a potion as 
she knew how in his own room before his very eyes. 
Then he tried it on a kid, and as the animal lingered 
for five hours, had the mixture steeped again and again 
and threw some of it before a pig. The beast 
instantly fell dead, whereupon he ordered that the 
poison be taken to the dining-room and given to 
Britannicus. The boy dropped dead at the very 
first taste, but Nero lied to his guests and declared 
that he was seized with the falling sickness, to which 
he was subject, and the next day had him hastily 
and unceremoniously buried in a pouring rain. He 
rewarded Locusta for her eminent services with a 
full pardon? and large estates in the country, and 
actually sent her pupils.* 

XXXIV. His mother offended him by too strict 
surveillance and criticism of his words and acts, but 
at first he confined his resentment to frequent 
endeavours to bring upon her a burden of unpopu. : 
larity by pretending that he would abdicate *^- 
throne and go off to Rhodes. Then depriving her 
of all her honours and of her guard of Roman and 
German soldiers, he even forbade her to live with 
him and drove her from the Palace. After that 
he passed all bounds in harrying her, bribing 
men to annoy her with lawsuits while she remained 
in the city, and after she had retired to the 
country, to pass her house by land and sea and 
break her rest with abuse and mockery. At last 


143 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


violentia territus perdere statuit; et cum ter veneno 
temptasset sentiretque antidotis praemunitam, lacu- 
naria, quae noctu super dormientem laxata machina 
deciderent, paravit. Hoc consilio per conscios parum 
celato solutilem navem, cuius vel naufragio vel 
camarae! ruina periret, commentus est atque ita 
reconciliatione simulata iucundissimis litteris Baias 
evocavit ad sollemnia Quinquatruum? simul cele- 
branda ; datoque negotio trierarchis, qui liburnicam 
qua advecta erat velut fortuito concursu confringe- 
rent, protraxit convivium repetentique Baulos in 
locum corrupti navigii machinosum illud optulit, 
hilare prosecutus atque in digressu papillas quoque 
exosculatus. Reliquum temporis cum magna trepi- 
datione vigilavit opperiens coeptorum exitum. Sed 
ut diversa omnia nandoque evasisse eam comperit, 
inops consilii L. Agermum libertum eius salvam et 
incolumem cum gaudio nuntiantem, abiecto clam 
iuxta pugione ut percussorem sibi subornatum arripi 
constringique iussit, matrem occidi, quasi deprehen- 
sum crimen voluntaria morte vitasset. Adduntur his 
atrociora nec incertis auctoribus : ad visendum inter- 
fectae cadaver accurrisse, contrectasse membra, alia 
vituperasse, alia laudasse, sitique interim oborta 


! camare, ML; the other mss. have camerae or camere. 
? Quinquatruum] Quinquatrum, MLY; Quinquatrium, 
PT. 


@ The inventor was his freedman Anicetus; Tac. Ann. 
14. 3. > See Aug. lxxi. 3. 

* Given by the future emperor Otho ; see Otho, iii. 

4 Tacitus tells us that some denied this ; Ann. 14. 9. 


144 


7 2 ee. Tse a o 


NERO 


terrified by her violence and threats, he deter- 
mined to have her life, and after thrice attempting 
it by poison and finding that she had made herself 
immune by antidotes, he tampered with the ceiling 
of her bedroom, contriving a mechanical device for 
loosening its panels and dropping them upon her 
while she slept. When this leaked out through 
some of those connected with the plot, he devised a 
collapsible boat,* to destroy her by shipwreck or by 
the falling in of its cabin. Then he pretended a 
reconciliation and invited her in a most cordial let- 
ter to come to Baiae and celebrate the feast of 
Minerva? with him. On her arrival, instructing his 
captains to wreck the galley in which she had come, 
by running into it as if by accident, he detained her 
at a banquet,’ and when she would return to Bauli, 
offered her his contrivance in place of the craft which 
had been damaged, escorting her to it in high spirits 
and even kissing her breasts as they parted. The rest 
of the night he passed sleepless in intense anxiety, 
awaiting the outcome of his design. On learning that 
everything had gone wrong and that she had escaped 
by swimming, driven to desperation he secretly 
had a dagger thrown down beside her freedman 
Lucius Agermus, when he joyfully brought word 
that she was safe and sound, and then ordered that 
the freedman be seized and bound, on the charge of 
being hired to kill the emperor; that his mother be 
put to death, and the pretence made that she had 
escaped the consequences of her detected guilt by 
suicide. Trustworthy authorities 4 add still more grue- 
some details : that he hurried off to view the corpse, 
handled her limbs, criticising some and commending 
others, and that becoming thirsty meanwhile, he took 


145 
VOL. II. L 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


bibisse. Neque tamen conscientiam sceleris, quan- 
quam et militum et senatus populique gratulationibus 
confirmaretur, aut statim aut umquam postea ferre 
potuit, saepe confessus exagitari se materna specie 
verberibusque Furiarum ac taedis ardentibus. Quin 
et facto per Magos sacro evocare Manes et exorare 
temptavit. Peregrinatione quidem Graeciae et Eleu- 
sinis sacris, quorum initiatione impii et scelerati voce 
praeconis summoventur, interesse non.ausus est. 
Iunxit parricidio matris amitae necem. Quam 
cum ex duritie alvi cubantem visitaret, et illa trac- 
tans lanuginem eius, ut assolet, iam grandis natu per 
blanditias forte dixisset: “Simul hanc excepero, 
mori volo," conversus ad proximos confestim se posi- 
turum velut irridens ait, praecepitque medicis ut 
largius purgarent aegram ; necdum defunctae bona 
invasit suppresso testamento, ne quid abscederet. 
XXXV. Uxores praeter Octaviam duas postea 
duxit, Poppaeam! Sabinam quaestorio patre natam 
et equiti R. antea nuptam, deinde Statiliam Messa- 
linam Tauri bis consulis ac triumphalis abneptem. 
Qua ut poteretur, virum eius Atticum Vestinum 
consulem in honore ipso trucidavit. Octaviae con- 
suetudinem cito aspernatus, corripientibus amicis 
sufficere illi debere respondit uxoria ornamenta. 


1 Poppaeam, Sabellicus ; Pompeiam, Q. 


a That is, ** when I see you arrived at man's estate." The 
first shaving of the beard by a young Roman was a symbolic 
act, usually performed at the age of twenty-one with due 
ceremony ; see chap. xii. 3, above. According to Tac. Ann. 
14. 15, and Dio, 61. 19, Nero first shaved his beard in 59 A.D. 
at the age of twenty-one and commemorated the event by 
establishing the Juvenales ludi or Juvenalia (chap. xi. 1). 


146 


NERO 


 adrink. Yet he could not either then or ever after- 
wards endure the stings of conscience, though 
soldiers, senate and people tried to hearten him with 
their congratulations; for he often owned that he 
was hounded by his mother's ghost and by the 
whips and blazing torches of the Furies. He even 
had rites performed by the Magi, in the effort to 
summon her shade and entreat it for forgiveness. 
Moreover, in his journey through Greece he did 
not venture to take part in the Eleusinian mys- 
teries, since at the beginning the godless and wicked 
are warned by the herald's proclamation to go 
hence. 

To matricide he added the murder of his aunt. 
When he once visited her as she was confined to her 
bed from costiveness, and she, as old ladies will, 
stroking his downy beard (for he was already well 
grown) happened to say fondly: “ As soon as I 
receive this," I shall gladly die," he turned to those 
with him and said as if in jest: “Tl take it off 
at once." Then he bade the doctors give the sick 
woman an overdose of physic and seized her property 
before she was cold, suppressing her will, that nothing 
might escape him. 

XXXV. Besides Octavia he later took two wives, 
Poppaea Sabina, daughter of an ex-quaestor and 
previously married to a Roman knight, and then 
Statilia Messalina, daughter of the great-grand- 
daughter of Taurus, who had been twice consul and 
awarded a triumph. To possess the latter he slew 
her husband Atticus Vestinus while he held the 
office of consul. He soon grew tired of living with 
Octavia, and when his friends took him to task, 
replied that *she ought to be content with the 


147 
L 2 


2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


Eandem mox saepe frustra strangulare meditatus 
dimisit ut sterilem, sed improbante divortium populo 
nec parcente conviciis, etiam  relegavit, denique 
occidit sub crimine adulteriorum adeo inpudenti 
falsoque, ut in quaestione pernegantibus cunctis 
Anicetum paedagogum suum indicem subiecerit, 
qui fingeret et! dolo stupratam a se fateretur. 
Poppaeam? duodecimo die post divortium Octaviae 
in matrimonium acceptam dilexit unice; et tamen 
ipsam quoque ictu calcis occidit, quod se ex 
aurigatione sero reversum gravida et aegra conviciis 
incesserat. Ex hac filiam tulit Claudiam Augustam 
amisitque admodum infantem. 

Nullum adeo necessitudinis genus est, quod non 
scelere perculerit. Antoniam Claudi filiam, recusan- 
tem post Poppaeae mortem nuptias suas, quasi 
molitricem novarum rerum interemit; similiter 
ceteros? aut affinitate aliqua sibi aut propinquitate 
coniunctos; in quibus Aulum Plautium iuvenem, 
quem cum ante mortem per vim conspurcasset : 
* Eat nunc," inquit, * mater mea et successorem 
meum osculetur," iactans dilectum ab ea et ad spem 
imperii impulsum. Privignum Rufrium Crispinum 
Poppaea natum, impuberem adhuc, quia ferebatur 

1 fingeret et, X ; fingeret, MG ; T omits both words. 

? Pompeiam, 2; Poppeiam, Q. 


3 The earlier mss. except p have inter before ceteros; inter- 
emit or item, c; intercepit, Polak. 


a A brutal pun. Just as the consular insignia or ornamenta 
were given in place of the regular office (see Claud. v.), and 
the triumphal instynia in place of a triumph, so Octavia 
ought to be content with being the emperor's wife in name 
only. 


148 


NERO 


insignia of wifehood." ^ Presently after several vain 
attempts to strangle her, he divorced her on the 
ground of barrenness, and when the people took it 
ill and openly reproached him, he banished her 
besides; and finally he had her put to death on a 
charge of adultery that was so shameless and 
unfounded, that when all who were put to the 
torture maintained her innocence, he bribed his 
former preceptor Anicetus® to make a pretended 
confession that he had violated her chastity by a 
stratagem. He dearly loved Poppaea, whom he 
married twelve days after his divorce from Octavia, 
yet he caused her death too by kicking her when she 
was pregnant and ill, because she had scolded him 
for coming home late from the races. By her he 
had a daughter, Claudia Augusta, but lost her when 
she was still an infant. 

Indeed there is no kind of relationship that he did 
not violate in his career of crime. He put to death 
Antonia, daughter of Claudius,’ for refusing to marry 
him after Poppaea’s death, charging her with an 
attempt at revolution; and he treated in the same 
way all others who were in any way connected with 
him by blood or by marriage. Among these was the 
young Aulus Plautius, whom he forcibly defiled before 
his death, saying “ Let my mother come now and kiss 
my successor,” openly charging that Agrippina had 
loved Plautius and that this had roused him to hopes 
of the throne. Rufrius Crispinus, a mere boy, his 
stepson and the child of Poppaea, he ordered to be 
drowned by the child’s own slaves while he was 


5 Anicetus was at the time prefect of the precionan fleet 
at Misenum 5 see Tac. Ann. 14. 62. 
© See Claud. xxvii. 1. 


149 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


ducatus et imperia ludere, mergendum mari, dum 
piscaretur, servis ipsius demandavit. Tuscum 
nutricis filium relegavit, quod in procuratione Aegypti 
balineis in adventum suum exstructis lavisset. Sene- 
cam praeceptorem ad necem compulit, quamvis saepe 
commeatum petenti bonisque cedenti persancte 
iurasset. suspectum se frustra periturumque potius 
quam nociturum ei. Burro praefecto remedium ad 
fauces pollicitus toxicum misit. Libertos divites et 
senes, olim adoptionis mox dominationis suae fautores 
atque rectores, veneno partim cibis partim potionibus 
indito intercepit. 

XXXVI. Nec minore saevitia foris et in exteros 
grassatus est. Stella crinita, quae summis potesta- 
tibus exitium portendere vulgo putatur, per continuas 
noctes oriri coeperat. Anxius ea re, ut ex Balbillo 
astrologo didicit, solere reges talia ostenta caede 
aliqua illustri expiare atque a semet in capita 
procerum depellere, nobilissimo cuique . exitium 
destinavit; enimvero multo magis et quasi per 
-iustam causam duabus coniurationibus provulgatis, 
quarum prior maiorque Pisoniana Romae, posterior 
Viniciana Beneventi conflata atque detecta est. 
Coniurati e vinculis triplicium catenarum dixere 
causam, cum quidam ultro crimen faterentur, non- 
nulli etiam imputarent, tamquam aliter illi non 
possent nisi morte succurrere dedecorato flagitiis 


-— 


a Seneca's speech and Nero’s reply are preserved by 
Tacitus (Ann. 14. 53-50). 

> Pallas and Doryphorus ; see Tac. Ann. 14. 65. 

* Tacitus mentions two comets, one in 60 and the other in 
64 ; see Ann. 14. 22; 15. 47. 


150 


Te mM PO c CENE, quee umo ee 


NERO 


fishing, because it was said that he used to play at 
being a general and an emperor. He banished his 
nurse's son Tuscus, because when procurator in 
Egypt, he had bathed in some baths which were 
built for a visit of Nero's. He drove his tutor Seneca 
to suicide, although when the old man often pleaded 
to be allowed to retire and offered to give up his 
estates,^ he had sworn most solemnly that he did 
wrong to suspect him and that he would rather die 
than harm him. He sent poison to Burrus, prefect 
of the Guard, in place of a throat medicine which he 
had promised him. The old and wealthy freedmen 
who had helped him first to his adoption and later 
to the throne, and aided him by their advice, he 
killed by poison, administered partly in their food 
and partly in their drink. 

XXXVI. Those outside his family he assailed with 
no less cruelty. It chanced that a comet^ had begun 
to appear 'on several successive nights, a thing which 
is commonly believed to portend the death of great 
rulers. Worried by this, and learning from the 
astrologer Balbillus that kings usually averted such 
omens by the death of some distinguished man, thus 
turning them from themselves upon the heads of the 
nobles, he resolved on the death of all the eminent men 
of the State ; butthe more firmly, and with some sem. 
blance of justice, after the discovery of twoconspiracies. 
The earlier and more dangerous of these was that of 
Piso at Rome ; the other was set on foot by Vinicius 
at Beneventum and detected there. The conspirators 
made their defence in triple sets of fetters, some volun- 
tarily admitting their guilt, some even making a favour 
of it, saying that there was no way except by death 
that they could help a man disgraced by every kind 


ISI 


65 A.D. 


to 


e 
THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


omnibus. Damnatorum liberi urbe pulsi enectique 
veneno aut fame; constat quosdam cum paedagogis 
et capsariis uno prandio pariter necatos, alios diurnum 
victum prohibitos quaerere. 

XXXVII. Nullus posthac adhibitus dilectus aut 
modus interimendi quoscumque libuisset quacum- 
que de causa. Sed ne de pluribus referam, Sal- 
vidieno Orfito obiectum est quod tabernas tres de 
domo sua circa Forum civitatibus ad stationem 
locasset, Cassio Longino iuris consulto ac luminibus 
orbato, quod in vetere gentili! stemmate C. Cassi 
percussoris Caesaris imagines  retinuisset, Paeto 
Thraseae tristior et paedagogi vultus. Mori iussis 
non amplius quam horarum spatium dabat; ac ne 
quid morae interveniret, medicos admovebat qui 
cunctantes continuo curarent; ita enim vocabatur 2 
venas mortis gratia incidere. Creditur etiam poly- 
phago cuidam Aegypti generis crudam carnem et 
quidquid daretur mandere assueto, concupisse vivos 
homines laniandos absumendosque obicere. Elatus 
inflatusque tantis velut successibus negavit quem- 
quam principum scisse quid sibi liceret, multasque 
nec dubias significationes saepe iecit, ne reliquis 
quidem se parsurum senatoribus, eumque ordinem 


! gentili, öç; gentilis, MGX ; gentis, t. 
2 vocabatur, MY ; iocabatur, G; vocabat, X. 


a As Dio says (62. 24) ** they desired at the same time to 
be rid of these evils and to give Nero his release from them.” 
Death was the only remedy for one as far gone in wicked- 
ness ; hence in attempting to apply this remedy, they were 
doing him a favour. Cf. also Tac. Ann. 15. 68. 

è The capsarii carried the children's books and writing 
materials in a box (capsa). l 


t52 


NERO 


of wickedness.^ The children of those who were 
condemned were banished or put to death by poison 
or starvation; a number are known to have been 
slain all together at a single meal along with their pre- 
ceptors and attendants,’ while others were prevented 
from earning their daily bread. 

XXXVII. After this he showed neither dis- 
crimination nor moderation in putting to dea... 
whomsoever he pleased on any pretext whatever. 
To mention but a few instances, Salvidienus Orfitus 
was charged with having let to certain states as 
headquarters three shops which formed part of his 
house near the Forum; Cassius Longinus, a blind 
jurist, with retaining in the old family tree of his 
house the mask of Gaius Cassius, the assassin of 
Julius Caesar; Paetus Thrasea with having a sullen . 
mien, like that of a preceptor. To those who were 
bidden to die he never granted more than an hour's 
respite, and to avoid any delay, he brought physicians 
who were at once to “attend to” such as lingered ; 
for that was the term he used for killing them by 
opening their veins. It is even believed that it was 
his wish to throw living men to be torn to pieces and 
devoured by a monster^ of Egyptian birth, who 
would crunch raw flesh and anything else that was 
given him. Transported and puffed up with such 
successes, as he considered them, lre boasted that rv 
prince had ever known what power he really had, and 
he often threw out unmistakable hints that he would 
not spare even those of the senate who survived, but 
would one day blot out the whole order from the 
State and hand over the rule of the provinces and the 


c The Greek word means “a glutton,” or something 
stronger, 


153 


to 


e 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


sublaturum quandoque e re p. ac provincias et - 


exercitus equiti R. ac libertis permissurum. Certe 
neque adveniens neque proficiscens quemquam os- 
culo impertiit ac ne resalutatione quidem; et in 
auspicando opere Isthmi! magna frequentia clare 
ut sibi ac populo R. bene res verteret optavit dissi- 
mulata senatus mentione. 

XXXVIII. Sed nec populo aut moenibus patriae 
pepercit. Dicente quodam in sermone communi : 


Epo? 0 vóvros yata petxOyrw Tvpí, 


“Immo,” inquit, “pod [óvros, planeque ita fecit. 
Nam quasi offensus deformitate veterum aedificiorum 
et angustiis flexurisque vicorum, incendit urbem tam 
palam, ut plerique consulares cubicularios eius cum 
stuppa taedaque in praediis suis deprehensos non 
attigerint, et quaedam horrea circa domum Auream, 
quorum spatium maxime desiderabat, ut bellicis ma- 
chinis labefacta atque inflammata sint, quod saxeo 
muro constructa erant. Per sex dies septemque 
noctes ea clade saevitum est ad monumentorum 
bustorumque deversoria? plebe compulsa. Tune 
praeter immensum numerum insularum domus pris- 
corum ducum  arserunt hostilibus adhuc spoliis 
adornatae deorumque aedes ab regibus ac deinde 
Punicis et Gallicis bellis votae dedicataeque, et 


! [sthmii, IP E ; the greater number of the mas. have Sthimii. 
2 deversoria] diversoria, Q. 


a Such a salutation was usual; see Plin. Paneg. xxiii. . 

^ A line put by Dio, 58. 23, into the mouth of Tiberius. 
It is believed to be from the Bellerophon, a lost play of 
Euripides. ¢ But cf. Tac. Ann. 15. 38. 

4 Insulae here refers to blocks of houses, or tenements, in 


154 


| 


NERO 


command of the armies to the Roman knights and to 
his freedmen. Certain it is that neither on beginning 
a journey nor on returning did he kiss any member 4 
or even return his greeting ; and at the formal opening 
of the work at the Isthmus the prayer which he 
uttered in a loud voice before a great throng was, 
that the event might result favourably “for himself 
and the people of Rome," thus suppressing any 
mention of the senate. 

XXXVIII. But he showed no greater mercy 
to the people or the walls of his capital. When 
someone in a general conversation said : 


* When I am dead, be earth consumed by fire," ^ 


he rejoined * Nay, rather while I live," and his 
action was wholly in accord. For under cover 
of displeasure at the ugliness of the old buildings 
and the narrow, crooked streets, he set fire to 
the city? so openly that several ex-consuls did not 
venture to lay hands on his chamberlains although 
they caught them on their estates with tow and fire- 
brands, while some granaries near the Golden 
House, whose room he particularly desired, were de- 
molished by engines of war and then set on fire, 
because their walls were of stone. For six days and 
seven nights destruction raged, while the people 
were driven for shelter to monuments and tom! 

At that time, besides an immense number oti 
dwellings,? the houses of leaders of old were burned, 
still adorned with trophies of victory, and the 
temples of the gods vowed and dedicated by the 
kings and later in the Punic and Gallic wars, and 


which rooms were rented to the poorer classes; domus to 
detached houses or mansions. 


I55 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


quidquid visendum atque memorabile ex antiquitate 
duraverat. Hoc incendium e turre Maecenatiana 
prospectans laetusque “flammae,” ut aiebat, “ pul- 
chritudine" Halosin Ilii in illo suo scaenico habitu 
decantavit. Ac ne non hinc quoque quantum 
posset praedae et manubiarum invaderet, pollicitus 
cadaverum et ruderum gratuitam egestionem nemini 
ad reliquias rerum suarum adire permisit; conla- 
tionibusque non receptis modo verum et efflagitatis 
provincias privatorumque census prope exhausit. 

XXXIX. Accesserunt tantis ex principe malis 
probrisque quaedam et fortuita: pestilentia unius 
autumni, quo triginta funerum milia in rationem 
Libitinae venerunt; clades Britannica, qua duo 
praecipua oppida magna civium sociorumque caede 
direpta sunt; ignominia ad Orientem legionibus in 
Armenia sub iugum missis aegreque Syria retenta. 
Mirum et vel praecipue notabile inter haec fuerit 
nihil eum patientius quam maledicta et convicia 
hominum tulisse, neque in ullos leniorem quam qui 
se dictis aut carminibus lacessissent exstitisse. Multa 
Graece Latineque proscripta aut vulgata sunt, sicut 
illa : 

* Népov ’Opéotys 'AAkpéov uxrpokróvos-" 


^ A tower connected with the house and gardens of 
Maecenas on the Esquiline ; see Hor. Odes, 3. 29. 10, molem 
propinquam nubibus arduis. It was probably connected with 
the Palatine by the domus transitoria ; see chap. xxi. 2 and 
Tac. Ann. 15. 39, whose account, as well as that of Dio, 
62. 18, differs from that of Suetonius. 

è Probably a composition of his own; cf. Juv. 8. 22) 
and Vitell, xi. 2. 


156 


NERO 

whatever else interesting and noteworthy had 
survived from antiquity. Viewing the conflagration 
from the tower of Maecenas ^ and exulting, as he said, 
in * the beauty of the flames," he sang thé whole 
of the “Sack of llium,"^ in his regular stage 
costume. Furthermore, to gain from this calamity too 
all the spoil and booty possible, while promising the 
removal of the debris and dead bodies free of cost 
he allowed no one to approach the ruins of his 
own property ; and from the contributions which he 
not only received, but even demanded, he nearly 
bankrupted the provinces and exhausted the 
resources of individuals. 

XXXIX. To all the disasters and abuses thus caused 
by the prince there were added certain accidents of 
fortune ; a plague which in a single autumn entered 
thirty thousand deaths in the accounts of Libitina ; * 
a disaster in Britain, where two important towns were 
sacked? and great numbers of citizens and allies were 
butchered ; a shameful defeat in the Orient, in con- 
sequence of which the legions in Ármenia were sent 
under the yoke and Syria was all but lost. It is 
surprising and of special note that all this time 
he bore nothing with more patience than the 
curses and abuse of the people, and was particularly 
lenient towards those who assailed him with gibes 
and lampoons. Of these many were posted or 
circulated both in Greek and Latin, for example the 
following : 

* Nero, Orestes, Alemeon their mothers slew." 

* Venus Libitina, in whose temple funeral outfits and a 

register of deaths were kept. ; cf. Hor. Serm. ii. 6, 19. 


4 Camulodunum (Meldon) and Verülanium (St. Albans); 
according to Xiphilinus (61. 1) 80,000 perished. 


157 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


* Nedyndov! Népov idiav pyrépa ámékrewe." 


Quis negat Aeneae magna de stirpe Neronem ? 
Sustulit hic matrem, sustulit ille patrem. 


Dum tendit citharam noster, dum cornua 
Parthus, 
Noster erit Paean, ille Hecatebeletes. 


Roma domus fiet; Veios migrate, Quirites, 
Si non et Veios occupat ista domus. 


Sed neque auctores requisiit et quosdam per indicem 
delatos ad senatum adfici graviore poena prohibuit. 
Transeuntem eum Isidorus Cynicus in publico clara 
voce corripuerat, quod Naupli mala bene cantitaret, 
sua bona male disponeret; et Datus Atellanarum 
histrio in cantico quodam 


byiawe Tárep, vyiawe pHrep 
ita demonstraverat, ut bibentem natantemque faceret, 
exitum scilicet Claudi Agrippinaeque significans, et 
in novissima clausula 


Orcus vobis ducit pedes 


senatum gestu notarat.? Histrionem et philosophum 
Nero nihil amplius quam urbe Italiaque summovit, 


1 yeóynooy, 2; see Bücheler, Rh. Mus. 61, 308 f.; vedvup- 
pov, s. 2 notarat, Oudendorp ; notaret, 2. 


a See the reference to the Rh. Mus, in the textual note. 
The numerical value of the Greek letters in Nero’s name 
(1005) is the same as that of the rest of the sentence ; hence 
we have an equation, Nero=the slayer of one’s own mother. 

> Referring to Nero’s design mentioned in chap. xxxvii. 3. 


158 


-- mA a 


f 
' 
| 
| 


NERO 


« A calculation new. Nero his mother slew.” 4 


* Who can deny the descent from Aeneas’ great line 
of our Nero? 
One his mother took off, the other one took off 
his sire." 


* While our ruler his lyre doth twang and the Par- 
thian his bowstring, 
Paean-singer our prince shall be, and Far-darter 


our foe.” 
* Rome is becoming one house ; off with you to Veii, 
Quirites ! 
If that house does not soon seize upon Veii as 
well." 


. He made no effort, however, to find the authors; in 
fact, when some of them were reported to the 
senate by an informer, he forbade their being very 
severely punished, As he was passing along a 
public street, the Cynic Isidorus loudly taunted him, 
“because he was a good singer of the ills of 
Nauplius, but made ill use of his own goods." 
Datus also, an actor of Atellan farces, in a song 
beginning : 

* Farewell to thee, father ; farewell to thee, mother," 


represented drinking and swimming in pantomime, 
referring of course to the death of Claudius and 


Agrippina ; and in the final tag, 
* Orcus guides your steps,” 


he indicated the senate by a gesture? Nero 
contented himself with banishing the actor and the 
philosopher from the city, either because he was im- 


159 


2) 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


vel contemptu omnis infamiae vel ne fatendo dolorem 
irritaret ingenia. 

XL. Talem principem paulo minus quattuordecim 
annos perpessus terrarum orbis tandem destituit, 
initium facientibus Gallis duce Iulio Vindice, qui 
tum eam provinciam pro praetore optinebat. 

Praedictum a mathematicis Neroni olim erat fore 
ut quandoque destitueretur; unde illa vox eius cele- 
berrima : Tò réxvtov âs Suatpéeper,t quo maiore scilicet 
venia meditaretur citharoedicam artem, principi sibi 
gratam, privato necessariam. Spoponderant tamen 
quidam destituto Orientis dominationem, nonnulli 
nominatim regnum: Hierosolymorum, plures omnis 
pristinae fortunae restitutionem. Cui spei pronior, 
Britannia Armeniaque amissa ac rursus utraque 
recepta, defunctum se fatalibus malis existimabat. 
Ut vero consulto Delphis Apolline septuagensimum 
ac tertium annum cavendum sibi audivit, quasi eo 
demum obiturus, ac nihil coniectans de aetate 
Galbae, tanta fiducia non modo senectam sed etiam 
perpetuam singularemque concepit felicitatem, ut 
amissis naufragio pretiosissimis rebus non dubitaverit 
inter suos dicere pisces eas sibi relaturos. 

Neapoli de motu Galliarum cognovit die ipso quo 


matrem occiderat, adeoque lente ac secure tulit ut 


gaudentis etiam suspicionem praeberet tamquam occa- 


! Sarperpe, MLS; the rest of the mss. have diarpeper; 
61a0pé ei, T'urnebus from Dio, 63. 27. 


^ If the text is right, the remark must be of a general 
nature (‘‘us” = mankind). Dio, 63. 27, who reads 5:a6péyei, 
says that Nero when planning to kill the senators, burn 
Rome, and sail to Alexandria, said : ** Even though we be 
driven from our empire, yet this little artistic gift of ours 
shall support us there”; i.e. at Alexandria. 


160 


ee ee ee b ee — —À 


NERO 


pervious to all insults, or to avoid sharpening men’s 
wits by showing his vexation. 

XL. After the world had put up with such a ruler 
for nearly fourteen years, it at last cast him off, and 
the Gauls took the first step under the lead of Julius 
Vindex, who at that time governed their province as 
propraetor. 

Astrologers had predicted to Nero that he would 
one day be repudiated, which was the occasion 
of that well known saying of his: * A humble art 
affords us daily bread," * doubtless uttered to justify 
him in practising the art of lyre-playing, as an 
amusement while emperor, but a necessity for 
a private citizen. Some of them, however, had 
promised him the rule of the East, when he was 
cast off, a few expressly naming the sovereignty of 
Jerusalem, and several the restitution of all his 
former fortunes. Inclining rather to this last hope, 
after losing Armenia and Britain and recovering 
both, he began to think that he had suffered the 
misfortunes which fate had in store. And after 
consulting the oracle at Delphi and being told 
that he must look out for the seventy-third year, 
assuming that he would die only at that period, and 
taking no account of Galba's years, he felt so con- 
fident not only of old age, but also of unbroken and 
unusual good fortune, that when he had lost some 
articles of great value by shipwreck, he did not 
hesitate to say among his intimate friends that the 
fish would bring them back to him. 

He was at Naples when he learned of the uprising 
of the Gallic provinces, on the anniversary of his 
mother’s murder, and received the news with such 
calmness and indifference that he incurred the 


161 
VOL. II. M 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


sione nata spoliandarum iure belli opulentissimarum 
provinciarum ; statimque in gymnasium progressus 
certantis athletas effusissimo studio spectavit. Cenae 
quoque tempore interpellatus tumultuosioribus litteris 
hactenus excanduit, ut malum iis qui descissent mina- 
retur. Denique per octo continuos dies non re- 
scribere cuiquam, non mandare quid aut praecipere 
conatus rem silentio obliteravit. 

XLI. Edictis tandem Vindicis contumeliosis et 
frequentibus permotus senatum epistula in ultionem 
sui reique publicae adhortatus est, excusato languore 
faucium, propter quem non adesset. Nihil autem 
aeque doluit, quam ut malum se citharoedum in- 
crepitum ac pro Nerone Ahenobarbum appellatum ; 
et nomen quidem gentile, quod sibi per contumeliam 
exprobraretur, resumpturum se professus est deposito 
adoptivo, cetera convicia, ut falsa, non alio argumento 
refellebat, quam quod etiam inscitia sibi tanto opere 
elaboratae ! perfectaeque a se artis obiceretur, singulos 
subinde rogitans, nossentne quemquam  praestan- 
tiorem. Sed urgentibus aliis super alios nuntiis 
Romam praetrepidus rediit; leviterque modo in 
itinere frivolo auspicio mente recreata, cum adnotasset 
insculptum monumento militem Gallum ab equite R. 
oppressum trahi crinibus, ad eam speciem exsiluit 


! elaboratae, Bernegger ; laboratae, mas. 


^ Cf. chap. vii. 1. 


162 


NERO 


suspicion of actually rejoicing in it, because it gave 
him an excuse for pillaging those wealthy provinces 
according to the laws of war And he at once pro- 
ceeded to the gymnasium, where he watched the 
contests of the athletes with rapt interest. At 
dinner too when interrupted by a more disturbing 
letter, he fired up only so far as to threaten vengeance 
on the rebels. In short for eight whole days making 
no attempt to write a reply to anyone, none to give 
any commission or command, he blotted out the 
affair with silence. 

XLI. At last he was driven by numerous insulting 
edicts of Vindex, to urge the senate in a letter 
to avenge him and the state, alleging a throat trouble 
as his excuse for not appearing in person. Yet 
there was nothing which he so much resented as the 
taunt that he was a wretched lyre-player and that he 
was addressed as Ahenobarbus instead of Nero. 
With regard to his family name, which was cast in 
his teeth as an insult, he declared that he would 
resume it and give up that of his adoption. He used 
no other arguments to show the falsity of the rest 
of the reproaches than that he was actually taunted 
with being unskilled in an art to which he had de- 
voted so much attention and in which he had so per- 
fected himself, and he asked various individuals from 
time to time whether they knew of any artist who 
was his superior. Finally, beset by message after mes- 
sage, he returned to Rome in a panic; but on the 
way, when but slightly encouraged by an insignifi- 
cant omen, for he noticed a monument on which 
was sculptured the overthrow of a Gallic soldier by a 
Roman horseman, who was dragging him along by 
the hair, he leaped for joy at the sight and lifted up 

163 
M 2 


-THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


gaudio caelumque adoravit. Ac ne tunc quidem 


aut senatu aut populo coram appellato quosdam e 
primoribus viris domum evocavit transactaque raptim 
consultatione reliquam diei partem per organa 
hydraulica! novi et ignoti generis circumduxit, 
ostendensque singula, de ratione ac difficultate 
cuiusque disserens, iam se etiam prolaturum omnia 
in theatrum affirmavit, si per Vindicem liceat. 

XLII. Postquam deinde etiam Galbam et Hispanias 
descivisse cognovit, conlapsus animoque male facto 
diu sine voce et prope intermortuus? iacuit, utque 
resipiit, veste discissa, capite converberato, actum de 
se pronuntiavit consolantique nutriculae et aliis quo- 
que iam principibus similia accidisse memoranti, se 
vero praeter ceteros inaudita et incognita pati re- 
spondit, qui summum imperium vivusamitteret. Nec 
eo setius quicquam ex consuetudine luxus atque 
desidiae omisit vel inminuit; quin immo, cum 
prosperi quiddam ex provinciis nuntiatum esset, 
super abundantissimam cenam iocularia in defectionis 
duces carmina lasciveque modulata, quae vulgo 
notuerunt, etiam gesticulatus est; ac spectaculis 
theatri clam inlatus cuidam scaenico placenti nuntium 
misit abuti eum occupationibus suis. 

XLIII. Initio statim tumultus multa et inmania, 
verum non abhorrentia a natura sua creditur de- 
stinasse ; successores percussoresque summittere exer- 


1 ydraulica, mas. ? intermortuus] intermortuos, M. 


a This and the following sentences show Nero’s utter 
failure to realize the real gravity of the situation and his 
fluctuation between panic fear and fatuous confidence. 

^ Implying that Nero would have been the centre of 
attraction, if he were not otherwise engaged. 


164 


-— V^ 


NERO 


his hands to heaven. Not even on his arrival did he 
personally address the senate or people, but called 
some of the leading men to his house and after a 
hasty consultation spent the rest of the day in 
exhibiting some water-organs of a new and hitherto 
unknown form, explaining their several features and 
lecturing on the theory and complexity of each of 
them; and he even declared that he would pre- 
sently produce them all in the theatre “with the 
kind permission of Vindex." 

XLII. Thereafter, having learned that Galba also 
and the Spanish provinces had revolted, he fainted 
and lay for a long time insensible, without a word 
and all but dead. When he came to himself, he 
rent his robe and beat his brow, declaring that it 
was all over with him ; and when his old nurse tried 
to comfort him by reminding him that similar evils 
had befallen other princes before him, he declared 
that unlike all others he was suffering the unheard 
of and unparalleled fate of losing the supreme 
power while he still lived. Nevertheless he did not 
abandon or amend his slothful and luxurious habits ; 
on the contrary, whenever any good news came from 
the provinces, he not only gave lavish feasts, but 
even ridiculed the leaders of the revolt in verses set 
to wanton music, which have since become public, 
and accompanied them with gestures; then secretly 
entering the audience room of the theatre, he sent 
word to an actor who was making a hit that he was 
taking advantage of the emperor's busy days." 

XLIII. At the very beginning of the revolt it is 
believed that he formed many plans of monstrous 
wickedness, but in no way inconsistent with his 
character: to depose and assassinate the com- 


165 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


citus et provincias regentibus, quasi conspiratis idem- 
que et unum sentientibus ; quidquid ubique exsulum, 
quidquid in urbe hominum Gallicanorum esset 
contrucidare, illos ne desciscentibus adgregarentur, 
hos ut conscios popularium suorum atque fautores; 
Gallias exercitibus diripiendas permittere; senatum 
universum veneno per convivia necare; urbem incen- 
dere feris in populum immissis, quo difficilius 
defenderentur. Sed absterritus non tam paenitentia 
quam perficiendi desperatione credensque expedi- 
tionem necessariam, consules ante tempus privavit 
honore atque in utriusque locum solus iniit consula- 
tum, quasi fatale esset non posse Gallias debellari 
nisi a! consule. Ac susceptis fascibus cum post epulas 
triclinio  digrederetur, innixus umeris familiarium 
affirmavit, simul ac primum provinciam attigisset, 
inermem se in conspectum exercituum proditurum 
nec quicquam aliud quam fleturum, revocatisque ad 
paenitentiam defectoribus insequenti die laetum 
inter laetos cantaturum epinicia, quae iam nunc sibi 
componi oporteret. 

XLIV. In praeparanda expeditione primam curam 
habuit deligendi vehicula portandis scaenicis organis 
concubinasque, quas secum educeret, tondendi ad 
virilem modum et securibus peltisque Amazonicis 
instruendi. Mox tribus urbanas ad sacramentum 
citavit ac nullo idoneo respondente certum dominis 


la] ase, ç. 


^ Since Nero commanded the army, the consul in question 
must be himself ; hence the se of ¢ is unnecessary. 


166 


—MÁ—— Å a —— eel Ra n ED o RR 


—  — —BÀ eee, —Ó—ü 2 EQ —— e s = 


NERO 


manders of the armies and the governors of the |. .. 
vinces, on the ground that they were all united in a 
conspiracy against him; to massacre all the exiles 
everywhere and all men of Gallic birth in the city : the 
former, to prevent them from joining the rebels; the 
latter, as sharing and abetting the designs of their 
countrymen; to turn over the Gallic provinces to 
his armies to ravage; to poison the entire senate at 
banquets; to set fire to the city, first letting the wild 
beasts loose, that it might be harder for the people 
to protect themselves. But he was deterred from 
these designs, not so much by any compunction, 
as because he despaired of being able to carry them 
out, and feeling obliged to take the field, he deposed 
the consuls before the end of their term and assumed 
the office alone in place of both of them, alleging 
that it was fated that the Gallic provinces could not 
be subdued except by a consul.* Having assumed 
the fasces, he declared as he was leaving the dining- 
room after a banquet, leaning on the shoulders of his 
comrades, that immediately on setting foot in the 
province he would go before the soldiers unarmed 
and do nothing but weep ; and having thus led the 
rebels to change their purpose, he would next day 
rejoice among his rejoicing subjects and sing paeans 
of victory, which he ought at that very moment to 
be composing. 

XLIV. In preparing for his campaign his first care 
was to select wagons to carry his theatrical in- 
struments, to have the hair of his concubines, 
whom he planned to take with him, trimmed man- 
fashion, and to equip them with Amazonian axes and 
shields. Next he summoned the city tribes to enlist, 
and when no eligible person responded, he levied on 


167 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


servorum numerum indixit ; nec nisi ex tota cuius- 
que familia probatissimos, ne dispensatoribus quidem 
aut amanuensibus exceptis, recepit. Partem etiam 
census omnes ordines conferre iussit et insuper 
inquilinos privatarum aedium atque insularum pen- 
sionem annuam repraesentare fisco; exegitque 
ingenti fastidio et acerbitate nummum asperum, 
argentum pustulatum, aurum ad obrussam, ut 
plerique omnem collationem palam recusarent, con- 
sensu flagitantes a delatoribus potius revocanda 
praemia quaecumque cepissent. 7 

XLV. Ex annonae quoque caritate lucranti! ad- 
crevit invidia; nam et forte accidit, ut in publica 
fame Alexandrina navis nuntiaretur pulverem lucta- 
toribus aulicis advexisse. 

Quare omnium in se odio incitato nihil contume- 
liarum defuit quin subiret. Statuae eius a vertice 
cirrus appositus est cum inscriptione Graeca ; nunc 
demum agona esse, et traderet tandem. Alterius 
collo ácxós praeligatus? simulque titulus: “Ego egi 
quod potui. Sed tu cullum * meruisti." Ascriptum 
et columnis, etiam Gallos eum cantando excitasse. 

1 lucranti, Oudendorp ; lucrantia, Q; lucrantium, c. 

2 &ágkbs praeligatus, Howard (Harv. Stud. vii. 208); ascopa 
deligata, mss. 

3 ego egi quod potui, Howard; ego quid potui, Q. 

4 cullum, Howard; culleum, Q. 

a Instead of to their landlords. These people had no 
rating on the census list and their contribution took this form. 

> That is, tested by fire; see Pliny, N. H. 33. 59. 

¢ By using, for his own purposes, ships which would other- 


wise have been loaded with grain; but the text and the 
meaning are uncertain. 


168 


NERO 


their masters a stated number of slaves, accepting 
only the choicest from each household and not even 
exempting paymasters and secretaries. He also re- 
quired all classes to contribute a part of their 
incomes, and all tenants of private houses and 
apartments to pay a year's rent at once to the privy 
purse.^ With great fastidiousness and rigour he 
demanded newly. minted coin, refined silver, and 
pure gold,’ so that many openly refused to make 
any contribution at all, unanimously demanding that 
he should rather compel the informers to give up 
whatever rewards had been paid them. 

XLV. The bitter feeling against him was increased 
because he also turned the high cost of grain to his 
profit ; ^ for indeed, it so fell out that while the people 
were suffering from hunger it was reported that a 
ship had arrived from Alexandria, bringing sand for 
the court wrestlers. 

When he had thus aroused the hatred of all, there 
was no form of insult to which he was not subjected. 
A curl? was placed on the head of his statue with 
the inscription in Greek: “Now there is a real 
contest^ and you must at last surrender." To the 
neck of another statue a sack was tied and with it 
the words: “I have: done what I could, but you have 
earned the sack."/ People wrote on the columns 
that he had stirred up even the Gauls? by his 


4 Doubtless an allusion to the long hair which he wore 
during his Greek trip ; see chap. li. 

* In contrast with those of the stage. 

J The one in which parricides were put ; see Aug. xxxiii. 1. 
But the text and the meaning are uncertain. 

7 There is obviously a pun on Galli, ** Gauls," and galli, 
* cocks," and on cantare in the sense of ‘‘sing” and of 
** crow.” 


169 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


Iam noctibus iurgia cum servis plerique simulantes 
crebro Vindicem poscebant. 

XLVI. Terrebatur ad hoc evidentibus portentis 
somniorum et auspiciorum et ominum, cum 
veteribus tum novis. Numquam antea somniare 
solitus occisa demum matre vidit per quietem navem 
sibi regenti extortum gubernaculum trahique se ab 
Octavia uxore in artissimas tenebras et modo pinna- 
tarum formicarum multitudine oppleri, modo a 
simulacris gentium ad Pompei theatrum dedicatarum 
circumiri arcerique progressu; - asturconem, quo 
maxime laetabatur, posteriore corporis parte in 
simiae speciem transfiguratum ac tantum capite 
integro hinnitus edere canoros. De Mausoleo, 
sponte foribus patefactis, exaudita vox est nomine 
eum cientis. Kal. Ian. exornati Lares in ipso sacri- 
ficii apparatu conciderunt ; auspicanti Sporus anulum 
muneri optulit, cuius gemmae scalptura ! erat Proser- 
pinae raptus; votorum nuncupatione, magna iam 
ordinum frequentia, vix repertae Capitolii claves. 
Cum ex oratione eius, qua in Vindicem perorabat, 
recitaretur in senatu daturos poenas sceleratos ac 
brevi dignum exitum facturos, conclamatum est ab 
universis: “Tu facies, Auguste." Observatum 
etiam fuerat novissimam fabulam cantasse eum 


1 scalptura] sculptura, ^. 


^ Punning of course on Vindex, the leader of the revolt. 

b On the first of January, for the prosperity of the 
emperor and the State. 

* Of course used in a double sense. 


170 


Tw 


NERO 


singing. When night came on, many men pretended 
to be wrangling with their slaves and kept calling out 
for a defender.^ 

XLVI. In addition he was frightened by mar © * 
portents from dreams, auspices and omens, Le. ; o ' 
and new. Although he had never before been in the 
habit of dreaming, after he had killed his mother it 
seemed to him that he was steering a ship in his 
sleep and that the helm was wrenched from his 
hands; that he was dragged by his wife Octavia 
into thickest darkness, and that he was now covered 
with a swarm of winged ants, and now was surrounded 
by the statues of the nations which had been 
dedicated in Pompey's theatre and stopped in his 
tracks. A Spanish steed of which he was very fond 
was changed into the form of an ape in the hinder 
parts of its body, and its head, which alone remained 
unaltered, gave forth tuneful neighs. The doors of the 
Mausoleum flew open of their own accord, and a voice 
was heard from within summoning him by name. 
After the Lares had been adorned on the Kalends of 
January, they fell to the ground in the midst of the 
preparations for the sacrifice. As he was taking the 
auspices, Sporus made him a present of a ring with a 
stone on which was engraved the rape of Proserpina. 
When the vows were to be taken? and a great throng 
of all classes had assembled, the keys of the Capitol 
could not be found for a long time. When a speech 
of his in which he assailed Vindex was being read in 
the senate, at the words “the wretches will suffer 
punishment and will shortly meet the end which they 
deserve," all who were present cried out with one 
voice: * You will do it, Augustus." ^ It also had not 
failed of notice that the last piece which he sang in 


171 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


publice Oedipodem exsulem atque in hoe desisse! 
versu : 
——. av&y pw dvwye? cvyyapos, pyTnp, TATHD. 

XLVII. Nuntiata interim etiam ceterorum exer- 
cituum defectione litteras prandenti sibi redditas 
concerpsit, mensam subvertit, duos scyphos gratissimi 
usus, quos Homerios a caelatura carminum Homeri 
vocabat, solo inlisit ac sumpto a Lucusta veneno et 
in auream pyxidem condito transiit in hortos Ser- 
vilianos, ubi praemissis libertorum fidissimis Ostiam 
ad classem praeparandam tribunos centurionesque 
praetorii de fugae societate temptavit. Sed partim 
tergiversantibus, partim aperte detrectantibus, uno 
vero etiam proclamante : 


* Usque adeone mori miserum est ?”’ 


varie agitavit, Parthosne an Galbam supplex peteret, 
an atratus prodiret in publicum proque rostris quanta 
maxima posset miseratione veniam praeteritorum 
precaretur, ac ni flexisset animos, vel Aegypti prae- 
fecturam concedi sibi oraret. Inventus est postea in 
scrinio eius hac de re sermo formatus ; sed deterritum 
putant, ne prius quam in Forum perveniret dis- 
cerperetur. 

Sic cogitatione in posterum diem dilata ad mediam 
fere noctem excitatus, ut comperit stationem militum 


1 desisse, c; dedisse, MX (dixisse, P); finem dedisse, G; 
decidisse, T. 2 w kvæye) pevwye, 2. 


^ Pliny, N. H. 37. 29, tells us that the cups were of crystal. 
è Verg. Aen. 12. 646. 


172 


NERO 


public was “ Oedipus in Exile,” and that he ended 
with the line: 


«< Wife, father, mother drive me to my death." 


XLVII. When meanwhile word came that the other 
armies had revolted, he tore to pieces the dispatches 
which were handed to him as he was dining, tipped 
over the table, and dashed to the ground two favourite 
drinking cups, which he called * Homeric," because 
_ they were carved with scenes from Homer's poems.^ 

Then taking some poison from Locusta and putting 
it into a golden box, he crossed over into the 
Servilian gardens, where he tried to induce the 
tribunes and centurions of the Guard to accompany 
him in his flight, first sending his most trustworthy 
freedmen to Ostia, to get a fleet ready. But when 
some gave evasive answers and some openly refused, 
one even cried : 


‘“< Is it so dreadful a thing then to die ? ” ^ 


Whereupon he turned over various plans in his mind, 
whether to go as a suppliant to the Parthians or 
Galba, or to appear to the people on the rostra, 
dressed in black, and beg as pathetically as he could 
for pardon for his past offences ; and if he could not 
soften their hearts, to entreat them at least to allow 
him the prefecture of Egypt. Afterwards a speech 
composed for this purpose was found in his writing 
desk ; but it is thought that he did not dare to deliver 
it for fear of being torn to pieces before he could 
reach the Forum. 

Having therefore put off further consideration to 
the following day, he awoke about midnight and 
finding that the guard of soldiers had left, he sprang 


173 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


recessisse, prosiluit e lecto misitque circum amicos, 
et quia nihil a quoquam renuntiabatur, ipse cum 
paucis hospitia singulorum adiit. Verum clausis 
omnium foribus, respondente nullo, in cubiculum 
rediit, unde iam et custodes diffugerant, direptis 
etiam stragulis, amota et pyxide veneni; ac statim 
Spiculum murmillonem vel quemlibet alium per- 
cussorem, cuius manu periret, requisiit et nemine 
reperto: “Ergo ego," inquit, “nec amicum habeo 
nec inimicum?” procurritque, quasi praecipitaturus 
se in Tiberim. 

XLVIII. Sed revocato rursus impetu aliquid 
secretioris latebrae ad colligendum animum de- 
sideravit, et offerente Phaonte liberto suburbanum 
suum inter Salariam et Nomentanam viam circa 
quartum miliarium, ut erat nudo pede atque tuni- 
catus, paenulam obsoleti coloris superinduit adoperto- 
que capite et ante faciem optento sudario equum 
inscendit, quattuor solis comitantibus, inter quos et 
Sporus erat. Statimque tremore terrae et fulgure 
adverso pavefactus audiit e proximis castris clamorem 
militum et sibi adversa et Galbae prospera ominan- 
tium, etiam ex obviis viatoribus quendam dicentem: 
“Hi Neronem persequuntur," alium sciscitantem: 
* Ecquid! in urbe novi de Nerone?" Equo autem 
ex odore abiecti in via cadaveris consternato, detecta 
facie agnitus est a quodam missicio praetoriano et 
salutatus. Ut ad deverticulum ventum est, dimissis 
equis inter fruticeta ac vepres per harundineti 


! ecquid, second Roman edition; etquid, Q. 


^ In the Palace. > See chap. xxx. 2. 
* The word percussor implies experience in dealing death. 
Nero wished to be killed swiftly and painlessly. 


174 


————————— —— Alli n. — 


NERO 


from his bed and sent for all his friends. Since no 
reply came back from anyone, he went himself to 
their rooms with a few followers. But finding that 
all the doors were closed and that no one replied to 
him, he returned to his own chamber, from which now 
the very caretakers had fled, taking with them even 
the bed-clothing and the box of poison. Then he at 
once called for the gladiator Spiculus® or any other 
adept © at whose hand he might find death, and when 
no one appeared, he cried * Have I then neither 
friend nor foe? " and ran out as if to throw himself 
into the Tiber. 

XLVIII. Changing his purpose again, he sought for 
some retired place, where he could hide and collect 
-his thoughts; and when his freedmen Phaon offered 
his villa in the suburbs between the Via Nomentana 
and the Via Salaria near the fourth milestone, just as 
he was, barefooted and in his tunic, he put on a 
faded cloak, covered his head, and holding a hand- 
kerchief before his face, mounted a horse with only 
four attendants, one of whom was Sporus. At once 
he was startled by a shock of earthquake and a flash 
of lightning full in his face, and he heard the shouts 
of the soldiers from the camp hard by, as they 
prophesied destruction for him and success for Galba. 
He also heard one of the wayfarers whom he met say : 
*'l'hese men are after Nero," and another ask : ** Is 
there anything new in the city about Nero?" Then 
his horse took fright at the smell of a corpse which 
had been thrown out into the road, his face was 
exposed, and a retired soldier of the Guard recognised 
him and saluted him. When they came to a by-path 
leading to the villa, they turned the horses loose and 
he made his way amid bushes and brambles and along 


175 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


semitam aegre nec nisi strata sub pedibus veste ad 
aversum ! villae parietem evasit. Ibi hortante eodem 
Phaonte, ut interim in specum egestae harenae con- 
cederet, negavit se vivum sub terram iturum, ac parum- 
per commoratus, dum clandestinus ad villam introitus 
pararetur, aquam ex subiecta lacuna poturus manu 
hausit et: * Haec est," inquit, * Neronis decocta." 
Dein divolsa sentibus paenula traiectos surculos rasit, 
atque ita quadripes per angustias effossae cavernae 
receptus in proximam cellam decubuit super lectum 
modica culcita, vetere pallio strato, instructum ; 
fameque et iterum siti interpellante panem quidem 
sordidum oblatum aspernatus est, aquae autem tepidae 
aliquantum bibit. 

XLIX. Tunc uno quoque hinc inde instante ut 
quam primum se impendentibus contumeliis eriperet, 
scrobem coram fieri imperavit dimensus ad corporis 
sui modulum, componique simul, si qua invenirentur, 
frusta marmoris et aquam simul ac ligna conferri cu- 
rando mox cadaveri, flens ad singula atque identidem 
dictitans : * Qualis artifex pereo! " 

Inter moras perlatos a cursore Phaonti codicillos 
praeripuit legitque se hostem a senatu iudicatum et 
quaeri, ut puniatur more maiorum, interrogavitque 
quale id genus esset poenae; et cum comperisset 


1 aversum, J. F. Gronov ; adversum, 8. 


a Referring to a drink of his own contrivance, distilled 
water cooled in snow; cf. Pliny, N. H. 31. 40. 

> Cella implies a small room, for the use of slaves. 

* The water was for washing the corpse and the fire for 
burning it. 4 Cf. Claud. xxxiv. 1. 


176 


NERO 


a path through a thicket of reeds to the back wall of 
the house, with great difficulty and only when a robe 
was thrown down for him to walk on. Here the afore- 
said Phaon urged him to hide for a time in a pit, 
from which sand had been dug, but he declared 
that he would not go under ground while still 
alive, and after waiting for a while until a secret 
entrance into the villa could be made, he scooped 
up in his hand some water to drink from a 
pool close by, saying: “This is Nero's distilled 
water." * Then, as his cloak had been torn by the 
thorns, he pulled out the twigs which had pierced it, 
and crawling on all fours through a narrow passage 
that had been dug, he entered the villa and lay 
down in the first room ? he came to, on a couch with 
a common mattress, over which an old cloak had 
been thrown. Though suffering from hunger and 
renewed thirst, he refused some coarse bread which 
was offered him, but drank a little lukewarm water. 
XLIX. At last, while his companions one and all 
urged him to save himself as soon as possible from 
the indignities that threatened him, he bade them 
dig a grave in his presence, proportioned to the size - 
of his own person, collect any bits of níarble that 
could be found, and at the same time bring water 
and wood for presently disposing of his body." As 
each of these things was done, he wept and said again 
and again: “ What an artist the world is losing !”’ 
While he hesitated, a letter was brought to Phaon 
by one of his couriers. Nero snatching it from his 
hand read that he had been pronounced a public 
enemy by the senate, and that they were seeking 
him to punish him in the ancient fashion; and he 
asked what manner of punishment that was. When 


177 
VOL. II, N 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


nudi hominis cervicem inseri furcae, corpus virgis ad 
necem caedi, conterritus duos pugiones, quos secum 
extulerat, arripuit temptataque utriusque acie rursus 
condidit, causatus nondum adesse fatalem horam. Ac 
modo Sporum hortabatur ut lamentari ac plangere 
inciperet, modo orabat ut se aliquis ad mortem 
capessendam exemplo iuvaret; interdum segnitiem 
suam his verbis increpabat: “Vivo deformiter, 
turpiter—o$ -mpére Népwn, où mpére—vjoew det 
èv Tois Toroúrois—dye €yewpe aeavróv." lamque equites 
appropinquabant, quibus praeceptum erat ut vivum 
eum adtraherent. Quod ut sensit, trepidanter 
effatus : 


"Irrov p’ ökvróðwv apdi króros ovata Bade 


ferrum iugulo adegit iuvante Epaphrodito a libellis. 
Semianimisque adhuc irrumpenti centurioni et paenula 
ad vulnus adposita in auxilium se venisse simulanti 
non aliud respondit quam: * Sero," et: * Haec est 
fides." Atque in ea voce defecit, exstantibus rigenti- 
busque oculis usque ad horrorem formidinemque , 
visentium. Nihil prius aut magis a comitibus exegerat 
quam ne potestas cuiquam capitis sui fieret, sed ut 
quoquo modo totus cremaretur. Permisit hoc Icelus,! 
Galbae libertus, non multo ante vinculis exsolutus, in 
quae primo tumultu coniectus fuerat. 

L. Funeratus est impensa ducentorum milium, 


1 [celus, Politianus; hiceius, f. 


a Two pieces of wood, fastened together in the form of a 
: ^ Iliad. 10. 535. e Sce Domit. xiv. 4. 
4 See Galla, xiv. 9. 


178 


NERO 


he learned that the criminal was stripped, fastened : 
by the neck in a fork ^ and then beaten to death 
with rods, in mortal terror he seized two daggers 
which he had brought with him, and then, after 
trying the point of each, put them up again, pleading 
that the fated hour had not yet come. Now he would 
beg Sporus to begin to lament and wail, and now 
entreat someone to help him take his life by setting 
him the example; anon he reproached himself for 
his cowardice in such words as these: * To live is 
a scandal and shame—this does not become Nero, 
does not become him—one should be resolute at such 
times—come, rouse thyself!" And now the horse- 
men were at hand who had orders to take him off 
alive. When he heard them, he quavered : 


* Hark, now strikes on my ear the trampling of 
swift-footed coursers ! " ^ 


and drove a dagger into his throat, aided by 
Epaphroditus, his private secretary.^ He was all 
but dead when a centurion rushed in, and as he 
placed a cloak to the wound, pretending that he had 
come to aid him, Nero merely gasped : * Too late !” 
` and “ This is fidelity!" With these words he was 
gone, with eyes so set and starting from their sockets 
that all who saw him shuddered with horror. First 
and beyond all else he had forced from his com- 
panions a promise to let no one have his head, 
but to contrive in some way that he be buried 
umnmutilated. And this was granted by Icelus, 
Galba’s freedman,? who had shortly before been re- 
leased from the bondage to which he was consigned at 
the beginning of the revolt. 
L. He was buried at a cost of two hundred 


179 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


. stragulis albis auro intextis, quibus usus Kal. Ian. 
fuerat. Reliquias Egloge! et Alexandria nutrices 
cum Acte concubina gentili Domitiorum monimento 
condiderunt, quod prospicitur e campo Martio impo- 
situm colli? Hortulorum. In eo monimento solium 
porphyretici marmoris, superstante Lunensi ara, 
circumsaeptum est lapide Thasio. 

LI. Statura fuit prope iusta, corpore maculoso et 
fetido, subflavo capillo, vultu pulchro magis quam 
venusto, oculis caesis et hebetioribus, cervice obesa, 
ventre  proiecto, gracilimis cruribus, valitudine 
prospera; nam qui luxuriae immoderatissimae esset, 
ter omnino per quattuordecim annos languit, at- 
que ita ut neque vino neque consuetudine reliqua 
abstineret; circa cultum habitumque adeo pudendus, 
ut comam semper in gradus formatam peregrinatione 
Achaica etiam pone verticem summiserit ac pler- 
umque synthesinam indutus ligato circum collum 
sudario prodierit in publicum sine cinctu et discal- 
ciatus. | 

LII. Liberalis disciplinas omnis fere puer attigit. 
Sed a philosophia eum mater avertit monens impera- 
turo contrariam esse ; a cognitione veterum oratorum 
Seneca praeceptor, quo diutius in admiratione sui 
detineret. Itaque ad poeticam pronus carmina 


1 Egloge] Ecloge, Basle ed. of 1533. 
2 colli, Stephanus ; colle, c ; collo, Q. 


4 The modern Pincio. 


è The synthesina (sc. vestis), or synthesis, was a loose robe 
of bright-coloured silk, worn at dinner, during the Saturnalia, 


180 


NERO 


thousand sesterces and laid out in white robes embroi- 
dered with gold, which he had worn on the Kalends 
of January. His ashes were deposited by his nurses, 
Egloge and Alexandria, accompanied by his mistress 
Acte, in the family tomb of the Domitii on the summit 
of the Hill of Gardens, which is visible from the 
Campus Martius. In that monument his sarcophagus 
of porphyry, with an altar of Luna marble standing 
above it, is enclosed by a balustrade of Thasian stone. 

LI. He was about the average height, his body 
marked with spots and malodorous, his hair light 
blond, his features regular rather than attractive, 
his eyes blue and somewhat weak, his neck over 
thick, his belly prominent, and his legs very slender. 
His health was good, for though indulging in every 
kind of riotous excess, he was ill but three times in 
all during the fourteen years of his reign, and even 
then not enough to give up wine or any of his usual 
habits. He was utterly shameless in the care of his 
person and in his dress, always having his hair 
arranged in tiers of curls, and during the trip to 
Greece also letting it grow long and hang down 
behind ; and he often appeared in public in a dining- 
robe, with a handkerchief bound about his neck, 
ungirt and unshod.° 

LII. When a boy he took up almost all the 
liberal arts; but his mother turned him from philo- 
sophy, warning him that it was a drawback to one 
who was going to rule, while Seneca kept him from 
reading the early orators, to make his admiration for 
his teacher endure the longer. Turning therefore to 


and by women at other times. Nero’s is described by Dio, 
63. 13, as **a short, flowered tunic with a muslin collar.” 
e Probably meaning ** in slippers.” 


181 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


libenter ac sine labore composuit nec, ut quidam 
putant, aliena pro suis edidit. Venere in manus 
meas pugillares libellique cum quibusdam notissimis 
versibus ipsius chirographo scriptis, ut facile appar- 
eret non tralatos aut dictante aliquo exceptos, sed 
plane quasi a cogitante atque generante exaratos; 
ita multa et deleta et inducta et superscripta inerant. 
Habuit et pingendi fingendique! non mediocre 
studium. 

LIII. Maxime? autem popularitate efferebatur, om- 
nium aemulus, qui quoquo modo animum vulgi move- 
rent. Exiit opinio post scaenicas coronas proximo 
lustro descensurum eum ad Olympia? inter athletas ; 
nam et luctabatur assidue nec aliter certamina 
gymnica tota Graecia spectaverat quam brabeutarum 
more in stadio humi assidens ac, si qua paria longius 
recessissent, in medium manibus suis protrahens. 
Destinaverat etiam, quia Apollinem cantu, Solem 
aurigando aequiperare  existimaretur, imitari et 
Herculis facta; praeparatumque leonem aiunt, quem 
vel clava vel brachiorum nexibus in amphitheatri 
harena spectante populo nudus elideret. 

LIV. Sub exitu quidem ‘vitae palam voverat, si 
sibi incolumis status permansisset, proditurum se 
partae victoriae ludis etiam hydraulam et choraulam 
et utricularium ac novissimo die histrionem saltatu- 

! Q had maxime after fingendique, aZmisplaced emendation 


of the following maxima. 2 maxime, c ; maxima, Q. 
3 Olympia, c; Olympiam, 0. 


a See note on Aug. xcvii. 1. Here lustrum is applied to 
the five-year period of the Olympic games. 


182 


NERO 


poetry, he wrote verses with eagerness and without 
labour, and did not, as some think, publish the work 
of others as his own. I have had in my possession 
note-books and papers with some well-known verses 
of his, written with his own hand and in such wise 
that it was perfectly evident that they were not 
copied or taken down from dictation, but worked out 
exactly as one writes when thinking and creating; 
so many instances were there of words erased or 
struck through and written above the lines. He like- 
wise had no slight interest in painting and sculpture. 

LIII. But above all he was carried away by a craze 
for popularity and he was jealous of all who in any 
way stirred the feeling of the mob. It was the general 
belief that after his victories on the stage he would at 
the next lustrum * have competed with the athletes at 
Olympia ; for he practised wrestling constantly, and 
all over Greece he had always viewed the gymnastic 
contests after the fashion of the judges, sitting on the 
ground in the stadium ; and if any pairs of contest- 
ants withdrew too far from their positions, he would 
force them forward with his own hand. Since he 
was acclaimed as the equal of Apollo in music and of 
the Sun in driving a chariot, he had planned to 
emulate the exploits of Hercules as well; and they 
say that a lion had been specially trained for him 
to kill naked in the arena of the amphitheatre before 
al the people, with a club 'or by the clasp of his 
arms. 

LIV. Towards the end of his life, in fact, he had 
publicly vowed that if he retained his power, he 
would at the games in celebration of his victory give a 
performance on the water-organ, the flute, and the 
bagpipes, and that on the last day he would appear 


183 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


rumque Vergili Turnum. Et sunt qui tradant 
Paridem histrionem occisum ab eo quasi gravem 
adversarium. 

LV. Erat illi aeternitatis perpetuaeque famae 
cupido, sed inconsulta. Ideoque multis rebus ac 
locis vetere appellatione detracta novam indixit ex 
suo nomine, mensem quoque Aprilem Neroneum 
appellavit;  destinaverat et Romam  Neropolim 
nuncupare. 

LVI. Religionum usque quaque contemptor, prae- 
ter unius Deae Syriae, hanc mox ita sprevit ut urina 
contaminaret, alia superstitione captus, in qua sola 
pertinacissime haesit, siquidem imagunculam puel- 
larem, cum quasi remedium insidiarum a plebeio 
quodam et ignoto muneri accepisset, detecta 
confestim coniuratione pro summo numine trinisque 
in die sacrificiis colere perseveravit volebatque credi 
monitione eius futura praenoscere. Ante paucos 
quam periret menses attendit et extispicio nec 
umquam litavit. 

LVII. Obiit tricensimo et secundo aetatis anno, 
die quo quondam Octaviam interemerat, tantumque 
gaudium publice praebuit, ut plebs pilleata tota urbe 
discurreret. Et tamen non defuerunt qui per longum 
tempus vernis aestivisque floribus tumulum eius 
ornarent ac modo imagines praetextatas in rostris 
proferrent, modo edicta quasi viventis et brevi 
magno inimicorum malo reversuri. Quin etiam 
Vologaesus Parthorum rex missis ad senatum legatis 


^ Atargatis, the principal deity of Northern Syria, identi- 
fied with Magna Mater and Caelestis ; often mentioned in 
inscriptions and called by Apul. Metam. 8. 25, omnipotens et 
omniparens. ^ See note on Tib. iv. 2. 


184 


NERO 


as an actor and dance “Vergils Turnus." Some 
even assert that he put the actor Paris to death as a 
dangerous rival. 

LV. He had a longing for immortality and undying 
fame, though it was ill-regulated. With this in view 
he took their former appellations from many things 
and numerous places and gave them new ones from 
his own name. He also called the month of April 
Neroneus and was minded to name Rome Neropolis. 

LVI. He utterly despised all cults, with the sole 
exception of that of the Syrian Goddess,* and even 
acquired such a contempt for her that he made water 
on her image, after he was enamoured of another 
superstition, which was the only one to which he 
constantly clung. For he had received as a gift from 
some unknown man of the commons, as a protection 
against plots, a little image of a girl ; and since a con- 
spiracy at once came to light, he continued to venerate 
it as a powerful divinity and to offer three sacrifices to 
it every day, encouraging the belief that through its 
communication he had knowledge of the future. A 
few months before his death he did attend an 
inspection of victims, but could not get a favourable 
omen. 

LVII. He met his death in the thirty-second year 
of his age, on the anniversary of the murder of 
Octavia, and such was the public rejoicing that the 
people put on liberty-caps ? and ran about all over the 
city. Yet there were some who for a long time 
decorated his tomb with spring and summer flowers, 
and now produced his statues on the rostra in the 
fringed toga, and now his edicts, as if he were still 
alive and would shortly return and deal destruction 
to his enemies. Nay more, Vologaesus, king of the 


185 


68 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VI 


de instauranda societate hoc etiam magno opere 
oravit, ut Neronis memoria coleretur. Denique cum 
post viginti annos adulescente me exstitisset condi- 
cionis incertae qui se Neronem esse iactaret, tam 
favorabile nomen eius apud Parthos fuit, ut vehe- 
menter adiutus et vix redditus sit. 


186 


NERO 
|. Parthians, when he sent envoys to the senate to renew 
his alliance, earnestly begged this too, that honour 
be paid to the memory of Nero. In fact, twenty 
, years later, when I was a young man, a person of 
. obscure origin appeared, who gave out that he was 

Nero,’ and the name was still in such favour with the 
Parthians that they supported him vigorously and 
surrendered him with great reluctance. 


a In 88, Terentius Maximus by name; another pseudo- 
Nero had appeared in 70 ; see Tac. Hist. 2. 8. 


187 


BOOK VII 


GALBA, OTHO, AND VITELLIUS 


LIBER VII 


GALBA OTHO VITELLIUS 


GALBA 


I. PRocENiEs, Caesarum in Nerone defecit: quod 
futurum compluribus quidem signis, sed vel eviden- 
tissimis duobus apparuit. Liviae olim post Augusti 
statim nuptias Veientanum suum revisenti praeter- 
volans aquila gallinam albam ramulum lauri rostro 
tenentem, ita ut rapuerat, demisit in gremium ; cum- 
que nutriri alitem, pangi ramulum placuisset, tanta 
pullorum suboles provenit, ut hodieque ea villa ** ad 
Gallinas"" vocetur, tale vero lauretum, ut triumpha- 
turi Caesares inde laureas decerperent ; fuitque mos 
triumphantibus, alias confestim eodem loco pangere; 
et observatum est sub cuiusque obitum arborem ab 
ipso institutam elanguisse. Ergo novissimo Neronis 
anno et silva omnis exaruit radicitus, et quidquid ibi 
gallinarum erat interiit. Ac subinde tacta de caelo 
Caesarum aede capita omnibus simul statuis de- 
ciderunt, Augusti etiam sceptrum e manibus 
excussum est. 


.? Nero was the last who bore the name because of connec- 
tion with the family of Augustus ; after him it became a 


designation of rank. > «The Hen Roost.” 
i l'hose which they carried in their triumph, according to 
Pliny, N. H. 15. 136f. 4 No such temple is known. 


190 


—— s 


BOOK VII 


GALBA, OTHO, AND VITELLIUS 


GALBA 


I. Tue race of the Caesars ended with Nero.* That 


this would be so was shown by many portents and 


especially by two very significant ones. Years before, 
as Livia was returning to her estate near Veii, imme- 
diately after her marriage with Augustus, an eagle 
which flew by dropped into her lap a white hen, 
holding in its beak a sprig of laurel, just as the 

le had carried it off. Livia resolved to rear the 
fowl and plant the sprig, whereupon such a great 
brood of chickens was hatched that to this day the 
villa is called Ad Gallinas and such a grove of 
laurel sprang up, that the Caesars gathered their 
laurels from it when they were going to celebrate 
triumphs. Moreover it was the habit of those who 
triumphed to plant other branches ° at once in that 
same place, and it was observed that just before the 
death of each of them the tree which he had planted 
withered. Now in Nero's last year the whole grove 
died from the root up, as well as all the hens. 
Furthermore, when shortly afterwards the temple of 
the Caesars 4 was struck by lightning, the heads fell 
from all the statues at the same time, and his sceptre, 
too, was dashed from the hand of Augustus. 


I9I 


88 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


II. Neroni Galba successit nullo gradu contingens 
Caesarum domum, sed haud dubie nobilissimus 
magnaque et vetere prosapia, ut qui statuarum titulis 
pronepotem se Quinti Catuli Capitolini semper 
ascripserit, imperator vero etiam stemma in atrio 
proposuerit, quo paternam originem ad Iovem, 
maternam ad Pasiphaam Minonis uxorem referret. 

III. Imagines et elogia universi generis exsequi 
longum est, familiae breviter attingam. Qui primus 
Sulpiciorum cognomen Galbae tulit cur aut unde 
traxerit, ambigitur. Quidam putant, quod oppidum 
Hispaniae frustra diu oppugnatum inlitis demum 
galbano facibus succenderit; alii, quod in diuturna 
valitudine galbeo, id est remediis lana involutis, 
assidue uteretur; nonnulli, quod praepinguis fuerit 
visus, quem galbam Galli vocent; vel contra, quod 
tam exilis, quam sunt animalia quae in aesculis 
nascuntur appellanturque galbae. 

Familiam illustravit Servius Galba consularis, tem- 
porum suorum vel! eloquentissimus, quem tradunt 
Hispaniam ex praetura optinentem, triginta Lusitan- 
orum milibus perfidia trucidatis, Viriatini belli causam 
exstitisse. Eius nepos ob repulsam consulatus in- 
fensus Iulio Caesari, cuius legatus in Gallia fuerat, con- 


1 vel, Bentley ; et, mss. except T}, which omits the word. 


^ No existing inscription confirms this statement. 

> That is, of those of the Sulpicii who bore the surname 
Galba. 

* The gum of a Syrian plant ; see Pliny, N.H. 12. 126. 


192 


GALBA 


II. Nero was succeeded by Galba, who was related 
in no degree to the house of the Caesars, although 
unquestionably of noble origin and of an old and 
powerful family; for he always added to the in- 
scriptions on his statues that he was the great- 
grandson of Quintus Catulus Capitolinus,” and when 
he became emperor he even displayed a family tree 
in his hall in which he carried back his ancestry on 
his father's side to Jupiter and on his mother's to 
Pasiphae, the wife of Minos. 

III. It would be a long story to give in detail his 
illustrious ancestors and the honorary inscriptions of 
the entire race, but I shall give a brief account of 
his immediate family. It is uncertain who was the 
first of the Sulpicii to bear the surname Galba, 
why he assumed it, and whence it was derived. 
Some think that it was because after having for a long 
time unsuccessfully besieged a town in Spain, he at 
last set fire to it by torches smeared with galbanum® ; 
others because during a long illness he made constant 
use of galbeum, that is to say of remedies wrapped in 
wool ; still others, because he was a very fat man, 
such as the Gauls term galba, or because he was, on 
the contrary, as slender as the insects called galbae, 
which breed in oak trees. 

The family acquired distinction from'Servius Galba, 
who became consul and was decidedly the most 
eloquent speaker of his time. This man, they say, 
was the cause of the war with Viriathus, because 
while governing Spain as propraetor, he treacherously 
massacred thirty thousand of the Lusitanians. His 
grandson had been one of Caesar's lieutenants in 
Gaul, but angered because his commander caused his 


defeat for the consulship, he joined the conspiracy 


193 
VOL. IL o 


68 A.D. 


145 5.9. 


150-186 
B.C. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


spiravit cum Cassio et Bruto, propter quod Pedia lege 
damnatus est. Ab hoc sunt imperatoris Galbae avus 
ac pater: avus clarior studiis quam dignitate—non 
enim egressus praeturae gradum—multiplicem nec 
incuriosam historiam edidit ; pater consulatu functus, 
quanquam brevi corpore atque etiam gibber modicae- 
que in dicendo facultatis, causas industrie actitavit. 
Uxores habuit Mummiam Achaicam, neptem Catuli 
proneptemque L. Mummi, qui Corinthum excidit ; 
item Liviam Ocellinam ditem admodum et pulchram, 
a qua tamen nobilitatis causa appetitus ultro existi- 
matur et aliquanto enixius, postquam subinde instanti 
vitium corporis secreto posita veste detexit, ne quasi 
ignaram fallere videretur. Ex Achaica liberos 
Gaium et Servium ! procreavit, quorum maior Gaius 
attritis facultatibus urbe cessit prohibitusque a 
Tiberio sortiri anno suo proconsulatum voluntaria 
morte obiit. 

IV. Ser. Galba imperator M. Valerio Messala Cn.? 
Lentulo cons. natus est VIIII. Kal. Ian. in villa colli 
superposita prope Tarracinam? sinistrorsus Fundos 
petentibus, adoptatusque a noverca sua Livia nomen 
et Ocellare cognomen assumpsit mutato praenomine ; 
nam Lucium mox pro Servio* usque ad tempus 
imperii usurpavit. Constat Augustum puero adhuc, 


! Servium, Glareanus; Sergium, Q. 
? Cn., mss. ; it should be L. 
3 Terracinam, N. * Sergio, 0. 
a See Nero, iii. 1. 
> That is, after his consulship. Tiberius doubtless sus- 
pected him of a desire to enrich himself at the expense of 
the provincials; cf. Tib. xxxii. 2, at the end. 


194 


DÁM ee —— — —— 


GALBA 


with Brutus and Cassius, and was consequently 
condemned to death by the Pedian law.* From him 
were descended the grandfather and the father 
of the emperor Galba. The former, who was more 
eminent for his learning than for his rank—for he 
did not advance beyond the grade of praetor— 
published a voluminous and painstaking history. 
The father attained the consulship, and although he 22 .». 
was short of stature and even hunchbacked, besides 
being only an indifferent speaker, was an indus- 
trious pleader at the bar. He married Mummia 
Achaica, the granddaughter of Catulus and great- 
granddaughter of Lucius Mummius who destroyed 
Corinth ; and later Livia Ocellina, a very rich and 
beautiful woman, who however is thought to have 
sought marriage with him because of his high rank, 
and the more eagerly when, in response to her 
frequent advances, he took off his robe in private and 
showed her his deformity, so as not to seem to 
deceive her by concealing it. By Achaica he had 
two sons, Gaius and Servius. Gaius, who was the 
elder, left Rome after squandering the greater part 
of his estate, and committed suicide because Tiberius 
would not allow him to take part in the allotment 
of the provinces in his year.^ 
IV. The emperor Servius Galba was born in the Dec. 24, 
consulship of Marcus Valerius Messala and Gnaeus ?^* 
Lentulus, on the ninth day before the Kalends of 
January, in a country house situated on a hill near 
Tarracina, on the left as you go towards Fundi. 
Adopted by his stepmother Livia, he took her name 
and the surname Ocella, and also changed his 
forename ; for he used Lucius, instead of Servius, 
from that time until he became emperor. It is well 
195 


o 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


salutanti se inter aequales, apprehensa buccula 
dixisse: xai ov Tékvov Tis ápxis "uv TapaTpof».! 
Sed et Tiberius, cum comperisset imperaturum eum 
verum in senecta: “ Vivat sane,’ ait, “quando id ad 

2nos nihil pertinet." Avo quoque eius fulgur pro- 
curanti, cum exta de manibus aquila rapuisset et in 
frugiferam quercum contulisset, responsum est 
summum sed serum imperium portendi familiae; et 
ille irridens : “ Sane,” inquit, “cum mula pepererit.” 
Nihil aeque postea Galbam temptantem res novas 
confirmavit quam mulae partus, ceterisque ut 
obscaenum ostentum abhorrentibus, solus pro laetis- 
simo accepit memor sacrificii dictique avi. 

3 Sumpta virili toga somniavit Fortunam dicentem, 
stare se ante fores defessam et nisi ocius reciperetur, 
cuicumque obvio praedae futuram. Utque evigilavit, 
aperto atrio simulacrum aeneum deae cubitali maius 
iuxta limen invenit idque gremio suo Tusculum, ubi 
aestivare consueverat, avexit et in parte aedium con- 


secratum menstruis deinceps supplicationibus et 
pervigilio anniversario coluit. 

4 Quanquam autem nondum aetate constanti 
veterem civitatis exoletumque morem ac tantum in 


1 xaparpótn, Turnebus ; mwapatpw(n, Q. 


a The usual procedure, to avert the evil omen. 
> Proverbial for ‘‘ never,” like the Greek Kalends (A ug. 
Ixxxvii. 1). 


196 


GALBA 


known that when he was still a boy and called 
to pay his respects to Augustus with others of 
his age, the emperor pinched his cheek and said in 
Greek : “ Thou too, child, wilt have a nibble at this 
power of mine." Tiberius too, when he heard that 
Galba was destined to be emperor, but in his old 
age, said: “ Well, let him live then, since that does 
not concern me." Again, when Galba’s grandfather 
was busy with a sacrifice for a stroke of lightning,” 
and an eagle snatched the intestines from his hand and 
carried them to an oak full of acorns, the prediction 
was made that the highest dignity would come 
to the family, but late; whereupon he said with a 
laugh: * Very likely, when a mule has a foal.®” 
Afterwards when Galba was beginning his revolt, 
nothing gave him so much encouragement as the 
foaling of a mule, and while the rest were horrified 
and looked on it as an unfavourable omen, he alone 
regarded it as most propitious, remembering the 
sacrifice and his grandfather's saying. 

When he assumed the gown of manhood, he 
dreamt that Fortune said that she was tired of 
standing before his door, and that unless she were 
quickly admitted, she would fall a prey to the first 
comer. When he awoke, opening the door of the 
hall, he found close by the threshold a bronze 
statue of Fortune more than a cubit high. This he 
carried in his arms to Tusculum, where he usually 
spent the summer, and consecrated it in a room 
of his house ; and from that time on he honoured it 
with monthly sacrifices and a yearly vigil. 

Even before he reached middle life, he persisted 
in keeping up an old and forgotten custom of 
his country, which survived only in his own house- 


197 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


domo sua haerentem obstinatissime retinuit, ut 
liberti servique bis die frequentes adessent ac mane 
salvere, vesperi valere sibi singuli dicerent. 

V. Inter liberales disciplinas attendit et iuri. 
Dedit et matrimonio operam; verum amissa uxore 
Lepida duobusque ex ea filiis remansit in caelibatu 
neque sollicitari ulla condicione amplius potuit, ne 
Agrippinae quidem, quae! viduata morte Domiti 
maritum quoque adhuc necdum caelibem Galbam 
adeo omnibus sollicitaverat modis, ut in conventu 
matronarum correpta iurgio atque etiam manu 
pulsata sit a matre Lepidae. 

2  Observavit ante omnis Liviam Augustam, cuius et 
vivae gratia plurimum valuit et mortuae testamento 
paene ditatus est; sestertium namque quingenties 
praecipuum inter legatarios habuit, sed quia notata, 
non perscripta erat summa, herede Tiberio legatum 
ad quingenta revocante, ne haec quidem accepit. 

VI. Honoribus ante legitimum tempus initis 
praetor commissione ludorum  Floralium novum 
spectaculi genus elephantos funambulos edidit ; exim 
provinciae Aquitaniae anno fere praefuit; mox 
consulatum per sex menses ordinarium gessit, even- 
itque ut in eo ipse L.? Domitio patri Neronis, ipsi 
Salvius Otho pater Othonis succederet, velut prae- 


1 quae, added by G. Becker; Mand Q have it after Domiti. 
2 L. mss. (Lucio, G) ; Cn., Torrentius. 


a To marry and rear a family was regarded as one of the 
duties of a good citizen. > Cf. Nero, xi. 2. 

¢ That is to say, entering office on January 1, and with 
his colleague, L. Cornelius Sulla, giving his name to the year. 


198 


GALBA 


hold, of having his freedmen and slaves appear before 
him twice a day in a body, greeting him in the 
morning and bidding him farewell at evening, one 
by one. 

V. Among other liberal studies he applied himself 
to the law. He also assumed a husband's duties,? 
but after losing his wife Lepida and two sons whom 
he had by her, he remained a widower. And he 
could not be tempted afterwards by any match, not 
even with Agrippina, who no sooner lost Domitius by 
death than she set her cap for Galba so obviously, 
even before the death of his wife, that Lepida’s 
mother scolded her roundly before a company of 
matrons and went so far as to slap her. 

He showed marked respect to Livia Augusta, 
to whose favour he owed great influence during her 
lifetime and by whose last will he almost became a 
rich man ; for he had the largest bequest among her 
legatees, one of fifty million sesterces. But because 
the sum was designated in figures and not written 
out in words, Tiberius, who was her heir, reduced 
the bequest to five hundred thousand, and Galba 
never received even that amount. 

VI. He began his career of office before the legal 
age, and in celebrating the games of the Floralia in 
his praetorship he gave a new kind of exhibition, 
namely of elephants walking the rope. Then he 
governed the province of Aquitania for nearly a year 
and soon afterwards held a regular consulship * for six 
months; and it chanced that in this office he 
succeeded Lucius ^ Domitius, the father of Nero, and 
was succeeded by Salvius Otho, the father of 


4 Either Suetonius is in error or the manuscripts; the 
name should be Gnaeus. 


199 


88 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


sagium insequentis casus, quo medius inter utriusque 
filios exstitit imperator. 

A Gaio Caesare legatus Germaniae superioris in 
locum Gaetulici! substitutus, postridie quam ad 
legiones venit, sollemni forte spectaculo plaudentes 
inhibuit data tessera, ut manus paenula ? continerent ; 
statimque per castra iactatum est : 


* Disce miles militare ; Galba est, non Gaetulicus." 


Pari severitate interdixit commeatus peti. Vetera- 
num ac tironem militem opere assiduo corroboravit 
matureque barbaris, qui iam in Galliam usque 
proruperant, coercitis, praesenti quoque Gaio talem 
et se et exercitum approbavit, ut inter innumeras 
contractasque ex omnibus provinciis copias neque 
testimonium neque praemia ampliora ulli perciperent ; 
ipse maxime insignis, quod campestrem decursionem 
scuto moderatus, etiam ad essedum imperatoris per 
viginti passuum milia cucurrit. 

VII. Caede Gai nuntiata multis ad occasionem 
stimulantibus quietem praetulit. Per hoc gratissimus 
Claudio receptusque in cohortem amicorum tantae 
dignationis est habitus, ut cum subita ei valitudo nec 
adeo gravis incidisset, dilatus sit expeditionis 
Britannicae dies. Africam pro consule biennio 
; jus Germaniae superioris in locum Gaetu-, supplied 
y Ihm 


? manus paenula, Salmasius; manus paenulas, M XY (pae- 
nulis, OST); manu paenulas, G. 


a See Calig. xliii. and xliv. ò Of Calig. xxvi. 2. 
200 | 


GALBA 


the emperor Otho, a kind of omen of what happened 
later, when he became emperor between the reigns 
of the sons of these two men. 

Appointed governor of Upper Germany by Gaius 
Caesar in room of Gaetulicus, the day after he 
appeared before the legions he put a stop to their 
applause at a festival which chanced to fall at that 
time, by issuing a written order to keep their hands 
under their cloaks ; and immediately this verse was 
bandied about the camp : 


* Soldiers, learn to play the soldier; 'tis Galba, not 
Gaetulicus.”’ 


With equal strictness he put a stop to the requests 
for furloughs. He got both the veterans and the 
new recruits into condition by plenty of hard work, 
speedily checked the barbarians, who had already 
made inroads even into Gaul, and when Gaius 
arrived,^ Galba and his army made such a good 
impression, that out of the great body of troops 
assembled from all the provinces none received 
greater commendation or richer rewards. Galba 
particularly distinguished himself, while directing the 
military manceuvres shield in hand, by actually run- 
ning for twenty miles close beside the emperor's 
chariot.^ 

VII. When the murder of Gaius was announced, 
although many urged Galba to take advantage of 


. the opportunity, he preferred quiet. Hence he 


was in high favour with Claudius, became one of his 
staff of intimate friends, and was treated with such 
consideration that the departure of the expedition to 
Britain was put off because Galba was taken with a 
sudden illness, of no great severity. He governed 


20I 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


optinuit extra sortem electus ad ordinandam 
provinciam et intestina dissensione et barbarorum 
tumultu inquietam ; ordinavitque magna severitatis 
ac iustitiae cura etiam in parvulis rebus. Militi, qui 
per expeditionem  artissima annona residuum 
cibariorum tritici modium centum denariis vendidisse 
arguebatur, vetuit, simul atque indigere cibo coepisset, 
a quoquam opem ferri ; et is fame extabuit. At in 
iure dicendo cum de proprietate iumenti quaereretur, 
levibus utrimque argumentis et testibus ideoque 
difficili coniectura veritatis, ita decrevit ut ad lacum, 
ubi adaquari solebat, duceretur capite involuto atque 
ibidem revelato eius esset, ad quem sponte se a potu 
recepisset. 

VIII. Ob res et tunc in Africa et olim in 
Germania gestas ornamenta triumphalia accepit et 
sacerdotium triplex, inter quindecimviros sodalesque 
Titios item Augustales cooptatus; atque ex eo 
tempore prope ad medium Neronis principatum in 
secessu plurimum vixit, ne ad gestandum quidem um- 
quam iter ingressus quam ut secum vehiculo proximo 
decies sestertium in auro efferret, donec in oppido 
Fundis moranti Hispania Tarraconensis oblata est. 
Acciditque, ut cum provinciam ingressus sacrificaret, 
intra aedem publicam puero e ministris acerram 


a Except in special cases, the governors were appointed by 
lot from among those who were eligible. 

> The modius was 8.75 litres. 

¢ See note on Jul. Ixxix. 3. 

4 The sodales Titit were an ancient priesthood of uncertain 
origin. The tradition arose that they were established to 
keep up the ancient Sabine worship, and named from Titus 
Tatius. ¢ See note on Claud. vi. 2. 

7 So as to be able to leave the country on short notice. 


202 


— s a > IR pes ERE a 


basan: eee + 


47 7 v7 


GALBA 


Africa for two years with the rank of proconsul, being 
specially chosen^ to restore order in the province, 
which was disturbed both by internal strife and by a 
revolt of the barbarians. And he was successful, owing 
to his insistence on strict discipline and his observance 
of justice even in trifling matters. When provisions 
were very scarce during a foray and a soldier was 
accused of having sold for a hundred denarii a peck ^ 
of wheat which was left from his rations, Galba 
gave orders that when the man began to lack food, 
he should receive aid from no one; and he starved 
to death. On another occasion when he was holding 
court and the question of the ownership of a beast of 
burden was laid before him, as the evidence on both 
sides was slight and the witnesses unreliable, so that 
it was difficult to get at the truth, he ruled that the 
beast should be led with its head muffled up to the 
pool where it was usually watered, that it should then 
be unmuffled, and should belong to the man to whom 
it returned of its own accord after drinking. 

VIII. His services in Africa at that time, and 
previously in Germany, were recognised by the 
triumphal regalia and three priesthoods, for he was 
chosen a member of the Fifteen," of the brotherhood 
of Titius,? and of the priests of Augustus. After 
that he lived for the most part in retirement until 


about the middle of Nero's reign, never going out .. 


even for recreation without taking a million sesterces 
in gold with him in a second carriage ; until at last, 
while he was staying in the town of Fundi, Hispania 
Tarraconensis was offered him. And it fell out 
that as he was offering sacrifice in a public temple 
after his arrival in the province, the hair of a young 
attendant who was carrying an incense-box suddenly 


203 


60 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


tenenti capillus repente toto capite canesceret, nec 
defuerunt qui interpretarentur significari rerum 
mutationem successurumque iuveni senem, hoc est 
ipsum Neroni. Non multo post in Cantabriae lacum 
fulmen decidit repertaeque sunt duodecim secures, 
haud ambiguum summae imperii signum. 

. IX. Per octo annos varie et inaequabiliter provinciam 
rexit, primo acer et vehemens et in coercendis quidem 
delictis vel immodicus. Nam et nummulario non ex 
fide versanti pecunias manus amputavit mensaeque 
eius adfixit, et tutorem, quod pupillum, cui substitutus 
heres erat, veneno necasset, cruce adfecit; implo- 
rantique leges et civem Romanum se testificanti, quasi 
solacio et honore aliquo poenam levaturus, mutari 
multoque praeter ceteras altiorem et dealbatam statui 
crucem iussit. Paulatim in desidiam segnitiamque 
conversus est, ne quid materiae praeberet Neroni et, 
ut dicere solebat, quod nemo rationem otii sui reddere 
cogeretur. | 

Carthagine nova conventum agens tumultuari 
Gallias comperit legato Aquitaniae auxilia im- 
plorante; supervenerunt et Vindicis litterae hor- 
tantis, ut humano generi assertorem ducemque se 
accommodaret. Nec diu cunctatus condicionem 
partim metu partim spe recepit; nam et mandata 
Neronis de nece sua ad procuratores clam missa 
deprenderat et confirmabatur cum secundissimis 


4 See note on Claud. xxiv. 1. 


204 


" w€-— 


A ~ — 


GALBA 


turned white all over his head, and there were some 
who did not hesitate to interpret this as a sign of a 
change of rulers and of the succession of an old man 
to a young one; that is to say, of Galba to Nero. 
Not long after this lightning struck a lake of Can- 
tabria and twelve axes were found there, an unmis- 
takable token of supreme power. 

IX. For eight years he governed the province in 
a variable and inconsistent manner. At first he was 
vigorous and energetic and even over severe in 
punishing offences; for he cut off the hands of a 
money-lender who carried on his business dishonestly 
and nailed them to his counter ; crucified a man for 
poisoning his ward, whose property he was to inherit 
in case of his death ; and when the man invoked the 
law and declared that he was a Roman citizen, Galba, 
pretending to lighten his punishment by some con- 
solation and honour, ordered that a cross much 
higher than the rest and painted white be set up, 
and the man transferred to it. But he gradually 
changed to sloth and inaction, not to give Nero any 
cause for jealousy, and as he used to say himself, 
because no one could be forced to render an account 
for doing nothing. 

As he was holding the assizes at New Carthage, 
he learned of the rebellion of the Gallic provinces 
through an urgent appeal for help from the governor 
of Aquitania; then came letters from Vindex, calling 
upon him to make himself the liberator and leader of 


^. mankind. So without much hesitation he accepted the 


proposal, led by fear as well as by hope. For he had 
intercepted despatches ordering his own death, which 
had been secretly sent by Nero to his agents." He 
was encouraged too, in addition to most favourable 


205 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


auspiciis et ominibus virginis honestae vaticinatione, 
tanto magis quod eadem illa carmina sacerdos lovis 
Cluniae ex penetrali somnio monitus eruerat ante 
ducentos annos similiter a fatidica puella pronuntiata. 
Quorum carminum sententia erat oriturum quando- 
que ex Hispania principem dominumque rerum. 

X. Igitur cum quasi manumissioni vacaturus con- 
scendisset tribunal, propositis ante se damnatorum 
occisorumque a Nerone quam plurimis imaginibus et 
astante nobili puero, quem exsulantem e proxima 
Baliari insula ob id ipsum acciverat, deploravit 
temporum statum consalutatusque imperator legatum 
se senatus ac populi R. professus est. Dein iustitio 
indicto, e plebe quidem provinciae legiones et auxilia 
conscripsit super exercitum veterem legionis unius 
duarumque alarum et cohortium trium ; at e pripiori- 
bus prudentia atque aetate praestantibus vel! ínstar 
senatus, ad quos de maiore re quotiens opus esset 
referretur, instituit. Delegit et equestris ordinis 
iuvenes, qui manente anulorum aureorum usu evocati 
appellarentur excubiasque circa cubiculum suum vice 
militum agerent. Etiam per provincias edicta 
dimisit, auctor in? singulis universisque conspirandi 
simul et ut qua posset quisque opera communem 
causam iuvarent. 

Per idem fere tempus in munitione oppidi, quod 


1 vel] velut, Y. 2 TIQ and the editions omit in. 


a Such predictions, like the responses of oracles, were in 
verse. > Instead of the emperor, as heretofore. 

e Évocati were soldiers who, after serving their time, were 
invited to continue their service. It is here an honorary 
title. 4 See note on Jul. xxxiii. 


206 


a—— —— | a oe... — b 4 —— eee ee ee. mc E EPIPEREN OR 


-= — wee eee Ue 9 —— 


m-——— gy gle 


GALBA 


auspices and omens, by the prediction of a young 
girl of high birth, and the more so because the 
priest of Jupiter at Clunia, directed by a dream, had 
found in the inner shrine of his temple the very 
same prediction, likewise spoken by an inspired girl 
two hundred years before. And the purport of the 
verses? was that one day there would come forth 
from Spain the ruler and lord of the world. 

X. Accordingly, pretending that he was going to 
attend to the manumitting of slaves, he mounted the 
tribunal, on the front of which he had set up as many 
images as he could find of those who had been con- 
demned and put to death by Nero; and having by 
his side a boy of noble family, whom he had summoned 
for that very purpose from his place of exile hard by 
in the Balearic Isles, he deplored the state of the 
times ; being thereupon hailed as emperor, he declared 
that he was their governor, representing the senate 
and people of Rome.’ Then proclaiming a holiday, 
he enrolled from the people of the province legions 
and auxiliaries in addition to his former force of one 
legion, two divisions of cavalry, and three cohorts. 
But from the oldest and most experienced of the 
nobles he chose a kind of senàte, to whom he might 
refer matters of special importance whenever it was 
necessary. He also chose young men of the order 
of knights, who were to have the title of volunteers * 
and keep guard before his bedchamber in place ot 
the regular soldiers, without losing their right to 
wear the gold ring.7/ He also sent proclamations 
broadcast throughout the province, urging all men 
individually and collectively to join the revolution 
and aid the common cause in every possible way. 

At about this same time, during the fortification 


207 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


sedem bello delegerat, repertus est anulus opere 
antiquo, scalptura gemmae Victoriam cum tropaeo 
exprimente ; ac subinde Alexandrina navis Dertosam 
appulit armis onusta, sine gubernatore, sine nauta 
aut vectore ullo, ut nemini dubium esset iustum 
piumque et faventibus diis bellum suscipi: cum 
repente ex inopinato prope cuncta turbata sunt. 
Alarum altera castris appropinquantem paenitentia 
mutati sacramenti destituere conata est aegreque 
retenta in officio, et servi, quos a liberto Neronis ad 
fraudem praeparatos muneri acceperat, per angiportum 
in balneas transeuntem paene interemerunt, nisi 
cohortantibus in vicem ne occasionem omitterent, 
interrogatisque de qua occasione loquerentur, expressa 
cruciatu confessio esset. 

XI. Accessit ad tanta discrimina mors Vindicis, 
qua maxime consternatus destitutoque similis non 
multum afuit quin vitae renuntiaret. Sed super- 
venientibus ab urbe nuntiis ut occisum Neronem 
cunctosque in verba sua iurasse cognovit, deposita 
legati suscepit Caesaris appellationem iterque in- 
gressus est paludatus ac dependente a cervicibus 
pugione ante pectus ; nec prius usum togae reciperavit 
quam oppressis qui novas res moliebantur, praefecto 


* See chap. x. 1. ^ See note on chap. i. 
208 


GALBA 


of a town which he had chosen as the seat of war, a 
ring of ancient workmanship was found, containing 
a precious stone engraved with a Victory and a trophy. 
Immediately afterwards a ship from Alexandria 
loaded with arms arrived at Dertosa without a pilot, 
without a single sailor or passenger, removing all 
doubt in anyone’s mind that the war was just and 
holy and undertaken with the approval of the gods. 
Then suddenly and unexpectedly the whole plan was 
almost brought to naught. One of the two divisions 
of cavalry,” repenting of its change of allegiance, 
attempted to desert Galba as he was approaching his 
camp and was with difficulty prevented. Some slaves 
too, whom one of Nero’s freedmen had given Gatba 
with treachery in view, all but slew him as he was 
going to the bath through a narrow passage-way. In 
fact they would have succeeded, had they not con- 
jured one another not to miss the opportunity and 
so been questioned as to what the opportunity 
was to which they referred; for when they were 
put to the torture, a confession was wrung from 
them. : 
XI. To these great perils was added the death of 
Vindex, by which he was especially panic-stricken 
and came near taking his own life, in the belief that 
all was lost. But when some messengers came from 
the city, reporting that Nero was dead and that all 
the people had sworn allegiance to him, he laid aside 
the title of governor and assumed that of Caesar.^ 
He then began his march to Rome ina general's 
cloak with a dagger hanging from his neck in front 
of his breast; and he,did not resume the toga until 
he had overthrown those who were plotting against 
him, Nymphidius Sabinus, prefect of the praetorian 


209 
VOL. II. P 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


praetori Nymphidio Sabino Romae, in Germania 
Fonteio Capitone, in Africa Clodio Macro legatis. 
XII. Praecesserat de eo fama saevitiae simul atque 
avaritiae, quod civitates Hispaniarum Galliarumque, 
quae cunctantius sibi accesserant, gravioribus tributis, 
quasdam etiam murorum destructione punisset et 
praepositos procuratoresque supplicio capitis adfecis- 
set cum coniugibus ac liberis; quodque oblatam a 
Tarraconensibus e vetere templo lovis coronam 
auream librarum quindecim conflasset ac tres uncias, 
quae ponderi deerant, iussisset exigi. Ea fama et 
confirmata et aucta est, ut primum urbem introiit. 
Nam cum classiarios, quos Nero ex remigibus iustos 
milites fecerat, redire ad pristinum statum cogeret, 
recusantis atque insuper aquilam et signa pertinacius 
flagitantis non modo inmisso equite disiecit, sed 
decimavit etiam. Item Germanorum cohortem a 
Caesaribus olim ad custodiam corporis institutam 
multisque experimentis fidelissimam dissolvit ac sine 
commodo ullo remisit in patriam, quasi Cn. Dolabellae, 
iuxta cuius hortos tendebat, proniorem. Illa quoque 
verene an falso per ludibrium iactabantur, adposita 
lautiore cena ingemuisse eum, et ordinario quidem 
dispensatori breviarium rationum offerenti paropsi- 
dem! leguminis pro sedulitate ac diligentia porre- 


! paropsidem] parobsidem, M ; parabsidem, @; the other 
mss. have parapsidem. 


a See note on Claud. xxiv. 1. 

> Cf. Aug. xxiv. 2; Calig. xlviii. 1. 

c See Aug. xlix. 1; Calig. lviii. 3. 

4 Doubtless many of them were false or exaggerated. 
Galba’s frugality was naturally regarded as stinginess by a 
people accustomed to a prince like Nero; see Nero, xxxi. 1. 


210 


GALBA 


guard at Rome, in Germany and Africa the governors 
Fonteius Capito and Clodius Macer. 

XII. His double reputation for cruelty and avarice 
had gone before him; men said that he had punished 
the cities of the Spanish and Gallic provinces which 
had hesitated about taking sides with him by heavier 
taxes and some even by the razing of their walls, 
putting to death the governors and imperial deputies“ 
along with their wives and children. Further, that 
he had melted down a golden crown of fifteen pounds 
weight, which the people of Tarraco had taken from 
their ancient temple of Jupiter and presented to 
him, with orders that the three ounces which were 
found lacking be exacted from them. This reputa- 
tion was confirmed and even augmented immediately 
on his arrival in the city. For having compelled some 
marines whom Nero had made regular soldiers to 
return to their former position as rowers, upon their 
refusing and obstinately demanding an eagle and 
standards, he not only dispersed them by a cavalry 
charge, but even decimated’ them. He also dis- 
banded a cohort of Germans, whom the previous 
Caesars had made their body-guard * and had found 
absolutely faithful in many emergencies, and sent 
them back to their native country without any rewards, 
alleging that they were more favourably inclined 
towards Gnaeus Dolabella, near whose gardens they 
had their camp. The following tales too were told 
in mockery of him, whether truly or falsely :4 that 
when an unusually elegant dinner was set before 
him, he groaned aloud; that when his duly ap- 
pointed steward presented his expense account, he 
handed him a dish of beans in return for his 
industry and carefulness; and that when the flute 


21I 
P 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


xisse, Cano autem choraulae mire placenti denarios 
quinque donasse prolatos manu sua e peculiaribus 
loculis suis. 

XIII. Quare adventus eius non perinde gratus 
fuit, idque proximo spectaculo apparuit, siquidem 
Atellanis notissimum canticum exotsis : ! 


* Venit Onesimus? a villa ” 


cuncti simul spectatores consentiente voce reliquam 
partem rettulerunt ac saepius versu repetito egerunt. 
XIV. Maiore adeo et favore et auctoritate 
adeptus est quam gessit imperium, quanquam multa 
documenta egregii principis daret ; sed nequaquam 
tam grata erant, quam invisa quae secus fierent. 
Regebatur trium arbitrio, quos una et intra Pala- 
tium habitantis nec umquam non adhaerentis paeda- 
gogos vulgo vocabant. Ii erant T. Vinius legatus 
eius in Hispania, cupiditatis immensae ; Cornelius 
Laco ex assessore praefectus praetorii, arrogantia 
socordiaque intolerabilis ; libertus [celus, paulo ante 
anulis aureis et Marciani cognomine ornatus ac iam 
summae equestris gradus candidatus. His diverso 
vitiorum genere grassantibus adeo se abutendum 


1 exorsis, c; exorsus, f). 
2 venit Onesimus, 3; ventione simus, 2; venit Dorsennus, 
Lachmann. 


^ Plutarch, Galba, xvi., gives the story quite a different 
aspect, saying that the gift was of gold pieces, and that 
Galba said that it came from his own pocket, and not from 
the public funds. 

> The text is uncertain, but obviously the song ridiculed a 
stingy old countryman. 

* Cf. the inimitable sentence of Tac. (Hist. 1. 49) maior 
privatus visus, dum privatus, et' omnium consensu capax 
wmnpern, nis imperasset. 


212 


GALBA 


player Canus greatly pleased him, he presented him 
with five denarii, which he took from his own purse 
with his own hand. 

XIII. Accordingly his coming was not so welcome 
as it might have been, and this was apparent at the 
first performance in the theatre ; for when the actors 
of an Atellan farce began the familiar lines 


* Here comes Onesimus from his farm " ? 


all the spectators at once finished the song in chorus 
and repeated it several times with appropriate 
gestures, beginning with that verse. 

XIV. Thus his popularity and prestige were greater 
when he won, than while he ruled the empire, 
though he gave many proofs of being an excellent 
prince ; but he was by no means so much loved for 
those qualities as he was hated for his acts of the 
opposite character. 

He was wholly under the control of three men, 
who were commonly known as his tutors because 
they lived with him in the palace and never left his 
side. They were Titus Vinius, one of his generals in 
Spain, a man of unbounded covetousness ; Cornelius 
Laco, advanced from the position of judge's assistant 
to that of prefect of the Guard and intolerably 
haughty and indolent; and his own freedman Icelus, 
who had only just before received the honour of the 
gold ring? and the surname of Marcianus, yet 
already aspired to the highest office open to the 
equestrian order. To these brigands, each with his 
different vice, he so entrusted and handed himself 
over as their tool, that his conduct was far from 


4 See note on Jl. xxxiii. 
* Prefect of the praetorian guard. 


213 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


permisit et tradidit, ut vix sibi ipse constaret, modo 
acerbior parciorque, modo remissior ac neglegentior 
quam conveniret principi electo atque illud aetatis. 

3 Quosdam claros ex utroque ordine viros suspicione 
minima inauditos condemnavit. Civitates: R. raro 
dedit, iura trium liberorum vix uni atque alteri ac ne 
iis quidem nisi ad certum praefinitumque tempus. 
Iudicibus sextam decuriam adici precantibus non 
modo negavit, sed et concessum a Claudio beneficium, 
ne hieme initioque anni ad iudicandum evocarentur, 
eripuit. 

XV. Existimabatur etiam senatoria et equestria 
officia bienni spatio determinaturus nec daturus nisi 
invitis ac recusantibus.  Liberalitates Neronis non 
plus decimis concessis per quinquaginta equites R. ea 
condicione revocandas curavit exigendasque, ut et si 
quid scaenici ac xystici donatum olim vendidissent, 
auferretur emptoribus, quando illi pretio absumpto 

2solvere nequirent. At contra nihil non per comites 
atque libertos pretio addici aut donari gratia passus 
est, vectigalia immunitates, poenas innocentium 
impunitates noxiorum. Quin etiam populo R. depo- 
scente supplicium Haloti et Tigillini solos ex omnibus 
Neronis emissariis vel maleficentissimos incolumes 
praestitit atque insuper Halotum procuratione am- 


a See note on Claud. xv. 1. 

>’ See Claud. xxiii. 1, and the note. 

* These offices were numerous and varied. Since his 
apparent purpose was to check ambition and avarice, the 
senatorial offices referred to were probably military commands 
and governorships, and the equestrian, procuratorships; see 
note on Claud. xxxiv. 1. 


214 


GALBA 


consistent; for now he was more exacting and 
niggardly, and now more extravagant and reckless 
than became a prince chosen by the people and of 
his time of life. 

He condemned to death divers distinguished men 
of both orders on trivial suspicions without a trial. 
He rarely granted Roman citizenship, and the 
privileges of threefold paternity ^ to hardly one 
or two, and even to those only for a fixed and limited 
time. When the jurors petitioned that a sixth 
division be added to their number, he not only 
refused, but even deprived them of the privilege 
granted by Claudius, of not being summoned for 
court duty in winter and at the beginning of the year. 

XV. It was thought too that he intended to limit 
the offices open to senators and knights to a period 
of two years, and to give them only to such as did 
not wish them and declined them.° He had all the 
grants of Nero revoked, allowing only a tenth part 
to be retained ; and he exacted repayment with the 
help of fifty Roman knights, stipulating that even if 
the actors and athletes had sold anything that had for- 
merly been given them, it should be taken away from 
the purchasers, in case the recipient had spent the 
money and could not repay it. On the other hand, 
there was nothing that he did not allow his friends 
and freedmen to sell at a price or bestow as a favour, 
‘taxes and freedom from taxation, the punishment 
of the guiltless and impunity for the guilty. Nay 
more, when the Roman people called for the punish- 
ment of Halotus and Tigellinus, the most utterly 
abandoned of all Nero’s creatures, not content with 
saving their lives, he honoured Halotus with a very 
important stewardship and in the case of Tigellinus 


215 


' THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK. VII 


plissima ornavit, pro Tigillino etiam saevitiae 
populum edicto increpuit. 

XVI. Per haec prope universis ordinibus offensis 
vel praecipua flagrabat invidia apud milites. Nam 
cum in verba eius absentis iurantibus donativum: 
grandius solito praepositi pronuntiassent, neque 
ratam rem habuit et subinde iactavit legere se mili- 
tem, non emere consuesse ; atque eo quidem nomine 
omnis, qui ubique erant, exacerbavit. Ceterum prae- 
torianos etiam metu et indignitate commovit, 
removens subinde plerosque ut suspectos et Nymphidi 
socios. Sed maxime fremebat superioris Germaniae 
exercitus fraudari se praemiis navatae adversus 
Gallos et Vindicem operae. Ergo primi obsequium 
rumpere ausi Kal. Ian. adigi sacramento nisi in nomen 
senatus recusarunt statimque legationem ad praeto- 
rianos cum mandatis destinaverunt: displicere im- 
peratorem in Hispania factum ; eligerent ipsi quem 
cuncti exercitus comprobarent. 

XVII. Quod ut nuntiatum est, despectui esse non 
tam senectam suam quam orbitatem ratus, Pisonem 
Frugi Licinianum nobilem egregiumque iuvenem ac 
sibi olim probatissimum testamentoque semper in 
bona et nomen adscitum repente e media salutantium 
turba adprehendit filiumque appellans perduxit in 
castra ac pro contione adoptavit, ne tunc quidem 
donativi ulla mentione facta. Quo faciliorem occa- 


a According to Plutarch (Galba, 2) it was Nymphidius 
Sabinus, prefect of the praetorian guard, who made this 
promise. Praepositi would include those who followed his 
example. > See chap. xi 


216 


GALBA 


even issued an edict rebuking the people for their 
cruelty. | ; 

XVI. Having thus incurred the hatred of almost all 
men of every class, he was especially detested by the 
soldiers; for although their officers? had promised 
them a larger gift than common when they swore 
allegiance to Galba in his absence, so far from keeping 
the promise, he declared more than once that it was 
his habit to levy troops, not buy them ; and on this 
account he embittered the soldiers all over the 
empire. The praetorians he filled besides with both 
fear and indignation by discharging many of them 
from time to time as under suspicion of being 
partisans of Nymphidius.?^ But loudest of all was the 
grumbling of the'army in Upper Germany, because 
it was defrauded of the reward for its services against 
the Gauls and Vindex. Hence they were the first 
to venture on mutiny, refusing on the Kalends of 
January to swear allegiance to anyone save the 
senate, and at once resolving to send a deputation to 
the praetorians with the following message: that 
the emperor created in Spain did not suit them and 
the Guard must choose one who would be acceptable 
to all the armies. 

XVII. When this was reported to Galba, thinking 
that it was not so much his age as his lack of 
children that was criticised, he picked out Piso 
Frugi Licinianus from the midst of the throng at 
one of his morning receptions, a young man of 
noble birth and high character, who had long been 
one of his special favourites and always named in 
his will as heir to his property and his name. 
Calling him son, he led him to the praetorian camp 
and adopted him before the assembled soldiers. 


217 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


sionem M. Salvio Othoni praebuit perficiendi conata 
intra sextum adoptionis diem. | 

XVIII. Magna et assidua monstra iam inde a 
principio exitum ei, qualis evenit, portenderant. Cum 
per omne iter dextra sinistraque oppidatim victimae 
caederentur, taurus securis ictu consternatus rupto 
vinculo essedum eius invasit elatisque pedibus totum 
cruore perfudit ; ac descendentem speculator impulsu 
turbae lancea prope vulneravit. Urbem quoque et 
deinde Palatium ingressum excepit terrae tremor et 
assimilis quidam mugitui sonus. Secuta sunt aliquanto 
manifestiora. Monile margaritis gemmisque consertum 
ad ornandam Fortunam suam Tusculanam ex omni 
gaza secreverat; id repente quasi augustiore dignius 
loco Capitolinae Veneri dedicavit, ac proxima nocte 
somniavit speciem Fortunae querentis fraudatam se 
dono destinato, minantisque erepturam et ipsam quae 
dedisset. Cumque exterritus luce prima ad expiandum 
somnium, praemissis qui rem divinam appararent, 
Tusculum excucurrisset, nihil invenit praeter tepi- 
dam in ara favillam atratumque iuxta senem in catino 
vitreo tus! tenentem et in calice fictili merum. Obser- 
vatum etiam est Kal. Ian. sacrificanti coronam de 
capite excidisse, auspicanti pullos avolasse ; adoptionis 


1 tus] thus, mes. 


pran m ——————————M—————MMM—— ——— 


^ As he was on his way to Rome. è See chap. iv. 3. 

* The fire should have been blazing brightly and a youth 
clad in white should have carried the incense in a proper box 
(acerra, see chap. viii.), and the wine in a more costly and 
appropriate vessel. 


218 


GALBA 


But even then he made no mention of largess, thus 
making it easier for Marcus Salvius Otho to accom- 
plish his purpose within six days after the adoption. 

XVIII. Many prodigies in rapid succession from 
the very beginning of his reign had foretold Galba’s 
end exactly as it happened. When victims were 
being slain to right and left all along his route in 
every town,” an ox, maddened by the stroke of an 
axe, broke its bonds and charged the emperor's 
chariot, and as it raised its feet, deluged him with 
blood. And as Galba dismounted, one of his guards, 
pushed forward by the crowd, almost wounded him 
with his lance. Again, as he entered the city, and 
later the Palace, he was met by a shock of earth- 
quake and a sound like the lowing of kine. There 
followed even clearer signs. He had set apart from 
all the treasure a necklace fashioned of pearls and 
precious stones, for the adornment of his image of 
Fortune at Tusculum.? This on a sudden impulse 
he consecrated to the Capitoline Venus, thinking it 
worthy of a more august position. The next night 
Fortune appeared to him in his dreams, complaining 
of being robbed of the gift intended for her and 
threatening in her turn to take away what she had 
bestowed. When Galba hastened in terror to Tus- 
culum at daybreak, to offer expiatory sacrifices 
because of the dream, and sent on men to make 
preparations for the ceremony, he found on the altar 
nothing but warm ashes and beside it an old man 
dressed in black, holding the incense in a glass dish 
and the wine in an earthen cup. It was also 
remarked that as he was sacrificing on the Kalends 
of January, the garland fell from his head, and that 
as he took the auspices, the sacred chickens flew 


219 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


die neque milites adlocuturo castrensem sellam de 
more positam pro tribunali oblitis ministris et in 
senatu curulem perverse collocatam. 

XIX. Prius vero quam occideretur sacrificantem 
mane haruspex identidem monuit, caveret periculum, 
non longe percussores abesse. 

Haud multo post cognoscit teneri castra ab 
Othone, ac plerisque ut eodem quam primum 
pergeret suadentibus—posse enim auctoritate et 
praesentia praevalere—nihil amplius quam continere 
se statuit et legionariorum firmare praesidiis, qui 
multifariam diverseque tendebant. Loricam tamen 
induit linteam, quanquam haud dissimulans parum 
adversus tot mucrones profuturam. Sed extractus 
rumoribus falsis, quos conspirati, ut eum in publicum 
elicerent, de industria dissiparant, paucis temere 
affirmantibus transactum negotium, oppressos, qui 
tumultuarentur, advenire frequentis ceteros gratula- 
bundos et in omne obsequium paratos, iis ut occurreret 
prodiit tanta fiducia, ut militi cuidam occisum a se 
Othonem glorianti: *Quo auctore?" responderit, 
atque in Forum usque processit. Ibi equites, quibus 
mandata caedes erat, cum per publicum dimota 
paganorum turba equos adegissent, viso procul eo 


— 


a Of Piso. | v Of the praetorian guard. 
220 


GALBA 


away. As he was on the point of addressing the 
soldiers on the day of the adoption,“ his camp chair, 
through the forgetfulness of his attendants, was 
not placed on the tribunal, as is customary, and in 
the senate his curule chair was set wrong side 
foremost. 

XIX. As he was offering sacrifice on the morning 
before he was killed, a soothsayer warned him again 
and again to look out for danger, since assassins 
were not far off. 

Not long after this he learned that Otho held 
possession of the Camp,? and when several advised 
him to proceed thither as soon as possible—for they 
said that he could win the day by his presence and 
prestige—he decided to do no more than hold his 
present position and strengthen it by getting to- 
gether a guard of the legionaries, who were encamped 
in many different quarters of the city. He did how- 
ever put on a linen cuirass, though he openly 
declared that it would afford little protection against 
so many swords. But he was lured out by false re- 
ports, circulated by the conspirators to induce him to 
appear in public ; for when a few rashly assured him 
that the trouble was over, that the rebels had been 
overthrown, and that the rest were coming in a body 
to offer their congratulations, ready to submit to all 
his orders, he went out to meet them with so much 
confidence, that when one of the soldiers boasted 
that he had slain Otho, he asked him, ** On whose 
authority? " and then he went on as far as the Forum. 
There the horsemen who had been bidden to slay 
him, spurring their horses through the streets and 
dispersing the crowd of civilians, caught sight of him 
from a distance and halted for a moment. Then 


22T 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


parumper restiterunt; dein rursum incitati desertum 
a suis contrucidarunt. 

XX. Sunt qui tradant, ad primum tumultum pro- 
clamasse eum: “Quid agitis commilitones? Ego 
vester sum et vos mei," donativum etiam pollicitum. 
Plures autem prodiderunt optulisse ultro iugulum et 
ut hoc agerent ac ferirent, quando ita videretur, 
hortatum. Illud mirum admodum fuerit, neque 
praesentium quemquam opem imperatori ferre cona- 
tum et omnes qui arcesserentur ! sprevisse nuntium 
excepta  Germanicianorum?  vexillatione. Ii ob 
recens meritum, quod se aegros et invalidos magno 
opere ? fovisset, in auxilium advolaverunt, sed serius 
itinere devio per ignorantiam locorum retardati . 

Iugulatus est ad lacum Curti ac relictus ita uti erat, 
donec gregarius miles a frumentatione rediens abiecto 
onere caput ei amputavit; et quoniam capillo 
arripere non poterat, in gremium abdidit, mox 
inserto per os pollice ad Othonem detulit. Ille 
lixis calonibusque donavit, qui hasta suffixum non 
sine ludibrio circum castra portarunt adclamantes 
identidem: “Galba Cupido, fruaris aetate tua," 
maxime irritati ad talem iocorum petulantiam, quod 
ante paucos dies exierat in vulgus, laudanti cuidam 
formam suam ut adhuc floridam et vegetam respon- 
disse eum: 

"Ert poe pévos éumeddv éoTw. 
1 arcesserentur] arcessirentur, MG". 


2 Germanicianorum, Turnebus ; Germaniciorum, Q0. 
3 magno opere] magnopere, mss. 


a Which he had hitherto refused ; see chap. xvi. 1. 
^ See note on Calig. lviii. 2. 
* In the Forum; see Aug. lvii. 1, and Index. 


222 


we 


— — e o 


.. == o — 


GALBA 


they rushed upon him again and butchered him, 
abandoned by his followers. 

XX. Some say that at the beginning of the dis- 
turbance he cried out, “What mean you, fellow 
soldiers ? I am yours and you are mine,” and that he 
even promised them largess.” But the more general 
account is, that he offered them his neck without resist- 
ance, urging them to do their duty? and strike, since 
it was their will. It was very surprising that none 
of those present tried to lend aid to their emperor, 
and that all who were sent for treated the summons 
with contempt except a company of German troops. 
These, because of his recent kindness in showing 
them great indulgence when they were weakened 
by illness, flew to his help, but through their un- 
familiarity with the city took a roundabout way and 
arrived too late. 

He was killed beside the Lake of Curtius ^ and was 
left lying just as he was, until a common soldier, 
returning from a distribution of grain, threw down 
his load and cut off the head. Then, since there 
was no hair by which to grasp it, he put it under his 
robe, but later thrust his thumb into the mouth and 
so carried it to Otho. He handed it over to his 
servants and camp-followers, who set it on a lance 
and paraded it about the camp with jeers, crying 
out from time to time, ** Galba, thou Cupid, exult in 
thy vigour!" The special reason for this saucy jest 
was, that the report had gone abroad a few days 
before, that when someone had congratulated him on 
still looking young and vigorous, he replied : 


* As yet my strength is unimpaired.” d 


4 Iliad, 5. 254; Odyss. 21. 426. 
223 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


Ab iis Patrobii! Neroniani libertus centum aureis 
redemptum eo loco, ubi iussu Galbae animadversum 
in patronum suum fuerat, abiecit. Sero tandem 
dispensator Argivus et hoc et ceterum truncum 
in privatis eius hortis Aurelia via sepulturae dedit. 

XXI. Statura fuit iusta, capite praecalvo, oculis 
caeruleis, adunco naso, manibus pedibusque articulari 
morbo distortissimis, ut neque calceum perpeti nec ? 
libellos evolvere aut tenere omnino valeret. Excre- 
verat etiam in dexteriore latere eius caro praepende- 
batque adeo ut aegre fascia substringeretur. 

XXII. Cibi plurimi traditur, quem tempore hiber- 
no etiam ante lucem capere consuerat, inter cenam 
vero usque eo abundantis,? ut congestas super manus 
reliquias circumferri iuberet spargique ad pedes 
stantibus. Libidinis in mares pronior* et eos non 
nisi praeduros exoletosque; ferebant in Hispania 
Icelum e veteribus concubinis de Neronis exitu 
nuntiantem non modo artissimis osculis palam excep- 
tum ab eo, sed ut sine mora velleretur oratum atque 
seductum. 

XXIII. Periit tertio et septuagesimo aetatis anno, 
imperii mense septimo. Senatus, ut primum licitum 
est, statuam ei decreverat rostratae columnae super- 

! Patrobii, 7 (Sabellicus); Patrobil, Q. 

2 nec] ne, M ; neque, Gd; the other mss. have nec. 

3 abundantis, Graevius ; abundanti, 2; abundantem, Mian 


ed. of 1475 ; abundanter, Gruter. 
4 pronior, mss.; pronioris, Stephanus. 


a The meaning of this passage is uncertain and the inter- 
pretations various ; see the long note in the ed. of Baum- 


221 


GALBA 


From these it was bought by a freedman of Patrobius 
Neronianus for a hundred pieces of gold and thrown 
aside in the place where his patron had been 
executed by Galba’s order. At last, however, his 
steward Argivus consigned it to the tomb with 
the rest of the body in Galba’s private gardens on 
the Aurelian Road. 

XXI. He was of average height, very bald, with 
blue eyes and a hooked nose. His hands and feet 
were so distorted by gout that he could not endüre 
a shoe for long, unroll a book, or even hold one. 
The flesh on his left side too had grown out 
and hung down to such an extent, that it could 
with difficulty be held in place by a bandage. 

XXII. It is said that he was a heavy eater and 
bdo time was in the habit of taking food even 

fore daylight, while at dinner he helped himself 
so lavishly that he would have the leavings which 
remained in a heap before him passed along and 

istributed among the attendants who waited on 
him. He was more inclined to unnatural desire, 
and in gratifying it preferred full-grown, strong men. 
/They say that when Icelus, one of his old-time 
favourites, brought him news in Spain of Nero's 
‘death, he not only received him openly with 
. the fondest kisses, but begged him to prepare 
; himself without delay and took him one side. 

XXIII. He met his end in the seventy-third o9 4». 
year of his age and the seventh month of his reign. 
The senate, as soon as it was allowed to do so, 
voted him a statue standing upon a column adorned 
garten-Crusius. The meaning of super manus is particularly 


dark ; the most plausible suggestion is that it is equivalent 
to ante se. 


225 
VOL. Hl. — Q 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


stantem in parte Fori, qua trucidatus est; sed 
decretum Vespasianus abolevit, percussores sibi ex 


Hispania in Iudaeam submisisse opinatus. 


OTHO 


I. Maiores Othonis orti sunt oppido Ferentio, 
familia vetere et honorata atque ex principibus 
Etruriae. Avus M. Salvius! Otho, patre equite R., 
matre humili incertum an ingenua, per gratiam Liviae 
Augustae, in cuius domo creverat, senator est factus 
nec praeturae gradum excessit, 

Pater L. Otho, materno genere praeclaro multarum- 
que et magnarum propinquitatium, tam carus tamque 
non absimilis facie Tiberio principi fuit, ut plerique 
procreatum ex eo crederent. Urbangs honores, pro- 
consulatum Africae et extraordinaria imperia seve- 
rissime administravit. Ausus etiam est in Illyrico 
milites quosdam, quod motu Camilli ex paenitentia 
praepositos suos quasi defectionis adversus Claudium 
auctores occiderant, capite punire et quidem ante 
principia se coram, quamvis ob id ipsum promotos in 
1 Salvius, Stephanus ; Silvius, Q. 


^ Like Maecenas, Otho was Tyrrhena regum progenies ; 
Hor. Odes, 3. 29. 1. > See Claud. xiii. and xxxv. 2. 


226 


maf s om 


OTHO 


with the beaks of ships, in the part of the Forum 
where he was slain; but Vespasian annulled this 
decree, believing that Galba had sent assassins from 
Spain to Judaea, to take his life. 


——À —— —— ——— — ——— — — 


OTno 


I. Tue ancestors of Otho came from an old and 
illustrious family in the town of Ferentium and 
were descended from the princes of Etruria.^ His 
grandfather Marcus Salvius Otho, whose father was 
a Roman knight but whose mother was of lowly 
origin and perhaps not even free-born, became a 
senator through the influence of Livia Augusta, 
in whose house he was reared ; but did not advance 
beyond the grade of praetor. 

His father Lucius Otho was of a distinguished 
family on his mother's side, with many powerful 
connections, and was so beloved by Tiberius and so 
like him in appearance, that he was believed by 
many to be the emperors son. In the regular 
offices at Rome, the proconsulate of Africa, and 
several special military commands he conducted 
himself with extreme severity. In Illyricum he even 
had the courage to punish some soldiers with death, 
because in the rebellion of Camillus, repenting of 
their defection, they had killed their officers on 
the ground that they were the ringleaders in the 
revolt against Claudius; and they were executed in 
his presence before his headquarters, although he 
knew that they had been promoted to higher 

i 227 
Q 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


3 ampliorem gradum a Claudio sciret. Quo facto 
sicut gloriam auxit, ita gratiam minuit; quam tamen 
mature reciperavit detecta equitis R. fraude, quem 
prodentibus servis necem Claudio parare compererat. 
Namque et senatus honore rarissimo, statua in Palatio 
posita, prosecutus est eum et Claudius adlectum inter 
patricios conlaudans amplissimis verbis hoc quoque 
adiecit: * Vir, quo meliores liberos habere ne opto 
quidem." Ex Albia Terentia splendida femina duos 
filios tulit, L. Titianum et minorem M. cognominem 
sibi; tulit et filiam, quam vixdum nubilem Druso 
Germanici filio despondit. 

II. Otho imperator III. Kal. Mai. natus est Camillo 
Arruntio Domitio Ahenobarbo cons. A prima adules- 
centia prodigus ac procax, adeo ut saepe flagris obiur- 
garetur a patre, ferebatur et vagari noctibus solitus 
atque invalidum quemque obviorum vel potulentum 
corripere ac distento sago impositum in sublime 
iactare. Post patris deinde mortem libertinam auli- 
cam gratiosam, quo efficacius coleret, etiam diligere 
simulavit quamvis anum ac paene decrepitam ; per 
hanc insinuatus Neroni facile summum inter amicos 
locum tenuit congruentia morum, ut vero quidam 
tradunt, et consuetudine mutui stupri. Ac tantum 


a Suetonius does not mention this among the conspiracies 
against Claudius ; see Claud. xiii. 

> Instead of the modern blanket a sagum, or military 
cloak, was used, whence the operation was called sagatio. 


228 


OTHO 


positions by Claudius because of that very act. By 
this deed, while he increased his reputation, he lost 
favour at court; but he speedily regained it by 
detecting the treachery of a Roman knight, whose 
slaves betrayed their master’s design of killing 
the emperor. For in consequence of this, the 
senate conferred a very unusual honour on him by 
setting up his statue in the Palace; and Claudius 
also enrolled him among the patricians, and after 
praising him in the highest terms, added these 
words: “aman of greater loyalty than I can even 
pray for in my own children." By Albia Terentia, a 
woman of an illustrious line, he had two sons, Lucius 
Titianus and a younger called Marcus, who had the 
same surname as himself; also a daughter, whom 
he betrothed to Drusus, son of Germanicus, almost 
before she was of marriageable age. 

II. The emperor Otho was born on the fourth day 
before the Kalends of May in the consulate of 
Camillus Arruntius and Domitius Ahenobarbus. 
From earliest youth he was so extravagant and wild 
that his father often flogged him ; and they say that 
he used to rove about at night and lay hands on any 
one whom he met who was feeble or drunk and toss 
him in a blanket.^ 

After his father's death he pretended love for an 
influential freedwoman of the court, although she 
was an old woman and almost decrepit, that he 
might more effectually win her favour. Having 
through her wormed his way into Nero's good graces, 
he easily held the first place among the emperor's 
friends because of the similarity of their characters; 
but according to some, also through immoral relations. 
At any rate his influence was such, that when he had 


229 


Apr. 28, 
32 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


potentia valuit, ut damnatum repetundis consularem 
virum, ingens praemium pactus, prius quam plane 
restitutionem ei impetrasset, non dubitaret in senatum 
ad agendas gratias introducere. 

III. Omnium autem consiliorum secretorumque 
particeps die, quem necandae matri Nero destinarat, 
ad avertendas suspiciones cenam utrique exquisitissi- 
mae comitatis dedit ; item Poppaeam Sabinam tunc 
adhuc amicam eius, abductam marito demandatamque 
interim sibi, nuptiarum specie recepit nec corrupisse 
contentus adeo dilexit, ut ne rivalem quidem 
Neronem aequo tulerit animo. Creditur certe non 
modo missos ad arcessendam non recepisse, sed 
ipsum etiam exclusisse quondam pro foribus astantem 
miscentemque frustra minas et preces ac depositum 
reposcentem. Quare diducto matrimonio sepositus 
est per causam legationis in Lusitaniam. Et! satis 
visum, ne poena acrior mimum omnem divulgaret, 
qui tamen sic quoque hoc disticho enotuit : 


* Cur Otho mentito sit, quaeritis, exsul honore ? 
Uxoris moechus coeperat esse suae.” 


Provinciam administravit quaestorius per decem 
annos, moderatione atque abstinentia singulari. 


1 et, Q; id, Casaubon. 


* The penalty for extortion was expulsion from the senate ; 
see Jul. xliii. 1. > See note on Nero, xxxiv. 2. 

e According to Tac. Ann. 13. 45, the marriage was a real 
one, as is also implied below ; see note d. 

4 See note ¢ above. 


230 


-yr 


OTHO 


bargained for a huge sum of money to procure the 
pardon of an ex-consul who had been condemned 
for extortion, he had no hesitation in bringing him 
into the senate to give thanks, before he had fully 
secured his restoration. 

III. He was privy to all the emperor's plans and 
secrets, and on the day which Nero had chosen for 
the murder of his mother he gave both of them a 
most elaborate banquet," in order to avert suspicion. 
Also when Poppaea Sabina, who up to that time had 
been Nero's mistress, was separated from her hus- 
band and turned over for the time being to Otho, he 
pretended marriage with her ;^ but not content with 
seducing her he became so devoted that he could 
not endure the thought of having Nero even as a 
rival. Atall events it is believed that he not only 
would not admit those whom Nero sent to fetch 
her, but that on one occasion he even shut out 
the emperor himself, who stood before his door, 
vainly mingling threats and entreaties and demand- 
ing the return of his trust. Therefore Nero 
annulled the marriage? and under colour of an 
appointment as governor banished Otho to Lusitania, 
contenting himself with this through fear that by 
inflicting à severer punishment he would make the 
whole farce public; but even as it was, it was 
published abroad in this couplet : 

* Why, do you ask, in feigned honour does Otho 
in banishment languish ? 

With his own wedded wife he had begun an 

intrigue." 
With the rank of quaestor Otho governed the 
province for ten years with remarkable moderation 

and integrity. 
231 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


IV. Ut tandem occasio ultionis data est, conatibus 
Galbae primus accessit ; eodemque momento et ipse 
spem imperii cepit magnam quidem et ex condicione 
temporum, sed aliquanto maiorem ex affirmatione 
Seleuci mathematici. Qui cum eum olim superstitem 
Neroni fore spopondisset, tunc ultro inopinatus 
advenerat imperaturum quoque brevi repromittens. 

Nullo igitur officii aut ambitionis in quemquam 
genere omisso, quotiens cena principem acciperet, 
aureos excubanti cohorti viritim dividebat, nec minus 
alium alia via militum demerebatur; cuidam etiam 
de parte finium cum vicino litiganti adhibitus arbiter 
totum agrum redemit emancipavitque, ut iam vix 
ullus esset, qui non et sentiret et praedicaret solum 
successione imperii dignum. 

V. Speraverat autem fore ut adoptaretur a Galba, 
idque in dies exspectabat. Sed postquam Pisone 
praelato spe decidit, ad vim conversus est instigante 
super animi dolorem etiam magnitudine aeris alieni. 
Neque enim dissimulabat, nisi principem se stare 
non posse, nihilque referre ab hoste in acie an in 
Foro sub creditoribus caderet. Ante paucos dies 
servo Caesaris pro impetrata dispensatione decies 
sestertium expresserat; hoc subsidium tanti coepti 


^ Tacitus and Plutarch give Ptolemaeus as the name of 
the astrologer. 


232 


—we 


OTHO 


IV. When at last an opportunity for revenge was 


_ given him, Otho was the first to espouse Galba's 


cause, at the same time conceiving on his own 
account high hopes of imperial power, because of the 
state of the times, but still more because of a 
declaration of the astrologer Seleucus.” For he had 
not only promised Otho some time before that he 
would survive Nero, but had at this time unexpectedly 
appeared unsought and made the further promise, 
that he would soon become emperor as well. 

Accordingly Otho let slip no opportunity for 
flattery or attention to anyone. Whenever he 
entertained the prince at dinner, he gave a gold 
piece to each man of the cohort on guard, and put all 
the soldiers under obligation in one form or another. 
Chosen arbiter by a man who was at law with his 
neighbour about a part of his estate, he bought the 
whole property and presented it to him. As a 
result there was hardly anyone who did not both 
think and openly declare that he alone was worthy 
to succeed to the empire. 

V. Now he had hoped to be adopted by Galba, 
and looked forward to it from day to day. But when 
Piso was preferred and he at last lost that hope, he 
resorted to force, spurred on not merely by feelings 
of resentment, but also by the greatness of his debts. 
For he flatly declared that he could not keep on his 
feet unless he became emperor, and that it made no 
difference whether he fell at the hands of the enemy 
in battle or at those of his creditors in the 
Forum. 

He had extorted a million sesterces from one of 
the emperor's slaves a few days before for getting 
him a stewardship. This was the entire capital for 


233 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


fuit. Ac primo quinque speculatoribus commissa 
res est, deinde decem aliis, quos singuli binos 
produxerant ; omnibus dena sestertia repraesentata 
et quinquagena promissa. Per hos sollicitati reliqui, 
nec adeo multi, haud dubia fiducia in ipso negotio 
pluris adfuturos. 

VI. Tulerat animus post adoptionem statim castra 
occupare cenantemque in Palatio Galbam adgredi, 
sed obstitit respectus cohortis, quae tunc excubabat, 
ne oneraretur invidia, quod eiusdem statione et 
Gaius fuerat occisus et desertus Nero. Medium 
quoque tempus religio et Seleucus exemit. 

Ergo destinata die praemonitis consciis, ut se in 
Foro sub aede Saturni ad miliarium aureum 
opperirentur, mane Galbam salutavit, utque con- 
sueverat osculo exceptus, etiam sacrificanti interfuit 
audivitque praedicta haruspicis. ^ Deinde liberto 
adesse architectos nuntiante, quod signum con- 
venerat, quasi venalem domum inspecturus abscessit 
proripuitque se postica parte Palati ad constitutum. 
Alii febrem simulasse aiunt eamque excusationem 
proximis mandasse, si quaereretur. Tunc abditus 
propere muliebri sella in castra contendit ac 
deficientibus lecticariis ! cum descendisset &ursumque 

1 lecticariis, X ; lecticaris, Roth; lecticaribus, MG'r. 

a Between the adoption and the death of Galba, a space of 
five days. 

ò A pillar covered with gilded bronze, erected by Augustus, 
in 20 B.c., on which were engraved the names of the principal 
cities of the empire and their distance from Rome. The 


Roman roads were supposed to converge at that point, but 
the distances on them were reckoned from the gates. 


234 


' dme —d yore oou fc — 


— Ll Lm dii d ——-—-' € 


OTHO 


his great undertaking. At first the enterprise was 
entrusted to five of his body-guard, then to ten 
others, two being chosen by each of the first five ; 
to all of them ten thousand sesterces were paid at 
once and they were promised fifty thousand more. 
Through these others were won over, but not so very 
many, since he had full confidence that more would 
join him when the business was afoot. 
VI. He had been inclined to seize the Camp im- 
mediately after the adoption, and set upon Galba as 
he was dining in the Palace, but had been prevented 
by consideration for the cohort which was on guard 
at the time, and a reluctance to increase its ill 
repute; for it was while that same cohort was at its o P ARE 
post that both @elba had been slain and Nero had "" M 
been forsaken. The intervening time% was lost "**'"^ + 
owing to bad omens and the warnings of Seleucus. 
Accordingly, when the day was set, after admon- 
ishing his confederates to await him in the Forum at 
the golden mile-post^ hard by the temple of Saturn, 
he called upon Galba in the morning and was 
welcomed as usual with a kiss. He also attended 
the emperor as he was offering sacrifice, and heard 
the predictions of the soothsayer. Then a freed- 
man announced that the architects had tome, 
which was the signal agreed on, and going off 
as if to inspect a house which was for sale, he 
rushed from the Palace by a back door and hast- 
ened to the appointed place. Others say that he 
feigned an attack of fever and asked those who stood 
near him to give that excuse, in case he should be 
missed. Then hurriedly entering a closed sedan, such 
as women use, he hurried to the camp, but got out 
when the bearers' strength flagged, and started to run. 


235 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


cepisset, laxato calceo restitit, donec omissa mora 
succollatus et a praesente comitatu imperator con- 
salutatus inter faustas adclamationes strictosque 
gladios ad principia devenit, obvio quoque non aliter 
ac si conscius et particeps foret adhaerente. Ibi 
missis qui Galbam et Pisonem trucidarent, ad 
conciliandos pollicitationibus militum animos nihil 
magis pro contione testatus est, quam id demum se 
habiturum, quod sibi illi reliquissent. 

VII. Dein.vergente iam die ingressus senatum 
positaque brevi ratione! quasi raptus de publico et 
suscipere imperium vi coactus gesturusque communi 
omnium arbitrio, Palatium petit. Ac super ceteras 
gratulantium adulantiumque blanditias ab infima 
plebe appellatus Nero nullum indicium recusantis 
dedit, immo, ut quidam tradiderunt, etiam diplo- 
matibus primisque epistulis suis ad quosdam pro- 
vinciarum praesides Neronis cognomen adiecit. 
Certe et imagines statuasque eius reponi passus est 
et procuratores atque libertos ad eadem officia 
revocavit, nec quicquam prius pro potestate sub- 
scripsit quam quingenties sestertium ad peragendam 
Auream Domum. 

Dicitur ea nocte per quietem pavefactus gemitus 
maximos edidisse repertusque a concursantibus humi 
ante lectum iacens per omnia piaculorum genera 
Manes Galbae, a quo deturbari expellique se viderat, 
propitiare temptasse; postridie quoque in augurando 

1 ratione, Erasmus ; oratione, mss. 


236 


| 


=. o T . -9— 


OTHO 


His shoe came untied and he stopped, whereupon 
without delay he was at once taken up on the shoulders 
of his companions and hailed as emperor. In this 
way he arrived at headquarters, amid acclamations and 
drawn swords, while everyone whom he met fell in, 
just as though he were an accomplice and a partici- 
pator in the plot. He then sent emissaries to kill 
Galba and Piso, and made no further promises in the 
assembly to win the loyalty of the soldiers than to 
declare that he would have that—and only that— 
which they should leave to him. 

VII. Next, as the day was drawing to its close, he 
entered the senate and after giving a brief account 
of himself, alleging that he had been carried off in the 
streets and forced to undertake the rule, which he 
would exercise in accordance with the general will, 
he went to the Palace. When in the midst of 
the other adulations of those who congratulated and 
flattered him, he was hailed by the common herd as 
Nero, he made no sign of dissent ; on the contrary, 
. according to some writers, he even made use of that 
surname in his commissions and his first letters to 
some of the governors of the provinces. Certain it 
is that he suffered Nero's busts and statues to be set 
up again, and reinstated his procurators and freedmen 
in their former posts, while the first grant that he 
signed as emperor was one of fifty million sesterces 
for finishing the Golden House. 

It is said that he had a fearful dream that night, 
uttered loud groans, and was found by those who 
ran to his aid lying on the ground beside his couch ; 
that he tried by every kind of expiatory rite to 
propitiate the shade of Galba, by whom he dreamt 
that he was ousted and thrown out; and that next 


237 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


tempestate orta graviter prolapsum identidem 
obmurmurasse : 
Tí yap por kal paxpots avdois ; ! 

VIII. Sub idem vero tempus  Germaniciani 
exercitus in Vitelli verba iurarant. Quod ut 
comperit, auctor senatui fuit mittendae legationis, 
quae doceret electum iam principem, quietem 
concordiamque ? suaderet; et tamen per internuntios 
ac litteras consortem imperii generumque se Vitellio 
optulit. Verum haud dubio bello iamque ducibus 
et copiis, quas Vitellius praemiserat, appropin- 
quantibus animum fidemque erga se praetorianorum 
paene internecione amplissimi ordinis expertus est. 
Placuerat? per classiarios arma transferri remittique 
navibus ; ea cum in castris sub noctem promerentur, 
insidias quidam suspicati tumultum excitaverunt ; 
ac repente omnes nullo certo duce in Palatium 
cucurrerunt caedem senatus flagitantes, repulsisque 
tribunorum qui inhibere temptabant, nonnullis et 
occisis, sic ut erant cruenti, ubinam imperator esset 
requirentes perruperunt in triclinium usque nec nisi 
viso destiterunt. 

1 aùàoîs, c; M and the greater number of the other mas. 
have SovaAas. : 

2 concordiumque, GT6; et concordiam, T; the other mes. 


have only concordiam. 
3 placuerat, c (Torrentius) ; et placuerat, 0; ei, Biücheler. 


a Proverbial of undertaking something beyond one’s 
powers; cf. Cic. ad Att. ii. 16. 

> To Ostia. ¢ Of the armoury. 

4 This difficult passage is obscure because of its brevity 
and perhaps through corruption of the text. The same 
story is told by Tacitus (Hist. 1. 80) and Plutarch (Otho, 3.), 
but the three accounts seem to vary. According to 
Suetonius the arms were sent from the praetorian camp 
to Ostia, to fit out the (eighteenth) cohort, and that the 


238 


“me o rm o IM — 


nU m am ey 


eo] vka 


OTHO 


day, as he was taking the auspices, a great storin 
arose and he had a bad fall, whereat he muttered 
from time to time: 
With long pipes what concern have I ?4 

VIII. Now at about this same time the armies in 
Germany swore allegiance to Vitellius. When Otho 
learned of this, he persuaded the senate to send a 
deputation, to say that an emperor had already been 
chosen and to counsel peace and harmony; but in 
spite of this he offered Vitellius by messengers and 
letters a share in the imperial dignity and proposed 
to become his son-in-law. But when it became 
clear that war was inevitable, and the generals and 
troops which Vitellius had sent in advance were 
already drawing near, he was given a proof of the 
affection and loyalty of the praetorians towards him- 
self which almost resulted in the destruction of the 
senate. It had been resolved that some arms should 
be removed and carried back ® on shipboard by the 
marines; but as these were being taken out¢ in the 
Camp towards nightfall, some suspected treachery 
and started a riot; then on a sudden all the soldiers 
hastened to the Palace without any particular leader, 
demanding the death of the senators. After putting 
to flight some of the tribunes who attempted to 
stop them, and killing others, just as they were, all 
blood-stained, they burst right into the dining-room, 
demanding to know where the emperor was; and 
they could not be quieted until they had seen him. 
riot started in the praetorian camp ; the account of Tacitus 
seems to imply that it was the seldir from Ostia (joined by 
the praetorians) that burst into Otho's dining room : insiden- 
tes equis urbem ac Palatium petunt. The arms in question 


would seem to be a part of those belonging to the cohort; 
hence remitti. See however Hofstee, ad loc. 


239 


3 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


Expeditionem autem inpigre atque etiam prae- 
propere incohavit, nulla ne religionum quidem cura, 
sed et motis necdum conditis ancilibus, quod 
antiquitus infaustum habetur, et die, quo cultores 
deum Matris lamentari et plangere incipiunt, 
praeterea adversissimis auspiciis. Nam et victima 
Diti patri caesa litavit, cum tali sacrificio contraria 
exta potiora sint, et primo egressu inundationibus 
Tiberis retardatus ad vicensimum etiam lapidem 
ruina aedificiorum praeclusam viam offendit. 

IX. Simili temeritate, quamvis dubium nemini 
esset quin trahi bellum oporteret, quando et fame et 
angustiis locorum urgeretur hostis, quam primum 
tamen decertare statuit, sive impatiens longioris 
sollicitudinis speransque ante Vitelli adventum 
profligari plurimum posse, sive impar militum ardori 
pugnam deposcentium. Nec ulli pugnae affuit 
substititque Brixelli. 

Et tribus quidem, verum mediocribus proeliis 
apud Alpes circaque Placentiam et ad Castoris, 
quod loco nomen est, vicit; novissimo maximoque 
apud Betriacum! fraude superatus est, cum spe 
conloquii facta, quasi ad condicionem pacis militibus 
eductis, ex inproviso atque in ipsa consalutatione ? 


1 Betriacum] Bretiacum, 0. 
2 consalutatione, MQ (cf. Tac. Hist. 2. 42); the other mas. 
have consultatione. 


a From the temple of Mars, to be carried through the 
streets in the sacred procession. To begin any enterprise 
during that time was considered unlucky, und weddings 
were avoided ; see Ovid, Fasti, iii. 393. 

> Cybele, whose festival was from March 24 to 30. 

e Tacitus, Hist. 2. 24, says locus Castorum (= Castoris et 
Pollucis) vocatur, and that it was twelve miles from Cremona. 
There was probably a temple there to the Twin Brethren. 


240 


OTHO 


He began his expedition with energy and in fact 
too hastily, without any regard even for the omens, 
and in spite of the fact that the sacred shields had 
been taken out," but not yet put back, which for ages 
has been considered unlucky ; on the very day, too, 
when the worshippers of the Mother of the. Gods ^ 
begin their wailing and lamentation, and also with 
most unfavourable auspices. For having offered up a 
victim to father Dis, he had good omens, whereas 
in such a sacrifice adverse indications are more 
favourable; and when he first left the city, he 
was delayed by floods of the Tiber, while at the 
twentieth milestone he found the road blocked by 
fallen buildings. 

IX. With like rashness, although no one doubted 
that the proper course was to protract the war, since 
the enemy were hard pressed by hunger and by the 
narrowness of their quarters, he decided to fight 
a decisive battle as soon as possible, either because 
he could not endure the continued worry and hoped 
that the war could be ended before the arrival of 
Vitellius, or from inability to resist the impetuosity 
of his soldiers, who clamoured for the fight. He 
himself did not take part in any of the battles, but 
remained behind at Brixellum. 

He was victorious in three contests, but they 
were of little moment: in the Alps, near Placentia, 
and “at Castor's,"* asthe place is called. In the final 
and decisive struggle at Betriacum he was defeated, 
but through treachery. For hope of a conference 
was offered, and when his soldiers were led out in 
the belief that they were to discuss terms of peace, 
a battle was forced upon them unexpectedly, just as 
they were exchanging greetings with the foe. 


241 
VOL. II. R 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


3 dimicandum fuisset. Ac statim moriendi impetum 


cepit, ut multi nec frustra opinantur, magis pudore, 
ne tanto rerum hominumque periculo dominationem 
sibi asserere perseveraret, quam desperatione ulla 
aut diffidentia copiarum ; quippe residuis integrisque 
etiam nunc quas secum ad secundos casus detinuerat, 
et supervenientibus aliis e Dalmatia Pannoniaque et 
Moesia, ne victis quidem adeo afflictis ut non in 
ultionem ignominiae quidvis discriminis ultro et vei 
solae subirent. 

X. Interfuit huic bello pater meus Suetonius 
Laetus, tertiae decimae legionis tribunus angusti- 
clavius. Is mox referre crebro solebat Othonem 
etiam privatum usque adeo detestatum civilia arma, 
ut memorante quodam inter epulas de Cassi 
Brutique exitu cohorruerit; nec concursurum cum 
Galba fuisse, nisi confideret sine bello rem transigi 
posse; tunc ad despiciendam vitam exemplo 
manipularis militis concitatum, qui cum cladem 
exercitus nuntiaret nec cuiquam fidem faceret ac 
nunc mendaci nunc timoris, quasi fugisset, ex acie 
argueretur, gladio ante pedes eius incubuerit. Hoc 
viso proclamasse eum aiebat, non amplius se in 
periculum talis tamque bene meritos coniecturum. 

Fratrem igitur fratrisque filium et singulos ami- 
corum cohortatus, ut sibi quisque pro facultate 


242 


~ — ~ — 


-n |e! gee - 


—— — M — 


- = -— -e , ate eo NÉ -— —À ane d 


d coe e - 


OTHO 


After the defeat, Otho at once resolved to take his 
own life, rather from a feeling of shame, as many 
have thought with good reason, and an unwillingness 
to persist in a struggle for imperial power at the 
expense of such danger to life and property, than 
from any despair of success or distrust of his troops ; 
for even then he had a fresh and strong force which he 
had held in reserve for a second attempt, while others 
were on their way from Dalmatia, Pannonia, and 
Moesia. Even the defeated troops were not so 
crushed as not to undergo any danger, and even 
without support undertake to avenge their disgrace. 

X. My father Suetonius Laetus took part in that 
war, as a tribune of the equestrian order in the 
Thirteenth legion. He used often to declare after- 
wards that Otho, even when he was a private citizen, 
so loathed civil strife, that at the mere mention of 
the fate of Brutus and Cassius at a banquet he 
shuddered; that he would not have engaged with 
Galba, if he had not felt confident that the affair 
could be settled peacefully; further, that he was 
led to hold his life cheap at that time by the 
example of a common soldier. This man on bring- 
ing news of the defeat of the army was believed by 
no one, but was charged by the soldiers now with 
falsehood and now with cowardice, and accused of 
running away; whereupon he fell on his sword at 
the emperor's feet. My father used to say that at 
this sight Otho cried out that he would no longer 
endanger the lives of such brave men, who had 
deserved so well. 

Having therefore advised his brother, his nephew, 
and his friends one by one to look out each for his 
own safety as best they could, he embraced and 


243 
R 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


consuleret, ab amplexu et osculo suo dimisit omnis, 
secretoque capto binos codicillos exaravit, ad sororem 
consolatorios et ad Messalinam Neronis, quam 
matrimonio destinarat, commendans reliquias suas 
et memoriam. Quicquid deinde epistularum erat, 
ne cui periculo aut noxae apud victorem forent, 
concremavit. Divisit et pecunias domesticis ex copia 
praesenti, 

XI. Atque ita paratus intentusque iam morti, 
tumultu inter moras exorto ut eos, qui discedere 
et abire coeptabant, corripi quasi desertores de- 
tinerique sensit : *Adiciamus," inquit, * vitae et hanc 
noctem," his ipsis totidemque verbis, vetuitque vim 
cuiquam fieri; et in serum usque patente cubiculo, 
si quis adire vellet, potestatem sui praebuit. Post 
hoc sedata siti gelidae aquae potione arripuit duos 
pugiones et explorata utriusque acie, cum alterum 
pulvino subdidisset, foribus adopertis  artissimo 
somno quievit. Et circa lucem demum experge- 
factus uno se traiecit ictu infra laevam papillam 
irrumpentibusque ad primum gemitum modo celans 
modo detegens plagam exanimatus est et celeriter, 
nam ita praeceperat, funeratus, tricensimo et 
octavo aetatis anno et nonagensimo et quinto 
imperii die. 

XII. Tanto Othonis animo nequaquam corpus aut 
habitus competit. Fuisse enim et modicae staturae 
et male pedatus scambusque ! traditur, munditiarum 


! scambusque, Turnebus; cambusque, 0; cf. Bonnet, 
A. L. L. 13, 579. 


244 


OTHO 


kissed them all and sent them off. Then going to a 
retired place he wrote two notes, one of consolation 
to his sister, and one to Nero’s widow Messalina, 
whom he had intended to marry, commending to 
her his corpse and his memory. Then he burned 
all his letters, to prevent them from bringing danger 
or harm to anyone at the hands of the victor. He 
also distributed what money he had with him among 
his servants. 

XI. When he had thus made his preparations and 
was now resolved upon death, learning from a dis- 
turbance which meantime arose that those who were 
beginning to depart and leave the camp were being 
seized and detained as deserters, he said * Let us add 
this one more night to our life " (these were his very 
words), and he forbade the offering of violence to 
anyone. Leaving the door of his bedroom open until 
a late hour, he gave the privilege of speaking with 
him to all who wished to come in. After that 
quenching his thirst with a draught of cold water, he 
caught up two daggers, and having tried the point of 
both of them, put one under his pillow. Then closing 
the doors, he slept very soundly. When he at last 
woke up at about daylight, he stabbed himself with 
a single stroke under the left breast; and now con- 
cealing the wound, and now showing it to those who 
rushed in at his first groan, he breathed his last and 
was hastily buried (for such were his orders) in the 
thirty-eighth year of his age and on the ninety-fifth 
day of his reign. 

XII. Neither Otho's person nor his bearing sug- 
gested such great courage. He is said to have been 
of moderate height, splay-footed and bandy-legged, 
but almost feminine in his care of his person. He 


245 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


vero paene muliebrium, vulso corpore, galericulo 
capiti propter raritatem capillorum adaptato et 
adnexo, ut nemo dinosceret; quin et faciem cotidie 
rasitare ac pane madido linere consuetum, idque 
instituisse a prima lanugine, ne barbatus umquam 
esset; sacra etiam Isidis saepe in lintea religiosaque 
veste propalam celebrasse. Per quae factum putem, 
ut mors eius minime congruens vitae maiore miraculo 
fuerit. Multi praesentium militum cum plurimo fletu 
manus ac pedes iacentis exosculati, fortissimum virum, 
unicum imperatorem praedicantes, ibidem statim nec 
procul a rogo vim suae vitae attulerunt; multi et 
absentium accepto nuntio prae dolore armis inter se 
ad internecionem concurrerunt. Denique magna pars 
hominum incolumem gravissime detestata mortuum 
laudibus tulit, ut vulgo iactatum sit etiam, Galbam 
ab eo non tam dominandi quam rei p. ac libertatis 
restituendae causa interemptum. 


VITELLIUS 


I. VrrELLioRUM originem alii aliam et quidem 
diversissimam tradunt, partim veterem et nobilem, 
partim vero novam et obscuram atque etiam sor- 
didam; quod ego per adulatores obtrectatoresque 
246 


VITELLIUS 


had the hair of his body plucked out, and because of 
the thinness of his locks wore a wig so carefully 
fashioned and fitted to his head, that no one suspected 
it. Moreover, they say that he used to shave every day 
and smear his face with moist bread, beginning the 
practice with the appearance of the first down, so as 
never to have a beard ; also that he used to celebrate 
the rites of Isis publicly in the linen garment pre- 
scribed by the cult. I am inclined to think that it 
was because of these habits that a death so little in 
harmony with his life excited the greater marvel. 
Many of the soldiers who were present kissed his 
hands and feet as he lay dead, weeping bitterly and 
calling him the bravest of men and an incomparable 
emperor, and then at once slew themselves beside 
his bier. Many of those who were absent too, on 
receiving the news attacked and killed one another 
from sheer grief. In short the greater part of those 
who bad hated him most bitterly while he lived 
lauded him to the skies when he was dead; and it 
was even commonly declared that he had put an end 
to Galba, not so much for the sake of ruling, as of 
restoring the republic and liberty. 


VITELLIUS 


I. Or the origin of the Vitellii different and widely 
varying accounts are given, some saying that the 
family was ancient and noble, others that it was new 
and obscure, if not of mean extraction. I should 
believe that these came respectively from the 


247 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


imperatoris Vitelli evenisse opinarer, nisi aliquanto 
prius de familiae condicione variatum esset. Exstat 
Q. Elogi! ad Quintum Vitellium Divi Augusti 
quaestorem libellus, quo continetur, Vitellios Fauno 
Aboriginum rege et Vitellia, quae multis locis pro 
numine coleretur, ortos toto Latio imperasse ; horum 
residuam stirpem ex Sabinis transisse Romam atque 
inter patricios adlectam ; indicia stirpis mansisse diu 
viam Vitelliam ab Ianiculo ad mare usque, item 
coloniam eiusdem nominis, quam gentili copia ad- 
versus Aequiculos tutandam olim depoposcissent ; 
tempore deinde Samnitici belli praesidio in Apuliam 
misso quosdam ex Vitellis subsedisse Nuceriae eorum- 
que progeniem longo post intervallo repetisse urbem 
atque ordinem senatorium. 

II. Contra plures auctorem generis libertinum 
prodiderunt, Cassius Severus nec minus alii eundem 
et sutorem veteramentarium, cuius filius sectionibus 
et cognituris uberius compendium nanctus, ex muliere 
vulgari, Antiochi cuiusdam furnariam exercentis filia, 
equitem R. genuerit. Sed quod: discrepat, sit in 
medio. Ceterum P. Vitellius domo Nuceria, sive ille 
stirpis antiquae sive pudendis parentibus atque avis, 


! exstatq(ue) elogi, 2 (elogii, XT; elogium, G). 
248 


VITELLIUS 


flatterers and detractors of the emperor, were it not 
for a difference of opinion about the standing of the - 
family at a considerably earlier date. We have a 
book of Quintus Elogius addressed to Quintus 
Vitellius, quaestor of the Deified Augustus, in which 
it is written that the Vitellii were sprung from Faunus, 
king of the Aborigines, and Vitellia, who was wor- 
shipped as a goddess in many places; and that they 
ruled in all Latium. That the surviving members of 
the family moved from the Sabine district to Rome 
and were enrolled among the patricians. That traces 
of this stock endured long afterwards in the Vitellian 
Road, running from the Janiculum all the way to 
the sea, as well as in a colony of the same name, 
which in ancient days the family had asked the 
privilege of defending against the Aequicoli with 
troops raised from their own line. That when after- 
wards a force was sent into Apulia at the time of the 
Samnite war, some of the Vitellii settled at Nuceria, 
and that after a long time their descendants returned 
to the city and resumed their place in the senatorial 
order. 

II. On the other hand several have written that 
the founder of the family was a freedman, while 
Cassius Severus and others as well say further that 
he was a cobbler, and that his son, after making a 
considerable fortune from the sale of confiscated 
estates and the profession of informer, married a 
common strumpet, daughter of one Antiochus who 
kept a bakery, and became the father of a Roman 
knight. But this difference of opinion may be left 
unsettled. 

In any event Publius Vitellius of Nuceria, whether 
of ancient stock or of parents and forefathers in 


249 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


eques certe R. et rerum Augusti procurator, quattuor 
filios amplissimae dignitatis cognomines ac tantum 
praenominibus distinctos reliquit Aulum, Quintum, 
Publium, Lucium. Aulus in consulatu obiit, quem 
cum Domitio Neronis Caesaris patre inierat, prae- 
lautus! alioqui famosusque cenarum magnificentia. 
Quintus caruit ordine, cum auctore Tiberio secerni 
minus idoneos senatores removerique placuisset. 
Publius, Germanici comes, Cn. Pisonem inimicum et 
interfectorem eius accusavit condemnavitque, ac post 
praeturae honorem inter Seiani conscios arreptus et 
in custodiam fratri datus scalpro librario venas sibi 
incidit, nec tam mortis paenitentia quam suorum 
obtestatione obligari curarique se passus in eadem 
custodia morbo periit. Lucius ex consulatu Syriae 
praepositus, Artabanum Parthorum regem summis 
artibus non modo ad conloquium suum, sed etiam ad 
veneranda legionum signa pellexit. Mox cum Claudio 
principe duos insuper ordinarios consulatus censuram- 
que gessit. Curam quoque imperii sustinuit absente 
eo expeditione Britannica; vir innocens et industrius, 
sed amore libertinae perinfamis, cuius etiam salivis 


melle commixtis, ne clam quidem aut raro sed cotidie 
1 praelautus, Basle ed. of 1533 ; praelatus, Q0. 


a See Tac. Ann. 2. 48. _ > See Calig. xiv. 3. 
250 


VITELLIUS 


whom he could take no pride, unquestionably a 
Roman knight and a steward of Augustus’s property, 
left four sons of high rank with the same name and 
differing only in their forenames: Aulus, Quintus, 
Publius and Lucius. Aulus, who was given to luxury 
and especially notorious for the magnificence of his 
feasts, died a consul, appointed to the office with 
Domitius, father of the emperor Nero. Quintus 
lost his rank at the time when it was resolved, 
at the suggestion of Tiberius, to depose and get rid 
of undesirable senators. Publius, a member of 
Germanicus' staff, arraigned Gnaeus Piso, the enemy 
and murderer of his commander, and secured his 
condemnation. Arrested among the accomplices of 
Sejanus, after holding the praetorship, and handed 
over to his own brother to be kept in confinement, 
he opened his veins with a penknife, but allowed 
himself to be bandaged and restored, not so much 
from unwillingness to die, as because of the en- 
treaties of his friends ; and he met a natural death 
while still in confinement. Lucius attained the 
consulate and then was made governor of Syria, 
where with supreme diplomacy he not only induced 
Artabanus, king of the Parthians, to hold a con- 
ference with him,’ but even to do obeisance to the 
standards of the legion. Later he held, with the 
emperor Claudius, two more regular consulships and 
the censorship. He also bore the charge of the empire 
while Claudius was away on his expedition to Britain. 
He was an honest and active man, but of very ill 
repute because of his passion for a freedwoman, 
which went so far that he used her spittle mixed 
with honey to rub on his throat and jaws as a 
medicine, not secretly nor seldom, but openly and 


251 


82 A.D. 


20 A.D. 


85 A.D. 


84 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


5 ac palam, arterias et fauces pro remedio fovebat. Idem 
miri in adulando ingenii primus C. Caesarem adorare 
ut deum instituit, cum reversus ex Syria non aliter 
adire ausus esset quam capite velato circumvertens- 
que se, deinde procumbens. Claudium uxoribus 
libertisque addictum ne qua non arte demereretur, 
proximo munere a Messalina petit ut sibi pedes prae- 
beret excalciandos!; detractumque socculum dextrum 
inter togam tunicasque gestavit assidue, nonnumquam 
osculabundus. Narcissi quoque et Pallantis imagines 
aureas inter Lares coluit. Huius et illa vox est: 
* Saepe facias," cum saeculares ludos edenti Claudio 
gratularetur. 

III. Decessit paralysi altero die quam correptus 
est, duobus filiis superstitibus, quos ex Sestilia? 
probatissima nec ignobili femina editos consules 
vidit, et quidem eodem ambos totoque auno, cum 
maiori minor in sex menses successisset. Defunctum 
senatus publico funere honoravit, item statua pro 
rostris cum hac inscriptione : PIETATIS IMMOBILIS ERGA 
PRINCIPEM. 

A. Vitellius L. filius imperator natus est VIII. Kal. 
Oct., vel ut quidam VII. Id. Sept., Druso Caesare 
Norbano Flacco cons. Genituram eius praedictam a 
mathematicis ita parentes exhorruerunt, ut pater 
magno opere semper contenderit, ne qua ei provincia 


1 excalciandos] exculciandos, MGr!Z ; exosculandos, Q. 
2 Sestilia, the mas. except POST, which have Sextilia. 


a See Claud. xxix. l. ’ See Claud. xxi. 2. 
252 


VITELLIUS 


every day. He had also a wonderful gift for flattery 
and was the first to begin to worship Gaius Caesar as 
a god; for on his return from Syria he did not 
presume to approach the emperor except with veiled 
head, turning himself about and then prostrating 
himself. To neglect no means of gaining the favour 
of Claudius, who was a slave to his wives and 
freedmen,* he begged of Messalina as the highest 
possible favour that she would allow him to take off 
her shoes; and when he had taken off her right 
slipper, he constantly carried it about between his 
toga and his tunic, and sometimes kissed it. 
Narcissus also and Pallas he honoured by cherishing 
their images among his household gods. It was he 
who made the famous remark, * May you often do 
it," when he was congratulating Claudius at the 
celebration of the Secular games.» 

III. He died of a paralytic stroke on the eon 
day after he was seized, leaving two sons, begotten 
of Sestilia, a most worthy woman and of no mean 
family, and having lived to see them consuls both in 
the same year, and for the whole year, since the 
younger succeeded the elder for six months. On 
his decease the senate honoured him with a public 
funeral and with a statue on the rostra with this 
inscription : “ Of unwavering loyalty to his emperor.” 

The emperor Aulus Vitellius, son of Lucius, was 
born on the eight-day before the Kalends of October, 
or according to some, on the seventh day before the 
Ides of September, in the consulship of Drusus 
Caesar and Norbanus Flaccus. His parents were 
so aghast at his horoscope as announced by the 
astrologers, that his father tried his utmost, while he 
lived, to prevent the assignment of any province to 


253 


Sept. 24, 
15 A.D. 


Sept. 7 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


vivo se committeretur, mater et missum ad legiones 
et appellatum imperatorem pro afflicto statim lamen- 
tata sit. Pueritiam primamque adulescentiam Capreis 
egit inter Tiberiana scorta, et ipse perpetuo Spintriae ! 
cognomine notatus existimatusque corporis gratia 
initium et causa incrementorum patri fuisse. 

IV. Sequenti quoque aetate omnibus probris 
contaminatus, praecipuum in aula locum tenuit, 
Gaio per aurigandi, Claudio per aleae studium fami- 
liaris, sed aliquanto Neroni acceptior, cum propter 
eadem haec, tum peculiari merito, quod  praesi- 
dens certamini Neroneo cupientem inter citha- 
roedos contendere nec quamvis flagitantibus cunctis 
promittere audentem ideoque egressum theatro revo- 
caverat, quasi perseverantis populi legatione suscepta, 
exorandumque praebuerat. 

V. Trium itaque principum indulgentia non solum 
honoribus verum et sacerdotiis amplissimis auctus, 
proconsulatum Africae post haec curamque operum 
publicorum administravit et voluntate dispari et 
existimatione. In provincia singularem innocentiam 
praestitit biennio continuato, cum succedenti fratri 
legatus substitisset ; at in urbano officio dona atque 
ornamenta templorum subripuisse et commutasse 
quaedam ferebatur proque auro et argento stagnum? 
et aurichalcum supposuisse. 


! gpintriae] spintheriae, mss. 
? stagnum, the mss. except G (stamnum) IM's (stannum). 


a See Tib. xliii. 1. > See Nero, xii. 3 and xxi. 


254 


VITELLIUS 


his son; and when he was sent to the legions and 
hailed as emperor, his mother immediately mourned 
over him as lost. He spent his boyhood and early 
youth at Capreae among the wantons of Tiberius, 
being branded for all time with the nickname 
Spintria ^ and suspected of having been the cause of 
his father's first advancement at the expense of his 
own chastity. 

IV. Stained by every sort of baseness as he ad- 
vanced in years, he held a prominent place at court, 
winning the intimacy of Gaius by his devotion to 
driving and of Claudius by his passion for dice. But 
he was still dearer to Nero, not only because of 
these same qualities, but because of a special service 
besides; for when he was presiding at the contests 
of the Neronia? and Nero wished to compete among 
the lyre-players, but did not venture to do so al. 
though there was a general demand for him and 
accordingly left the theatre, Vitellius called him 
back, alleging that he came as an envoy from the 
insistent people, and thus gave Nero a chance to 
yield to their entreaties. 

V. Having in this way through the favour of three 
emperors been honoured not only with political 
positions but with distinguished priesthoods as well, 
he afterwards governed Africa as proconsul and 
served as curator of public works, but with varying 
purpose and reputation. In his province he showed 
exceptional integrity for two successive years, for 
he served as deputy to his brother, who succeeded 
him; but in his city offices he was said to have 
stolen some of the offerings and ornaments from the 
temples and changed others, substituting tin and 
brass for gold and silver. 


255 


60 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


VI. Uxorem habuit Petroniam consularis viri 
filiam et ex ea filium Petronianum captum altero 
oculo. Hunc heredem a matre sub condicione 
institutum, si de potestate patris exiisset, manu emisit 
brevique, ut creditum est, interemit, insimulatum 
insuper parricidii et quasi paratum ad scelus vene- 
num ex conscientia hausisset. Duxit mox Galeriam 
Fundanam praetorio patre ac de hac quoque liberos 
utriusque sexus tulit, sed marem titubantia oris prope 
mutum et elinguem. 

VII. A Galba in inferiorem Germaniam contra 
opinionem missus est. Adiutum putant T. Vini! 
suffragio, tunc potentissimi et cui iam pridem per 
communem factionis Venetae favorem conciliatus 
esset; nisi quod Galba prae se tulit nullos minus 
metuendos quam qui de solo victu cogitarent, ac 
posse provincialibus copiis profundam gulam eius 
expleri, ut cuivis evidens sit contemptu magis quam 
gratia electum. Satis constat exituro viaticum de- 
fuisse, tanta egestate rei familiaris, ut uxore et liberis, 
quos Romae relinquebat, meritorio cenaculo abditis 
domum in reliquam partem anni ablocaret utque ex 
aure matris detractum unionem pigneraverit ad 
itineris impensas.  Creditorum quidem praestolan- 
tium ac detinentium turbam et in iis Sinuessanos 
Formianosque, quorum publica vectigalia interver- 

1 Vini, Torrentius; Iuni, Q. 
a A faction in the Circus ; see note on Calig. lv. 2. 


256 


-~a 


VITELLIUS 


VI. He had to wife Petronia, daughter of an ex- 
consul, and by her a son Petronianus, who was blind 
in one eye. Since this son was named as his mother’s 
heir on condition of being freed from his father’s 
authority, he manumitted him, but shortly afterwards 
killed him, according to the general belief, charging 
him besides with attempted parricide, and alleging 
that his guilty conscience had led him to drink 
the poison which he had mixed for his intended 
crime. Soon afterwards he married Galeria Fundana, 
daughter of an ex-praetor, and from her too he had 
a son and a daughter, but the former stammered so, - 
that he was all but dumb and tongue-tied. 

VII. Galba surprised everyone by sending him to 
Lower Germany. Some think that it was due to 
Titus Vinius, who had great influence at the time, and 
whose friendship Vitellius had long since won through 
their common support of the Greens.“ But since 
Galba openly declared that no men were less to be 
feared than those who thought of nothing but eating, 
and that Vitellius’s bottomless gullet might be filled 
from the resources of the province, it is clear to 
anyone that he was chosen rather through contempt 
than favour. It is notorious that when he was about 
to start, he lacked means for his travelling expenses, 
and that his need of funds was such, that after con- 
signing his wife and children, whom he left in Rome, 
to a hired garret, he let his house for the rest of 
the year; and that he took a valuable pearl from his 
mother’s ear and pawned it, to defray the expenses 
of his journey. He had to resort to false accusation 
to get rid of the throng of creditors that lay in wait 
for him and tried to detain him, including the people 
of Sinuessa and of Formiae, whose public revenues he 


25] 
VOL. II. s 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


terat, non nisi terrore calumniae amovit, cum 
libertino cuidam acerbius debitum reposcenti iniu- 
riarum formulam, quasi calce ab eo percussus, 
intendisset nec aliter quam extortis quinquaginta 
sestertiis remisisset. 

Advenientem male animatus erga E exer- 
citus pronusque ad res novas libens ac supinis mani- 
bus excepit velut dono deum oblatum, ter consulis 
filium, aetate integra, facili ac prodigo animo. 
Quam veterem de se persuasionem Vitellius recenti- 
bus etiam experimentis auxerat, tota via caligatorum 
quoque militum obvios exosculans perque stabula ac 
deversoria mulionibus ac viatoribus praeter modum 
comis, ut mane singulos iamne iantassent sciscitare- 
tur seque fecisse ructu quoque ostenderet. 

VILI. Castra vero ingressus nihil cuiquam poscenti 
negavit atque etiam ultro ignominiosis notas, reis 
sordes, damnatis supplicia dempsit. Quare vixdum 
mense transacto, neque diei neque temporis ratione 
habita, ac iam vespere, subito a militibus e cubiculo 
raptus, ita ut erat in veste domestica, imperator 
est consalutatus circumlatusque per celeberrimos 
vicos, strictum Divi Iuli gladium tenens detractum 
delubro Martis atque in prima gratulatione porrec- 
tum sibi a quodam. Nec ante in praetorium rediit 
quam flagrante triclinio ex conceptu camini, cum 


a Supinis manibus, ** with hands uplifted,” to the gods in 


gratitude. > See Aug. xxxii. 2. 
c Cf. Aug. lxxiii. and the note. See also Seneca, De 
Trang. An. 1. 5, placet . . . non ex arcula prolata vestis 


. sed domestica et vilis, nec servata, nec sumenda, sollicite. 
258 


VITELLIUS 


had embezzled ; for he brought an action for damages 
against a freedman who was somewhat persistent in 
demanding what was due to him, alleging that he had 
been kicked by him, and would not let him off until 
he had squeezed him to the tune of fifty thousand 
sesterces. 

On his arrival the army, which was disaffected 
towards the emperor and inclined to mutiny, received 
him gladly with open arms," as if he had come to 
them as a gift from the gods; since he was the son of 
a man who had thrice been consul, in the prime of 
life, and of an easy-going and lavish disposition. 
This earlier good opinion Vitellius had also strength- 
ened by recent acts, for throughout the march he 
kissed even the common soldiers whom he met, and 
at the posthouses and inns he was unusually affable 
to the mule drivers and travellers, asking each of 
them in the morning whether they had breakfasted 
and even showing by belching that he had done so. 

VIII. As soon as he entered the camp, he granted 
every request that anyone made and even of his own 
accord freed those in disgrace from their penalties, 
defendants of suits from their mourning,’ and the 
convicted from punishment. Therefore hardly a 
month had passed, when the soldiers, regardless of 
the hour, for it was already evening, hastily took him 
from his bedroom, just as he was, in his common house- 
clothes, and hailed him as emperor. Then he was 
carried about the most populous villages, holding a 
drawn sword of the Deified Julius, which someone had 
taken from a shrine of Mars and handed him during 
the first congratulations. He did not return to head- 
quarters until the dining-room caught fire from the 
stove and was ablaze; and then, when all were shocked 


259 
s 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


quidem consternatis et quasi omine adverso anxiis 
omnibus: “ Bono,’ inquit, “animo estote! nobis 
adluxit," nullo sermone alio apud milites usus. Con- 
sentiente deinde etiam superioris provinciae exercitu, 
qui prior a Galba ad senatum defecerat, cognomen 
Germanici delatum ab universis cupide recepit, 
Augusti distulit, Caesaris in perpetuum recusavit. 

IX. Ac subinde caede Galbae adnuntiata, com- 
positis Germanicis rebus, partitus est copias, quas 
adversus Othonem praemitteret quasque ipse per- 
duceret. Praemisso agmine laetum evenit auspicium, 
siquidem a parte dextra repente aquila advolavit 
lustratisque ! signis ingressos viam sensim antecessit. 
At contra ipso movente statuae equestres, cum 
plurifariam ei ponerentur, fractis repente cruribus 
pariter corruerunt, et laurea, quam religiosissime 
circumdederat, in profluentem excidit ; mox Viennae 
pro tribunali iura reddenti gallinaceus supra umerum 
ac deinde in capite astitit. Quibus ostentis par 
respondit exitus; nam confirmatum per legatos suos 
imperium per se retinere non potuit. 

X. De Betriacensi victoria et Othonis exitu, cum 
adhuc in Gallia esset, audiit nihilque cunctatus, quic- 
quid praetorianarum cohortium fuit, ut pessimi ex- 
empli, uno exauctoravit edicto iussas tribunis tradere 
arma. Centum autem atque viginti, quorum libellos 


lustratisque, ¢ (second Roman edition) ; lustravitque, ^. 


a Vienne, on the Rhone. ò See chap. xviii. below. - 
* [n deserting Galba for Otho. 


260 


VITELLIUS 


and troubled at what seemed a bad omen, he said : 
* Be of good cheer; to us light is given”’; and this 
was his only address to the soldiers. When he 
presently received the support of the army of the 
upper province too, which had previously transferred 
its allegiance from Galba to the senate, he eagerly 
accepted the surname of Germanicus, which was 
unanimously offered him, put off accepting the title 
of Augustus, and forever refused that of Caesar. 

IX. Then hearing of the murder of Galba, he 
settled affairs in Germany and made two divisions of 
his forces, one to send on against Otho, and the other 
to lead in person. The former was greeted with a 
lucky omen at the start, for an eagle suddenly flew 
towards them from the right and after hovering 
about the standards, slowly preceded their line of 
march. But, on the contrary, when he himself began 
his advance, the equestrian statues which were being 
set up everywhere in his honour on a sudden all 
collapsed with broken legs, and the laurel crown 
which he had put on with due ceremony fell into 
a running stream. Later, as he was sitting in judg- 
ment on the tribunal at Vienna," a cock perched on 
his shoulder and then on his head.’ And the out- 
come corresponded with these omens; for he was 
not by his own efforts able to retain the power 
which his lieutenants secured for him. 

X. He heard of the victory:at Betriacum and of 
the death of Otho when he was still in Gaul, and with- 
out delay by a single edict he disbanded all the prae- 
torian cohorts, as having set a pernicious example,° 
and bade them hand over their arms to their 
tribunes. Furthermore, he gave orders that one 
. hundred and twenty of them should be hunted up 


261 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


Othoni datos invenerat exposcentium praemium ob 
editam in caede Galbae operam, conquiri et supplicio 
adfici imperavit, egregie prorsus atque magnifice et ut 
summi principis spem ostenderet, nisi cetera magis 
ex natura et priore vita sua quam ex imperii maies- 
tate gessisset. Namque itinere incohato per medias 
civitates ritu triumphantium: vectus est perque 
flumina delicatissimis navigiis et variarum coronarum 
genere redimitis, inter profusissimos obsoniorum 
apparatus, nulla familiae aut militis disciplina, 
rapinas ac petulantiam omnium in iocum vertens, qui 
non contenti epulo ubique publice praebito, quoscum- 
que libuisset in libertatem asserebant, verbera et 
plagas, saepe vulnera, nonnumquam necem reprae- 
sentantes adversantibus. Utque campos, in quibus 
pugnatum est, adit, abhorrentis quosdam cadaverum 
tabem detestabili voce confirmare ausus est, optime 
olere occisum hostem et melius civem. Nec eo 
setius ad leniendam gravitatem odoris plurimum 
meri propalam hausit passimque divisit. Pari vani- 
tate atque insolentia lapidem memoriae. Othonis 
inscriptum intuens dignum eo Mausoleo ait, pugio- 
nemque, quo is se occiderat, in Agrippinensem 
coloniam misit Marti dedicandum. In Appennini 
quidem iugis etiam pervigilium egit. 


@ Modern Cologne. . j 
> See note c on Calig. liv. 2. The connection suggests an 
orgy in celebration of his victory. 


262 


VITELLIUS 


and punished, having found petitions which they had 
written to Otho, asking for a reward for services 
rendered in connection with Galba’s murder. These 
acts were altogether admirable and noble, and such 
as to give hope that he would be a great prince, 
had it not been that the rest of his conduct was 
more in harmony with his natural disposition and his 
former habits of life than with imperial dignity. 
For when he had begun his march, he rode through 
the middle of the cities like a triumphing general, 
and on the rivers he sailed in most exquisite craft 
wreathed with various kinds of garlands; amid lavish 
entertainments, with no discipline among his house- 
hold or the soldiers, making a jest of the pillage 
and wantonness of all his followers. For not 
content with the banquets which were furnished 
them everywhere at public expense, they set free 
whatever slaves they pleased, promptly paying those 
who remonstrated with blows and stripes, often with 
wounds, and sometimes with death. When he came 
to the plains where the battle was fought and some 
shuddered with horror at the mouldering corpses, 
he had the audacity to encourage them by the 
abominable saying, that the odour of a dead enemy 
was sweet and that of a fellow-citizen sweeter still. 
But nevertheless, the better to bear the awful stench, 
he openly drained a great draught of unmixed wine 
and distributed some among the troops. With 
equal bad taste and arrogance, gazing upon the stone 
inscribed to the memory of Otho, he declared that 
he deserved such a Mausoleum, and sent the dagger 
with which his rival had killed himself to the Colony of 
Agrippina," to be dedicated to Mars. He also held an 
all night festival è on the heights of the Apennines. 


263 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


XI. Urbem denique ad classicum introiit palu- 
datus ferroque succinctus, inter signa atque vexilla, 
sagulatis comitibus ac detectis commilitonum armis. 

Magis deinde ac magis omni divino humanoque 
iure neglecto Alliensi die pontificatum maximum 
cepit, comitia in decem annos ordinavit seque 
perpetuum consulem. Et ne cui dubium foret, quod 
exemplar regendae rei p. eligeret, medio Martio 
campo adhibita publicorum sacerdotum frequentia 
inferias Neroni dedit ac sollemni convivio citharoedum 
placentem palam admonuit, ut aliquid et de dominico 
diceret, incohantique  Neroniana cantica primus 
exsultans etiam plausit. 

XII. Talibus principiis magnam imperii partem 
non nisi consilio et arbitrio vilissimi cuiusque 
histrionum et aurigarum administravit et maxime 
Asiatici liberti. Hunc adulescentulum mutua libidine 
constupratum, mox taedio profugum cum Puteolis 
poscam vendentem reprehendisset, coniecit in com- 
pedes statimque solvit! et rursus in deliciis habuit ; 
iterum deinde ob nimiam contumaciam et furacitatem 
gravatus circeumforano ? lanistae vendidit dilatumque 
ad finem muneris repente subripuit et provincia 
demum accepta manumisit ac primo imperii die 


1 solvit, Basle edition of 1533 ; coluit, Q. 
? circumforano] cireumforaneo, c. 


a A day of special ill omen because of the defeat hy the 
Gauls in 390 s.c. 

* Dominicus (liber) was the name applied to a collection of 
Nero's compositions. 

¢ A drink made of sour wine or vinegar mixed with water. 


264 


" 


VITELLIUS 


XI. Finally he entered the city to the sound of 
the trumpet, wearing a general's mantle and a sword 
at his side, amid standards and banners, with his staff 
in military cloaks and his troops with drawn swords. 

Then showing greater and greater disregard for 
the laws of gods and men, he assumed the office 
of high priest on the day of Allia," held elections 
for ten years to come, and made himself consul for 
life. And to leave no doubt in anyone's mind what 
model he chose for the government of the State, he 
made funerary offerings to Nero in the middle of the 
Campus Martius, attended by a great throng of 
the official priests; and when at the accompanying 
banquet a flute-player was received with applause, 
he openly urged him “to render something from the 
Master's Book > as well" ; and when he began the 
songs of Nero, Vitellius was the first to applaud him 
and even jumped for joy. 

XII. Beginning in this way, he regulated the 
greater part of his rule wholly according to the 
advice and whims of the commonest of actors 
and chariot-drivers, and in particular of his freed- 
man Asiaticus. This fellow had immoral relations 
with Vitellius in his youth, but later grew weary of 
him and ran away. When Vitellius came upon him 
selling posca® at Puteoli, he put him in irons, but 
at once freed him again and made him his favourite. 
His vexation was renewed by the man's excessive in- 
solence and thievishness, and he sold him to an itiner- 
ant keeper of gladiators. When, however, he was once 
reserved for the end of a gladiatorial show, Vitellius 
suddenly spirited him away, and finally on getting 
his province set him free. On the first day of his 
reign he presented him with the golden ring at a 

265 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


aureis donavit anulis super cenam, cum mane 
rogantibus pro eo cunctis detestatus esset severissime 
talem equestris ordinis maculam. 

XIII. Sed vel praecipue luxuriae saevitiaeque 
deditus epulas trifariam semper, interdum quadri- 
fariam dispertiebat, in iantacula et prandia et cenas 
comisationesque, facile omnibus sufficiens vomitandi 
consuetudine.  Indicebat autem aliud alii eadem 
die, nec cuiquam minus singuli apparatus quad- 
ringenis milibus nummum constiterunt. Famosissima 
super ceteras fuit cena data ei adventicia a fratre, 
in qua duo milia lectissimorum piscium, septem 
avium apposita traduntur. Hanc quoque exsuperavit 
ipse dedicatione patinae quam ob immensam 
magnitudinem clipeum Minervae zodtovxouv! dicti- 
tabat. In hac scarorum iocinera, phasianarum ? et 
pavonum cerebella, linguas phoenicopterum, mure- 
narum lactes a Parthia usque fretoque Hispanico per 
navarchos ac triremes petitarum commiscuit. Ut 
autem homo non profundae modo sed intempestivae 
quoque ac sordidae gulae, ne in sacrificio quidem 
umquam aut itinere ullo temperavit, quin inter 
altaria ibidem statim viscus et farris frusta? paene 

1 woAioD Xov, Stephanus; rovdvxou, Q. 


2 phasianarum] fasianarum, A. 
3 farris frusta and farra, ç; farris, 2. 


a The ientaculum was ordinarily a very light breakfast ; 
Vitellius made a banquet of it. 

è Probably referring to the colossal statue of Athena 
Promachos on the.Acropolis at Athens. Pliny, N.H. 35. 
163 ff., says that the platter cost a million sesterces, and 


266 


VITELLIUS 


banquet, although in the morning, when there was a 
general demand that Asiaticus be given that honour, 
he had deprecated in the strongest terms such a blot 
on the equestrian order. 

XIII. But his besetting sins were luxury and 
cruelty. He divided his feasts into three, sometimes 
into four a day, breakfast, luncheon, dinner, and a 
drinking bout ; and he was readily able to do justice 
to all of them through his habit of taking emetics. 
Moreover, he had himself invited to each of these 
meals by different men on the same day, and the 
materials for any one of them never cost less than four 
hundred thousand sesterces. Most notorious of all 
was the dinner given by his brother to celebrate the 
emperor's arrival in Rome, at which two thousand of 
the choicest fishes and seven thousand birds are said 
to have been served. He himself eclipsed even this 
at the dedication of a platter, which on account of 
its enormous size he called the * Shield of Minerva, 
Defender of the City."^ In this he mingled the 
livers of pike, the brains of pheasants and peacocks, 
the tongues of flamingoes and the milt of lampreys, 
brought by his captains and triremes from the 
whole empire, from Parthia to the Spanish strait.¢ 
Being besides a man of an appetite that was not 
only boundless, but also regardless of time or 
decency, he could never refrain, even when he was 
sacrificing or making a journey, from snatching bits 
of meat and cakes amid the altars, almost from the 
very fire, and devouring them on the spot; and in 


that to make it a special furnace was built in the open 
fields. 

e That is, from the eastern to the western limits of the 
Roman world. 


267 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


rapta e foco manderet circaque viarum popinas 
fumantia obsonia vel pridiana atque semesa.. 

XIV. Pronus vero ad cuiuscumque et quacumque 
de causa necem atque supplicium nobiles viros, 
condiscipulos et aequales suos, omnibus blanditiis 
tantum non ad societatem imperii adlicefactos vario 
genere fraudis occidit, etiam unum veneno manu 
sua porrecto in aquae frigidae potione, quam is 
adfectus febre poposcerat. Tum faeneratorum et 
stipulatorum publicanorumque, qui umquam se aut 


Romae debitum aut in via portorium flagitassent, 


vix ulli pepercit; ex quibus quendam in^ ipsa 
salutatione supplicio traditum statimque revocatum, 
cunctis clementiam laudantibus, coram interfici 
iussit, velle se dicens pascere oculos; alterius poenae 
duos filios adiecit deprecari pro patre conatos. Sed 
et equitem R. proclamantem, cum raperetur ad 
poenam: “Heres meus es," exhibere testamenti 
tabulas coegit, utque legit coheredem sibi libertum 
eius ascriptum, iugulari cum liberto imperavit. 
Quosdam et de plebe ob id ipsum, quod Venetae 
factioni clare male dixerant, interemit contemptu 
sui et nova spe id ausos opinatus! Nullis tamen 
infensior quam vernaculis et mathematicis, ut quisque 


1 opinatus] obstinatus, MYT; obstinatosque, G. 


4 See Calig. liv. 2. 

* Vernaculus and verna are used by Martial 10. 3. 1 and 
]. 41. 2 in the sense of ** buffoons," a meaning derived from 
the proverbial insolence of the vernae, or home-born slaves. 
The connection of the word here with mathematicis, and the 
fact that only the astrologers are mentioned in what follows, 
would seem to imply that the lampoons of these jesters 
contained predictions about Vitellius. 


268 


= -—X 0a 6 BÓ re e 


VITELLIUS 


the cookshops along the road, viands smoking hot or 
even those left over from the day before and partly 
consumed. 

XIV. He delighted in inflicting death and torture 
on anyone whatsoever and for any cause whatever, 
putting to death several men of rank, fellow students 
and comrades of his, whom he had solicited to 
come to court by every kind of deception, all but 
offering them a share in the rule. This he did in 
various treacherous ways, even giving poison to one 
of them with his own hand in a glass of cold water, 
for which the man had called when ill of a fever. 
Besides he spared hardly one of the money-lenders, 
contractors, and tax-gatherers who had ever de- 
manded of him the payment of a debt at Rome or of a 
toll on a journey. When one of these had been 
handed over for execution just as he was paying his 
morning call and at once recalled, as all were 
praising the emperor's mercy, Vitellius gave orders 
to have him killed in his presence, saying that he 
wished to feast his eyes. In another case he had two 
sons who attempted to intercede for their father put 
to death with him. A Roman knight also, who cried 
as he was being taken off to execution, “ You are my 
heir,” he compelled to show his will; and reading 
that one of the man's freedmen was put down as 
joint-heir with himself, he ordered the death both 
of the knight and the freedman. He even killed 
some of the common people, merely because they 
had openly spoken ill of the Blue faction," thinking 
that they had ventured to do this from contempt of 
himself and the anticipation of a change of rulers. 
But he was especially hostile to writers of lampoons^ 
and to astrologers, and whenever any one of them was 


269 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


deferretur, inauditum capite puniebat exacerbatus, 
quod post edictum suum, quo iubebat intra Kal. 
Oct. urbe Italiaque mathematici excederent, statim 
libellus propositus est, et Chaldaeos dicere, bonum 
factum, ne Vitellius Germanicus intra eundem 
Kalendarum diem usquam esset. Suspectus et in 
morte matris fuit, quasi aegrae praeberi cibum 
prohibuisset, vaticinante Chatta! muliere, cui velut 
oraculo adquiescebat, ita demum firmiter ac diu- 
tissime imperaturum, si superstes parenti exstitisset. 
Alii tradunt ipsam taedio praesentium et imminen- 
tium metu venenum a filio impetrasse, haud 
sane difficulter. 

XV. Octavo imperii mense desciverunt ab eo 
exercitus Moesiarum atque Pannoniae, item ex 
transmarinis Iudaicus et Syriaticus, ac pars in ab- 
sentis pars in praesentis Vespasiani verba iurarunt. 
Ad retinendum ergo ceterorum hominum studium 
ac favorem nihil non publice privatimque nullo ad- 
hibito modo largitus est.  Dilectum quoque ea 
condicione in urbe egit, ut voluntariis non modo 
missionem post victoriam, sed etiam veteranorum 
iustaeque militiae commoda polliceretur. Urgenti 
deinde terra marique hosti hinc fratrem cum classe ac 
tironibus et gladiatorum manu opposuit, hinc Betria- 
censes copias et duces; atque ubique aut superatus 


1 Chatta] Chattha, MG ; catha, Y ; cata, X. 


a That is, the astrologers, for whom Chaldaei became a 
general term. > See note on Jul. lxxx. 2. 


270. 


VITELLIUS 


accused, he put him to death without trial, particu- 
larly incensed because after a proclamation of his in 
which he ordered the astrologers to leave the city 
and Italy before the Kalends of October, a placard 
was at once posted, reading: “ By proclamation of 
the Chaldeans,” God bless the State’! Before the 
same day and date let Vitellius Germanicus have 
ceased to live." Moreover, when his mother died, 
he was suspected of having forbidden her being 
given food when she was ill, because a woman of the 
Chatti, in whom he believed as he would in an oracle, 
prophesied that he would rule securely and for a 
long time, but only if he should survive his parent. 
Others say that through weariness of present evils 
and fear of those which threatened, she asked poison 
of her son, and obtained it with no great difficulty. 
XV. In the eighth month of his reign the armies 
of the Moesian provinces and Pannonia revolted from 
him, and also in the provinces beyond the seas those 
of Judaea and Syria, the former swearing allegiance 
to Vespasian in his absence and the latter in his 
presence. "Therefore, to retain the devotion and 
favour of the rest of the people, there was nothing 
that he did not lavish publicly and privately, without 
any limit whatever. He also held a levy in the city, 
promising those who volunteered not only their 
discharge upon his victory but also the rewards and 
privileges given to veterans after their regular term 
of service. Later, when his enemies were pressing 
him hard by land and sea, he opposed to them in 
one quarter his brother with a fleet manned by raw 
recruits and a band of gladiators, and in another the 
forces and leaders who had fought at Betriacum. 
And after he was everywhere either worsted or 


271 


3 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


aut proditus salutem sibi et milies sestertium a 
Flavio Sabino Vespasiani fratre pepigit; statimque 
pro gradibus Palati apud frequentes milites cedere 
se imperio quod invitus recepisset professus, cunctis 
reclamantibus! rem distulit ac nocte interposita 
primo diluculo sordidatus descendit ad rostra multis- 
que cum lacrimis eadem illa, verum e libello testatus 
est. Rursus interpellante milite ac populo et ne 
deficeret hortante omnemque operam suam certatim 
pollicente, animum resumpsit Sabinumque et reliquos 
Flavianos nihil iam metuentis vi subita in Capitolium 
compulit succensoque templo Iovis Optimi Maximi 
oppressit, cum et proelium et incendium e Tiberiana 
prospiceret domo inter epulas. Non multo post 
paenitens facti et in alios culpam conferens vocata 
contione iuravit coegitque iurare et ceteros nihil 
sibi antiquius quiete publica fore. Tunc solutum a 
latere pugionem consuli primum, deinde illo re- 
cusante magistratibus ac mox senatoribus singulis 
porrigens, nullo recipiente, quasi in aede Concordiae 
positurus abscessit. Sed quibusdam adclamantibus 
ipsum esse Concordiam, rediit nec solum retinere se 
ferrum affirmavit, verum etiam Concordiae recipere 
cognomen. 


1 reclamantibus, Sc ; declamantibus, A. 


^ As a sign that he was willing to renounce the power of 
life and death over the people; Tac. Hist. 3. 68. 


272 V 


ad 


VITELLIUS 


betrayed, he made a bargain with Flavius Sabinus, 
the brother of Vespasian, that he should have his 
own life and a hundred million sesterces. There- 
upon he immediately declared from the steps of 
the Palace before his assembled soldiers, that he 
withdrew from the rule which had been given 
him against his will; but when all cried out 
against this, he postponed the matter, and after a 
night had passed, went at daybreak to the rostra 
in mourning garb and with many tears made the 
same declaration, but from a written document. 
When the people and soldiers again interrupted him 
and besought him not to lose heart, vying with one 
another in promising him all their efforts in his 
behalf, he again took courage and by a sudden 
onslaught drove Sabinus and the rest of the Flavians, 
who no longer feared an attack, into the Capitol. 
Then he set fire to the temple of Jupiter Optimus 
Maximus and destroyed them, viewing the battle 
and the fire from the house of Tiberius, where he 
was feasting. Not long afterwards he repented of 
his action and throwing the blame upon others, 
called an assembly and took oath, compelling the 
rest to do the same, that there was nothing for 
which he would strive more earnestly than for the 
public peace. Then he took adagger from his side 
and offered it first to the consul, and when he refused 
it, to the magistrates, and then to the senators, one 
by one.^ When no one would take it, he went off 
as if he would place it in the temple of Concord; but 
when some cried out that he himself was Concord, 
he returned and declared that he would not only 
retain the steel but would also adopt the surname 
Concordia. 


.273 
VOL. II. T 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


XVI. Suasitque senatui, ut legatos cum virginibus 
Vestalibus mitterent pacem aut certe tempus ad 
consultandum petituros. . 

Postridie responsa opperienti nuntiatum est per 
exploratorem hostes appropinquare. Continuo igitur 
abstrusus gestatoria sella duobus solis comitibus, 
pistore et coco, Aventinum et paternam domum clam 
petit, ut inde in Campaniam fugeret; mox levi 
rumore et incerto, tamquam pax impetrata esset, 
referri se in Palatium passus est. Ubi cum deserta 
omnia repperisset, dilabentibus et qui simul erant, 
zona se aureorum plena circumdedit confugitque in 
cellulam ianitoris, religato pro foribus cane lectoque 
et culcita obiectis. 

XVII. Irruperant iam agminis antecessores ac 
nemine obvio rimabantur, ut fit, singula. Ab his 
extractus e latebra, sciscitantes, quis esset—nam 
ignorabatur—et ubi esse Vitellium sciret, mendacio 
elusit; deinde agnitus rogare non destitit, quasi 
quaedam de salute Vespasiani dicturus, ut custo- 
diretur interim vel in carcere, donec religatis post 
terga manibus, iniecto cervicibus laqueo, veste di- 
scissa seminudus in Forum tractus est inter magna 
rerum verborumque ludibria per totum viae Sacrae 
spatium, reducto coma capite, ceu noxii solent, atque 
etiam mento mucrone gladii subrecto, ut visendam 


274 


VITELLIUS 


XVI. He also persuaded the senate to send envoys 
with the Vestal virgins, to sue for peace or at least 
to gain time for conference. 

The following day, as he was waiting for a reply, 
word was brought by a scout that the enemy were 
drawing near. Then he was at once hurried into a 
sedan with only two companions, a baker and a cook, 
and secretly went to his fathers house on the 
Aventine, intending to flee from there to Campania. 
Presently, on a slight and dubious rumour that peace 
had been granted, he allowed himself to be taken 
back to the Palace. Finding everything abandoned 
there, and that even those who were with him were 
making off, he put on a girdle filled with gold pieces 
and took refuge in the lodge of the door-keeper, 
tying a dog before the door and putting a couch and 
a mattress against it. 

XVII. The foremost of the army had now forced 
their way in, and since no one opposed them, were 
ransacking everything in the usual way. They 
dragged Vitellius from his hiding-place and when 
they asked him his name (for they did not know him) 
and if he knew where Vitellius was, he attempted 
to escape them by a lie. Being soon recognised, he 
did not cease to beg that he be confined for a time, 
even in the prison, alleging that he had something 
to say of importance to the safety of Vespasian. But 
they bound his arms behind his back, put a noose 
about his neck, and dragged him with rent garments 
and half-naked to the Forum. All along the Sacred 
Way he was greeted with mockery and abuse, his 
head held back by the hair, as is common with 
criminals, and even the point of a sword placed under 
his chin, so that he could not look down but must let 


275 
T 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VII 


2 praeberet faciem neve summitteret ; quibusdam ster- 
core et caeno incessentibus, aliis incendiarium et 
patinarium vociferantibus, parte vulgi etiam corporis 
vitia exprobrante ; erat enim in eo enormis proceritas, 
facies rubida plerumque ex vinulentia, venter obesus, 
alterum femur subdebile impulsu olim quadrigae, cum 
auriganti Gaio ministratorem exhiberet. Tandem 
apud Gemonias minutissimis ictibus excarnificatus 
atque confectus est et inde unco tractus in Tiberim. 

XVIII. Periit cum fratre et filio anno vitae septimo 
quinquagesimo ; nec fefellit coniectura eorum qui 
augurio, quod factum ei Viennae ostendimus, non 
aliud portendi praedixerant quam venturum in 
alicuius Gallicani hominis potestatem, siquidem ab 
Antonio Primo adversarum partium duce oppressus 
est, cui Tolosae nato cognomen in pueritia Becco 
fuerat: id valet gallinacei rostrum. 


276 


s” n me paee ill — ———M eee eee Ol Imm 


— M Ó—À 


VITELLIUS 


his face be seen. Some pelted him with dung and 
ordure, others called him incendiary and glutton, and 
some of the mob even taunted him with his bodily 
defects. He was in fact abnormally tall, with a face 
` usually flushed from hard drinking, a huge belly, and 
one thigh crippled from being struck once upon a time 
by a four-horse chariot, when he was in attendance 
on Gaius as he was driving. At last on the Stairs 
of Wailing he was tortured for a long time and then 
despatched and dragged off with a hook to the Tiber. 

XVIII. He met his death, along with his brother 
and his son, in the fifty-seventh year of his age, 
fulfilling the prediction of those who had declared 
from an omen which befell him at Vienna, as we have 
stated," that he was destined to fall into the power 
of some man of Gaul. For he was slain by Antonius 
Primus, a leader of the opposing faction, who was 
born at Tolosa and in his youth bore the surname 
Becco, which means a rooster's beak.^ 


a Chap. ix., above. 
> Gallus means **a cock," as well as ‘a Gaul.” 


277 


BOOK VIII 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN, THE DEIFIED 
TITUS, DOMITIAN 


LIBER VIII 


DIVUS VESPASIANUS DIVUS TITUS 
DOMITIANUS 


Divus VESPASIANUS 


I. REsELLIOoNE trium principum et caede incertum 
diu et quasi vagum imperium suscepit firmavitque 
tandem gens Flavia, obscura illa quidem ac sine ullis 
maiorum imaginibus, sed tamen rei p. nequaquam 
paenitenda, constet licet Domitianum cupiditatis ac 
saevitiae merito poenas luisse. 

T. Flavius Petro, municeps Reatinus, bello civili 
Pompeianarum partium centurio an evocatus, profu- 
git ex Pharsalica acie domumque se contulit, ubi 
deinde venia et missione impetrata  coactiones 
argentarias factitavit. ^ Huius filius, cognomine 
Sabinus, expers militiae—etsi quidam eum primi- 
pilarem, nonnulli, cum adhuc ordines duceret, sacra- 
mento solutum per causam valitudinis tradunt— 
publicum quadragesimae in Asia egit; manebantque 

a See note on Galba, x. 3. 


* A duty (portorium) of two and a half per cent. on imports 
and exports ; cf. Jul. xliii, 1. 


280 


BOOK VIII 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN, THE DEIFIED 
TITUS, DOMITIAN 


Tue DEFIED VESPASIAN 


I. The empire, which for a long time had been 
unsettled and, as it were, drifting, through the 
usurpation and violent death of three emperors, was 
at last taken in hand and given stability by the 
Flavian family. This house was, it is true, obscure 
and without family portraits, yet it was one of which 
our country had no reason whatever to be ashamed, 
even though it is the general opinion that the 
penalty which Domitian paid for his avarice and 
cruelty was fully merited. 

Titus Flavius Petro, a burgher of Reate and 
during the civil war a centurion or a volunteer 
veteran* on Pompey's side, fled from the field of 
Pharsalus and went home, where after at last ob- 
taining pardon and an honourable discharge, he 
carried on the business of a collector of moneys. 
His son, surnamed Sabinus (although some say that 
he was a centurion of the first grade, and others that 
while still in command of a cohort he was retired 
because of ill-health) took no part in military life, 
but farmed the public tax of a fortieth® in Asia. 

251 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


imagines a civitatibus ei positae sub hoc titulo: 
KAAWC TEAWNHCANTI. Postea faenus apud 
Helvetios exercuit ibique diem obiit superstitibus 
uxore Vespasia Polla et duobus ex ea liberis, quorum 
maior Sabinus ad praefecturam urbis, minor Vespa- 
sianus ad principatum usque processit. Polla 
Nursiae honesto genere orta patrem habuit Vespa- 
sium Pollionem, ter tribunum militum praefectum- 
que castrorum, fratrem senatorem praetoriae 
dignitatis. Locus etiam ad sextum miliarium a 
Nursia Spoletium euntibus in monte summo 
appellatur Vespasiae, ubi Vespasiorum complura 
monumenta exstant, magnum indicium splendoris 
familiae et vetustatis. Non negaverim iactatum a 
. quibusdam Petronis patrem e regione Transpadana 
fuisse mancipem operarum, quae ex Umbria in 
Sabinos ad culturam agrorum quotannis commeare 
soleant; subsedisse autem in oppido Reatino uxore 
ibidem ducta. Ipse ne vestigium quidem de hoc, 
quamvis satis curiose inquirerein, inveni. 

II. Vespasianus natus est in Sabinis! ultra Reate 
vico modico, cui nomen est Falacrinae,? XV. Kal. 
Decb. vesperi, Q.? Sulpicio Camerino C. Poppaeo 
Sabino cons, quinquennio ante quam Augustus 
excederet; educatus sub paterna avia Tertulla in 
praediis Cosanis. Quare princeps quoque et locum 

1 Sabinis, & ; Samnis, 0. 
? Falacrini] Phalacrinae (-ne), Q. 
3 vesperiq(ue), Q; corrected in g. 


^ A position held by tried and skilful officers, especially 
centurions of the first grade (primipili; C. I. L. iii. 6809, 
etc.) Cf. Vegetius, Epit. Rei Miht. 2. 10, $8 post longam 
probatamque militiam peritissimus omnium legebatur, ut recte 
doceret altos quod ipse cum laude fecisset. 


282 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 


And there existed for some time statues erected in 
his honour by the cities of Asia, inscribed “To 
an honest tax-gatherer." Later he carried on a 
banking business in the Helvetian country and there 
he died, survived by his wife, Vespasia Polla, and by 
two of her children, of whom the elder, Sabinus, rose 
to the rank of prefect of Rome, and the younger, 
Vespasian, even to that of emperor. Polla, who was 
born of an honourable family at Nursia, had for 
father Vespasius Pollio, thrice tribune of the soldiers 
and prefect of the camp," while her brother became a 
senator with the rank of praetor. There is more- 
over on the top of a mountain, near the sixth mile- 
stone on the road from Nursia to Spoletium, a place 
called Vespasiae, where many monuments of the 
Vespasii are to be seen, affording strong proof of 
the renown and antiquity of the house. I ought to 
add that some have bandied about the report, that 
Petro's father came from the region beyond the Po 
and was a contractor for the day-labourers who come 
regularly every year from Umbria to the Sabine 
district, to till the fields; but that he settled in the 
town of Reate and there married. Personally.I have 
found no evidence whatever of this, in spite of 
rather careful investigation. 

II. Vespasian was born in the Sabine country, in a 
small village beyond Reate, called Falacrina, on the P 
evening of the fifteenth day before the Kalends of noh 
December, in the consulate of Quintus Sulpicius ° 
Camerinus and Gaius Poppaeus Sabinus, five years 
before the death of Augustus. He was brought up 
under the care of his paternal grandmother Tertulla 
on her estates "at Cosa. Therefore even after he 
became emperor he used constantly to visit the home 


283 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


incunabulorum assidue frequentavit, manente villa 
qualis fuerat olim, ne quid scilicet oculorum consue- 
tudini deperiret; et aviae memoriam tanto opere 
dilexit, ut sollemnibus ac festis diebus pocillo quoque 
eius argenteo potare perseveraverit. 

Sumpta virili toga latum clavum, quanquam fratre 
adepto, diu aversatus est, nec ut tandem appeteret 
compelli nisi a matre potuit. Ea demum extudit 
magis convicio quam precibus vel auctoritate, dum 
eum identidem per contumeliam anteambulonem 
fratris appellat. 

Tribunatum militum in Thracia meruit; quaestor 
Cretam et Cyrenas provinciam sorte cepit ; aedilitatis 
ac mox praeturae candidatus, illam ! non sine repulsa 
sextoque vix adeptus est loco, hanc? prima statim 
petitione et in primis. Praetor infensum ? senatui 
Gaium ne quo non genere demereretur, ludos extra- 
ordinarios pro victoria eius Germanica depoposcit 
poenaeque coniuratorum addendum censuit, ut 
insepulti proicerentur. Egit et gratias ei apud 
amplissimum ordinem, quod se honore cenae di- 
gnatus esset. 

III. Inter haec Flaviam Domitillam duxit uxorem, 
Statili Capellae equitis R. Sabratensis ex Africa 
delicatam olim Latinaeque condicionis, sed mox 

! illam, Torrentius; etiam, Q. 
2 hanc, Bentley, Duker ; ac, Q. 
3 infensum, Lipsius; infensus (-08), mas. 


a The anteambulo was the client who walked before his 
patron on the street and compelled people to make way for 
him ; cf. Mart. 2. 18. 5, tumidique anteambulo regis, where 
regis means ‘‘ patron," as in Hor. Epist. 1. 17. 43 and else- 
where. > See Calig. xlviii. and xlix. 

¢ Lepidus and Gaetulicus ; see Claud. ix. 1. 


284 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 


of his infancy, where the manor house was kept in its 
original condition, since he did not wish to miss 
anything which he was wont to see there; and he 
was so devoted to his grandmother’s memory, that 
on religous and festival days he always drank from a 
little silver cup that had belonged to her. 

After assuming the garb of manhood he for a long 
time made no attempt to win the broad stripe 
of senator, though his brother had gained it, and 
only his mother could finally induce him to sue for it. 
She at length drove him to it, but rather by sarcasm 
than by entreaties or parental authority, since she 
constantly taunted him with being his brother's 
footman.^ 

He served in Thrace as tribune of the soldiers ; as 
quaestor was assigned by lot to the province of Crete 
and Cyrene; became a candidate for the aedileship 
and then for the praetorship, attaining the former 
only after one defeat and then barely landing in the 
sixth place, but the latter on his first canvass and 
among the foremost. In his praetorship, to lose no 
opportuity of winning the favour of Gaius, who was 
at odds with the senate," he asked for special games 
because of the emperor's victory in Germany and 
recommended as an additional punishment of the 
conspirators^ that they be cast out unburied. He 
also thanked the emperor before that illustrious 
body 4 because he had deigned to honour him with 
an invitation to dinner. 

III. Meanwhile he took to wife Flavia Domitilla, 
formerly the mistress of Statilius Capella, a Roman 
knight of Sabrata in Africa, a woman originally only of 
Latin rank, but afterwards declared a freeborn 

4 The senate. * See note on Aug. xlvii. 


285 


38 A.D. 


89 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


ingenuam et civem Rom. reciperatorio iudicio 
pronuntiatam, patre asserente Flavio Liberale Fe- 
renti genito nec quicquam amplius quam quaestorio 
scriba. Ex hac liberos tulit Titum et Domitianum 
et Domitillam. Uxori ac filiae superstes fuit atque 
utramque adhuc privatus amisit. Post uxoris ex- 
cessum Caenidem, Antoniae libertam et a manu, 
dilectam quondam sibi revocavit in contubernium 
habuitque etiam imperator paene iustae uxoris loco. 
IV. Claudio principe Narcissi gratia legatus le- 
gionis in Germaniam missus est ; inde in Britanniam 
translatus tricies cum hoste conflixit. Duas validis- 
simas gentes superque viginti oppida et insulam 
Vectem Britanniae proximam in dicionem redegit 
partim Auli Plauti legati consularis partim Claudi 
ipsius ductu. Quare triumphalia ornamenta et in brevi 
spatio duplex sacerdotium accepit, praeterea consu- 
latum, quem gessit per duos novissimos anni menses. 
Medium tempus ad proconsulatum usque in otio seces- 
suque.egit, Agrippinam timens potentem adhuc apud 
filium et defuncti quoque Narcissi amici perosam. 
Exim! sortitus Africam integerrime nec sine 
magna dignatione adininistravit, nisi quod Hadru- 
meti seditione quadam rapa in eum iacta sunt. 
Rediit certe nihilo opulentior, ut qui prope labe- 
factata iam fide omnia praedia fratri obligaret neces- 
sarioque ad mangonicos quaestus sustinendae digni- 


1 exim, M ; the other mss. have exin. 


a See Claud. xvii. > The Isle of Wight. 

c Mango (cf. Gk. pdyyavov, ‘‘charm”) was the term 
applied to a dealer in slaves, cattle, or wares, to which he 
tried to give an appearance of greater value than they 
actually possessed. The nickname applied to Vespasian 
implies that his trade was in mules. 


286 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 


citizen of Rome in a suit before arbiters, brought by 
her father Flavius Liberalis, a native of Ferentum 
and merely a quaestor's clerk. By her he had three 
children, Titus, Domitian, and Domitilla. He out- 
lived his wife and daughter ; in fact lost them both 
before he became emperor. After the death of his 
wife he resumed his relations with Caenis, freed- 
woman and amanuensis of Antonia, and formerly 
his mistress; and even after he became emperor he 
treated her almost as a lawful wife. 

IV. In the reign of Claudius he was sent in com- 
mand of a legion to Germany, through the influence of 
Narcissus ; from there he was transferred to Britain,” 
where he fought thirty battles with the enemy. 
He reduced to subjection two powerful nations, 
more than twenty towns, and the island of Vectis,? 
near Britain, partly under the leadership of Aulus 
Plautius, the consular governor, and partly under 
that of Claudius himself. For this he received the 
triumphal regalia, and shortly after two priesthoods, 
besides the consulship, which he held for the last two 
months of the year. The rest of the time up to his 
proconsulate he spent in rest and retirement, through 
fear of Agrippina, who still had a strong influence 
over her son and hated any friend of Narcissus, even 
after the latter's death. 

The chance of the lot then gave him Africa, 
which he governed with great justice and high 
honour, save that in a riot at Hadrumetum he was 
pelted with turnips. Certain it is that he came 
back none the richer, for his credit was so nearly 
gone that he mortgaged all his estates to his brother, 
and had to resort to trading in mules* to keep up his 


287 


51 A.D. 


63 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


tatis causa descenderit ; propter quod vulgo mulio 
vocabatur.  Convictus quoque dicitur ducenta 
sestertia expressisse iuveni, cui! latum clavum 
adversus patris voluntatem impetrarat, eoque 
nomine graviter increpitus. 

Peregrinatione Achaica inter comites Neronis 
cum cantante eo aut discederet saepius aut praesens 
obdormisceret, gravissimam contraxit offensam, pro- 
hibitusque non contubernio modo sed etiam publica 
salutatione secessit in parvam ac deviam civitatem, 
quoad latenti etiamque extrema metuenti provincia 
cum exercitu oblata est. 

Percrebruerat Oriente toto vetus et constans 
opinio esse in fatis ut eo tempore Iudaea profecti 
rerum potirentur. Id de imperatore Romano, quan- 
tum postea eventu paruit, praedictum Iudaei ad se 
trahentes rebellarunt caesoque praeposito legatum 
insuper Syriae consularem suppetias ferentem rapta 
aquila fugaverunt. Ad hunc motum comprimendum 
cum exercitu ampliore et non instrenuo duce, cui 
tamen tuto tanta res committeretur, opus esset, ipse 
potissimum delectus est ut et industriae expertae 
nec metuendus ullo modo ob humilitatem generis ac 
nominis. Additis igitur ad copias duabus legionibus, 
octo alis, cohortibus decem, atque inter legatos 
maiore filio assumpto, ut primum provinciam attigit, 

1 cui, c (Sabellicus); qui, 2. 


a See Nero, xxii. ff. > Probably of auxiliaries. 


288 


uiii, pU EUN 2 — 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 


position ; whence he was commonly known as “the 
Muleteer." He is also said to have been found guilty 
of squeezing two hundred thousand sesterces out of 
a young man for whom he obtained the broad stripe 
against his father's wish, and to have been severely 
rebuked in consequence. 

On the tour through Greece, among the companions 
of Nero,” he bitterly offended the emperor by either 
going out often while Nero was singing, or falling 
asleep, if he remained. Being in consequence 
banished, not only from intimacy with the emperor 
but even from his public receptions, he withdrew to 
a little out-of-the-way town, until a province and an 
army were offered him while he was in hiding and 
in fear of his life. ] 

There had spread over all the Orient an old and 
established belief, that it was fated at that time for 
men coming from Judaea to rule the world. This 
prediction, referring to the emperor of Rome, as after- 
wards appeared from the event, the people of Judaea 
took to themselves; accordingly they revolted and 
after killing their governor, they routed the consular 
ruler of Syria as well, when he came to the rescue, 
and took one of his eagles. Since to put down this 
rebellion required a considerable army with a leader 
of no little enterprise, yet one to whom so great 
power could be entrusted without risk, Vespasian 
was chosen for the task, both as a man of tried 
energy and as one in no wise to be feared because 
of the obscurity of his family and name. There- 
fore there were added to the forces in Judaea two 
legions with eight divisions of cavalry and ten 
cohorts. He took his elder son as one of his 
lieutenants, and as soon as he reached his province 


289 
VOL. II. U 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


proximas quoque convertit in se, correcta statim 
castrorum ,disciplina, unoque et altero proelio tam 
constanter inito, ut in oppugnatione castelli lapidis 
ictum genu scutoque sagittas aliquot exceperit. 

V. Post Neronem Galbamque Othone ac Vitellio 
de principatu certantibus in spem imperii venit 
iam pridem sibi per haec ostenta conceptam. 

In suburbano Flaviorum quercus antiqua, quae 
erat Marti sacra, per tres Vespasiae partus singulos 
repente ramos a frutice dedit, haud dubia signa 
futuri cuiusque fati : primum exilem et cito arefactum, 
ideoque puella nata non perannavit, secundum 
praevalidum ac prolixum et qui magnam felicitatem 
portenderet, tertium vero instar arboris. Quare 
patrem Sabinum ferunt, haruspicio insuper confir- 
matum, renuntiasse matri, nepotem ei Caesarem gen- 
itum ; nec illam quicquam aliud quam cachinnasse, 
mirantem quod adhuc se mentis compote deliraret 
iam filius suus. 

Mox, cum aedilem eum C. Caesar, succensens 
curam verrendis viis non adhibitam, luto iussisset op- 
pleri congesto per milites in praetextae sinum, 
non defuerunt qui interpretarentur, quandoque pro- 
culcatam desertamque rem p. civili aliqua perturba- 


tione in tutelam eius ac velut in gremium deven- 
turam. 


290 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 


he attracted the attention of the neighbouring 
provinces also; for he at once reformed the disci- 
pline of the army and fought one or two battles 
with such daring, that in the storming of a fortress 
he was wounded in the knee with a stone and 
received several arrows in his shield. 

V. While Otho and Vitellius were fighting for the 
throne after the death of Nero and Galba, he began 
to cherish the hope of imperial dignity, which he 
had long since conceived because of the following 
portents. 

On the suburban estate of the Flavii an old oak 
tree, which was sacred to Mars, on each of the three 
occasions when Vespasia was delivered suddenly put 
forth a branch from its trunk, obvious indications of 
the destiny of each child. The first was slender and 
quickly withered, and so too the girl that was born 
died within the year; the second was very strong 
and long and portended great success, but the third 
was the image of a tree. Therefore their father 
Sabinus, so they say, being further encouraged by an 
inspection of victims, announced to his mother that 
a grandson had been born to her who would be a 
Caesar. But she only laughed, marvelling that her 
son should already be in his dotage, while she was 
still of strong mind. 

Later, when Vespasian was aedile, Gaius Caesar, 
incensed at his neglect of his duty of cleaning the 
streets, ordered that he be covered with mud, which 
the soldiers accordingly heaped into the bosom of 
his fringed toga ; this some interpreted as an omen 
that one day in some civil commotion his country, 
trampled under foot and forsaken, would come under 
his protection and as it were into his embrace. 

291 
v 2 


4 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


Prandente eo quondam canis extrarius e trivio 
manum humanam intulit mensaeque subiecit. Ce- 
nante rursus bos arator decusso iugo triclinium irrupit 
ac fugatis ministris quasi repente defessus procidit 
ad ipsos accumbentis pedes cervicemque summisit. 
Arbor quoque cupressus in agro avito sine ulla vi 
tempestatis evulsa radicitus atque prostrata inse- 
quenti die viridior ac firmior resurrexit. 

At in Achaia somniavit initium sibi suisque 
felicitatis futurum, simul ac dens Neroni exemptus 
esset ; evenitque ut sequenti die progressus in atrium 
medicus dentem ei ostenderet tantumque quod 
exemptum. 

Apud Iudaeam Carmeli dei oraculum consulentem 
ita confirmavere sortes, ut quidquid cogitaret volve- 
retque animo quamlibet magnum, id esse proventu- 
rum pollicerentur; et unus ex nobilibus captivis 
Iosephus, cum coiceretur in vincula, constantissime 
asseveravit fore ut ab eodem brevi solveretur, verum 
iam imperatore. Nuntiabantur et ex urbe praesagia : 
Neronem diebus ultimis monitum per quietem, ut 
tensam lovis Optimi Maximi e sacrario in domum 
Vespasiani et inde in Circum deduceret; ac non 
multo post comitia secundi consulatus ineunte Galba 
statuam Divi Iuli ad Orientem sponte conversam, 


a The hand was typical of power, and manus is often used 
in the sense of potestas. > Of Nero's lodging. 


292 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 


Once when he was taking breakfast, a stray dog 
brought in a human hand from the cross-roads and 
dropped it under the table.^ Again, when he was 
dining, an ox that was ploughing shook off its yoke, 
burst into the dining-room, and after scattering the 
servants, fell at the very feet of Vespasian as he 
reclined at table, and bowed its neck as if suddenly 
tired out. A cypress tree, also, on his grandfather's 
farm was torn up by the roots, without the agency 
of any violent storm, and thrown down, and on the 
following day rose again greener and stronger than 
before. 

He dreamed in Greece that the beginning of good 
fortune for himself and his family would come as 
soon as Nero had a tooth extracted; and on the 
next day it came to pass that a physician walked into 
the hall^ and showed him a tooth which he had 
just then taken out. 

When he consulted the oracle of the god of 
Carmel in Judaea, the lots were highly encouraging, 
promising that whatever he planned or wished, 
however great it might be, would come to pass; 
and one of his high-born prisoners, Josephus by 
name, as he was being put in chains, declared most 
confidently that he would soon be released by the 
same man, who would then, however, be emperor. 
Omens were also reported from Rome: Nero in his 
latter days was admonished in a dream to take the 
sacred chariot of Jupiter Optimus Maximus from its 
shrine to the house of Vespasian and from there to 
the Circus. Not long after this, too, when Galba 
was on his way to the elections which gave him his 
second consulship, a statue of the Deified Julius of 
its own accord turned towards the East ; and on the 


293 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


acieque Betriacensi, prius quam committeretur, duas 
aquilas in conspectu omnium conflixisse victaque 
altera supervenisse tertiam ab solis exortu ac 


victricem abegisse. 

Vl. Nec tamen quicquam ante temptavit, prom- 
ptissimis atque etiam instantibus suis, quam sollicita- 
tus quorundam et ignotorum et absentium fortuito 
favore. 

Moesiaci exercitus bina e tribus legionibus milia 
missa auxilio Othoni, postquam ingressis iter nuntia- 
tum est victum eum ac vim vitae suae attulisse, 
nihilo setius Aquileiam usque perseveraverunt, quasi 
rumori minus crederent. Ibi per occasionem ac 
licentiam omni rapinarum genere grassati, cum 
timerent ne sibi reversis reddenda ratio ac subeunda 
poena esset, consilium inierunt eligendi creandique 
imperatoris; neque enim deteriores esse aut Hi- 
spaniensi exercitu qui Galbam, aut praetoriano qui 
Othonem, aut Germaniciano qui Vitellium fecissent. 
Propositis itaque nominibus legatorum consularium, 
quot ubique tunc erant, cum ceteros alium alia 
de causa improbarent et quidam e legione tertia, 
quae sub exitu Neronis translata ex Syria in Moesiam 
fuerat, Vespasianum laudibus ferrent, assensere 
cuncti nomenque eius vexillis omnibus sine mora 
inscripserunt. Et tunc quidem compressa res est 
revocatis ad officium numeris parumper. Ceterum 
divulgato facto Tiberius Alexander praefectus 


294 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 


field of Betriacum, before the battle began, two 
eagles fought in the sight of all, and when one was 
vanquished, a third came from the direction of the 
rising sun and drove off the victor. 

VI. Yet he made no move, although his followers 
were quite ready and even urgent, until he was 
roused to it by the accidental support of men 
unknown to him and at a distance. Two thousand 
soldiers of the three legions that made up the army 
in Moesia had been sent to help Otho. When word 
came to them after they had begun their march 
that he had been defeated and had taken his own 
life, they none the less kept on as far as Aquileia, 
because they did not believe the report. There, 
taking advantage of the lawless state of the times, 
they indulged in every kind of pillage; then, 
fearing that if they went back, they would have to 
give an account and suffer punishment, they took it 
into their heads to select and appoint an emperor, 
saying that they were just as good as the Spanish 
army which had appointed Galba, or the praetorian 
guard which had elected Otho, or the German army 
which had chosen Vitellius. Accordingly the names 
of all the consular governors who were serving any- 
where were taken up, and since objection was made 
to the rest for one reason or another, while some 
members of the third legion, which had been trans- 
ferred from Syria to Moesia just before the death of 
Nero,highly commended Vespasian, they unanimously 
agreed on him and forthwith inscribed his name on 
alltheir banners. At the time, however, the move- 
ment was checked and the soldiers recalled to their 
allegiance for a season. But when their action 
became known, Tiberius Alexander, prefect of Egypt, 


295 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


Aegypti primus in verba Vespasiani legiones adegit 
Kal. Iul., qui principatus dies in posterum observatus 
est; Iudaicus deinde exercitus V. Idus Iul. apud 
ipsum iuravit. 

Plurimum coeptis contulerunt iactatum exemplar 
epistulae verae sive falsae defuncti Othonis ad 
Vespasianum extrema obtestatione ultionem man- 
dantis et ut rei p. subveniret optantis, simul rumor 
dissipatus destinasse victorem Vitellium permutare 
hiberna legionum et Germanicas transferre in 
Orientem ad securiorem mollioremque militiam, 
praeterea ex praesidibus provinciarum Licinius 
Mucianus et e regibus Vologaesus Parthus; ille de- 
posita simultate, quam in id tempus ex aemulatione 
non obscure gerebat, Syriacum promisit exercitum, 
hic quadraginta milia sagittariorum. 

VII. Suscepto igitur civili bello ac ducibus copiis- 
que in Italiam praemissis interim Alexandriam trans- 
iit, ut claustra Aegypti optineret. Hic cum de firmi- 
tate imperii capturus auspicium aedem Serapidis sum- 
motis omnibus solus intrasset ac propitiato multum - 
deo tandem se convertisset, verbenas coronasque et 
panificia, ut illic assolet, Basilides libertus obtulisse 
ei visus est; quem neque admissum a quoquam et 
iam pridem propter nervorum valitudinem vix 


a July 11 ; according to Tac. Hist. 9. 79, it was the fifth 
day before the Nones, July 3. 

è Governor of the neighbouring province of Syria. 

* The strategic importance of Egypt is shown by Tac. 
Ann. 2. 59; cf. Jul. xxxv. 1 (at the endi ; Aug. xviii. 9. 

4 The freedman's name, connected with Greek Basies, 
** king," was an additional omen. 


296 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 


was the first to compel his legions to take the 
oath for Vespasian on the Kalends of July, the 
day which was afterwards celebrated as that of his 
accession ; then the army in Judaea swore allegiance 
to him personally on the fifth day before the Ides of 
July. 

The enterprise was greatly forwarded by the 
circulation of a copy of a letter of the late emperor 
Otho to Vespasian, whether genuine or forged, 
urging him with the utmost earnestness to ven- 
geance and expressing the hope that he would come 
to the aid of his country; further, by a rumour 
which spread abroad that Vitellius had planned, after 
his victory, to. change the winter quarters of 
the legions and to transfer those in Germany to 
the Orient, to a safer and milder service ; and finally, 
among the governors of provinces, by the support 
of Licinius Mucianus, and among the kings, by that 
of Vologaesus, the Parthian. The former, laying 
aside the hostility with which up to that time 
jealousy had obviously inspired him, promised the 
Syrian army ; and the latter forty thousand bowmen. 

VII. Therefore beginning a civil war and sending 
ahead generals with troops to Italy, he crossed 
meanwhile to Alexandria, to take possession of the 
key to Egypt. ^ There he dismissed all his atten- 
dants and entered the temple of Serapis alone, to 
consult the auspices as to the duration of his power. 
And when after many propitiary offerings to the 
god he at length turned about, it seemed to him 
that his freedman Basilides? offered him sacred 
boughs, garlands and loaves, as is the custom 
there; and yet he knew well that no one had 
let him in, and that for some time he had been 


297 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


ingredi longeque abesse constabat. Ac statim ad- 
venere litterae fusas apud Cremonam Vitelli copias, 
ipsum in urbe interemptum nuntiantes. 

Auctoritas et quasi maiestas quaedam ut scilicet 
inopinato et adhuc novo principi deerat; haec 
quoque accessit. E plebe quidam luminibus orbatus, 
item alius debili crure sedentem pro tribunali pariter 
adierunt orantes opem valitudini demonstratam a 
Serapide per quietem: restituturum oculos, si 
inspuisset ; confirmaturum crus, si dignaretur calce 
contingere. Cum vix fides esset ullo modo rem 
successuram ideoque ne experiri quidem auderet, 
extremo hortantibus amicis palam pro contione 
utrumque temptavit ; nec eventus defuit. Per idem 
tempus Tegeae in Arcadia instinctu vaticinantium 
effossa sunt sacrato loco vasa operis antiqui atque in 
iis assimilis Vespasiano imago. 

VIII. Talis tantaque cum fama in urbem reversus 
acto de ludaeis triumpho consulatus octo veteri 
addidit; suscepit et censuram ac per totum imperii 
tempus nihil habuit antiquius quam prope afflictam 
nutantemque rem p. stabilire primo, deinde et 
ornare. 

Milites pars victoriae fiducia, pars ignominiae 
dolore ad omnem licentiam audaciamque processe- 


298 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 


hardly able to walk by reason of rheumatism, and 
was besides far away. And immediately letters came 
with the news that Vitellius had been routed at 
Cremona and the emperor himself slain at Rome. 
Vespasian as yet lacked prestige and a certain 
divinity, so to speak, since he was an unexpected 
and still new-made emperor; but these also were 
given him. A man of the people who was blind, 
and another who was lame, came to him together 
as he sat on the tribunal, begging for the help for 
their disorders which Serapis had promised in a 
dream; for the god declared that Vespasian would 
restore the eyes, if he would spit upon them, and 
give strength to the leg, if he would deign to touch 
it with his heel. Though he had hardly any faith 
that this could possibly succeed, and therefore shrank 
even from making the attempt, he was at last 
prevailed upon by his friends and tried both things 
in public before a large crowd; and with success. 
At this same time, by the direction of certain 
soothsayers, some vases of antique workmanship 


were dug up in a consecrated spot at Tegea in 


Arcadia and on them was an image very like Vespa- 
sian. 

VIII. Returning to Rome under such auspices and 
attended by so great renown, after celebrating a 


triumph over the Jews, he added eight consulships 70, 71, 72, 


and during the whole period of his rule he considered 
nothing more essential than first to strengthen the 
State, which was tottering and almost overthrown, 
and then to embellish it as well. 

The soldiery, some emboldened by their victory 
and some resenting their humiliating defeat, had 


299 


to his former one; he also assumed the censorship d T5, 76 


7, T9 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


rant; sed et provinciae civitatesque liberae, nec non 
et regna quaedam tumultuosius inter se agebant. 
Quare Vitellianorum quidem et exauctoravit plurimos 
et coercuit, participibus autem victoriae adeo nihil 
extra ordinem indulsit, ut etiam legitima praemia 
sero persolverit. Ac ne quam occasionem corrigendi 
disciplinam praetermitteret, adulescentulum fragran- 
tem unguento, cum sibi pro impetrata praefectura 
gratias ageret, nutu aspernatus, voce etiam gravis- 
sima increpuit: * Maluissem alium oboluisses," litter- 
asque revocavit. Classiarios vero, qui ab Ostia et 
Puteolis Romam pedibus per vices commeant, 
petentes constitui aliquid sibi calciarii nomine, 
quasi parum esset sine responso abegisse, iussit 
posthac excalciatos cursitare ; et ex eo ita cursitant. 

Achaiam, Lyciam, Rhodum, Byzantium, Samum 
libertate adempta, item Trachiam! Ciliciam et 
Commagenen dicionis regiae usque ad id tempus, 
in provinciarum formam redegit. ^ Cappadociae 
propter adsiduos barbarorum incursus legiones 
addidit consularemque rectorem imposuit pro eq. R. 

Deformis urbs veteribus incendiis ac ruinis erat ; 
vacuas areas occupare et aedificare, si possessores 
cessarent, cuicumque permisit. Ipse restitutionem 
Capitolii adgressus ruderibus  purgandis manus 
primus admovit ac suo collo quaedam extulit; 
aerearumque tabularum tria milia, quae simul 


1 Trachiam, Bentley (TI); Thraciam, Q0. 


@ They were stationed at Ostia and Puteoli as a fire 
brigade (see Claud. xxv. 2), and the various divisions were 
on duty now in one town, now in the other, and again in 
Rome. 

> Literally, ‘‘on his own neck”; in a basket. 


300 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 


abandoned themselves to every form of licence and 
recklessness ; the provinces, too, and the free cities, 
as well as some of the kingdoms, were in a state of 
internal dissension. Therefore he discharged many 
of the soldiers of Vitellius and punished many ; but 
so far from showing any special indulgence to those 
who had shared in his victory, he was even tardy in 
paying them their lawful rewards. To let slip no 
opportunity of improving military discipline, when a 
young man reeking with perfumes came to thank 
him for a commission which had been given him, 
Vespasian drew back his head in disgust, adding the 
stern reprimand: “I would rather you had smelt of 
garlic"; and he revoked the appointment. When 
the marines who march on foot by turns from Ostia 
and Puteoli to Rome,* asked that an allowance be 
made them under the head of shoe money, not con- 
tent with sending them away without a reply, he 
ordered that in future they should make the run 
barefooted ; and they have done so ever since. 

He made provinces of Achaia, Lycia, Rhodes, 
Byzantium and Samos, taking away their freedom, - 
and likewise of Trachian Cilicia and Commagene, 
which up to that time had been ruled by kings. He 
sent additional legions to Cappadocia because of the 
constant inroads of the barbarians, and gave it a 
consular governor in place of a Roman knight. 
| As the city was unsightly from fires and fallen 

buildings, he allowed anyone to take possession of 
vacant sites and build upon them, in case the owners 
failed to do so. He began the restoration of the 
Capitol in person, was the first to lend a hand in 
clearing away the debris, and carried some of it off 
on his own head.’ He undertook to restore the 


301 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


conflagraverant, restituenda suscepit undique in- 
vestigatis exemplaribus: instrumentum imperii 
pulcherrimum ac vetustissimum, quo continebantur 
paene ab exordio urbis senatus consulta, plebi scita 
de societate et foedere ac privilegio cuicumque 
concessis. 


IX. Fecit et nova opera templum Pacis Foro ' 


proximum Divique Claudi in Caelio monte coeptum 
quidem ab Agrippina, sed a Nerone prope funditus 
destructum ; item amphitheatrum urbe media, ut 
destinasse compererat Augustum. 

Amplissimos ordines et exhaustos caede varia et 
contaminatos veteri neglegentia purgavit supplevitque 
recenso senatu et equite, summotis indignissimis et 
honestissimo quoque Italicorum ac provincialium 
allecto. Atque uti notum esset, utrumque ordinem 
non tam libertate inter se quam dignitate differre, 
de iurgio quodam senatoris equitisque R. ita pro- 
nuntiavit, non oportere maledici senatoribus, remale- 
dici civile fasque esse. 

X. Litium series ubique maiorem in modum 
excreverant, manentibus antiquis intercapedine iuris 
dictionis, accedentibus novis ex condicione tumultu- 
que temporum ; sorte elegit per quos rapta bello 
restituerentur quique iudicia centumviralia, quibus 


a The Colosseum, known as the Flavian amphitheatre 
until the Middle Ages. 

> That is, a citizen could return the abuse of another 
citizen, regardless of their teopective ranks. 

e During the civil wars. 4 See note on Aug. xxxvi. 


302 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 


three thousand bronze tablets which were destroyed 
with the temple, making a thorough search for 
copies: priceless and most ancient records of the 
empire, containing the decrees of the senate and the 
acts of the commons almost from the foundation of 
the city, regarding alliances, treaties, and special 
privileges granted to individuals. 

IX. He also undertook new works, the temple of 
Peace hard by the Forum and one to the Deified 
Claudius on the Caelian mount, which was begun by 
Agrippina, but almost utterly destroyed by Nero; 
also an amphitheatre? in the heart of the city, a plan 
which he learned that Augustus had cherished. 

He reformed the two great orders, reduced by a 
series of murders and sullied by long standing neglect, 
and added to their numbers, holding a review of the 
senate and the knights, expelling those who least 
deserved the honour and enrolling the most dis- 
tinguished of the Italians and provincials. Further- 
more, to let it be known that the two orders differed 
from each other not so much in their privileges as in 


their rank, in the case of an altercation between a | 


senator and a Roman knight, he rendered this 
decision : * Unseemly language should not be used 
towards senators, but to return their insults in kind 
is proper and lawful." è 

X. Lawsuit upon lawsuit had accumulated in all 
the courts to an excessive degree, since those of long 
standing were left unsettled though the interruption 
of court business ^ and new ones had arisen through 
the disorder of the times. He therefore chose com- 
missioners by lot to restore what had been seized in 
time of war, and to make special decisions in the 
court of the Hundred,^ reducing the cases to the 


393 


"AE 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


peragendis vix suffectura litigatorum videbatur aetas, 
extra ordinem diiudicarent redigerentque ad brevissi- 
mum numerum. 

XI. Libido atque luxuria coercente nullo in- 
valuerat; auctor senatui fuit decernendi, ut quae se 
alieno servo iunxisset, ancilla haberetur; neve 
filiorum familiarum faeneratoribus exigendi crediti 
ius umquam esset, hoc est ne post patrum quidem 
mortem. 

XII. Ceteris in rebus statim ab initio principatus 
usque ad exitum civilis et clemens, mediocritatem 
pristinam neque dissimulavit umquam ac frequenter 
etiam prae se tulit. Quin et conantis quosdam 
originem Flavii generis ad conditores Reatinos 
comitemque Herculis, cuius monimentum exstat 
Salaria via, referre irrisit ultro. Adeoque nihil 
ornamentorum extrinsecus cupide appetivit, ut 
triumphi die fatigatus tarditate et taedio pompae 
non reticuerit, merito se plecti, qui triumphum, 
quasi aut debitum maioribus suis aut speratum 
umquam sibi, tam inepte senex concupisset. Ac 
ne tribuniciam quidem potestatem statim nec! 
patris patriae appellationem nisi sero recepit. Nam 
consuetudinem scrutandi salutantes manente adhuc 
bello civili omiserat. 

XIII. Amicorum libertatem, causidicorum figuras 


1 statim nec, supplied by Bücheler ; aut, Roth; statim, O. 
Hirschfeld. 


a In the legal sense; filii familiarum were sons who were 
still under the control of their fathers, regardless of their 
age ; cf. Tib. xv. 2. 

^ His tribunician power was reckoned from July 1, 69, the 


304 


— , — 9 — 0, M — N € M] — 2» ———] e, ———— P oD 


— —— — 9 — 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 
smallest possible number, since it was clear that 
the lifetime of the litigants would not suffice for the 
regular proceedings. 

XI. Licentiousness and extravagance had flourished 
without restraint; hence he induced the senate to 
vote that any woman who formed a connection with 
the slave of another person should herself be treated 
as a bond-woman ; also that those who lend money 
to minors ^ should never have a legal right to enforce 
payment, that is to say, not even after the death of 
the fathers. 

XII. In other matters he was unassuming and 
lenient from the very beginning of his reign until 
its end, never trying to conceal his former lowly 
condition, but often even parading it. Indeed, 
when certain men tried to trace the origin of the 
Flavian family to the founders of Reate and a 
companion of Hercules whose tomb still stands on 
the Via Salaria, he laughed at them for their pains. 
So far was he from a desire for pomp and show, that 
on the day of his triumph, exhausted by the slow and 
tiresome procession, he did not hesitate to say: “It 
serves me fight for being such a fool as to want a 
triumph in my old age, as if it were due to my ancestors 
or had ever been among my own ambitions." He 
did not even assume the tribunician power at once 
nor the title of Father of his Country until late.^ As 
for the custom of searching those who came to pay 
their morning calls," he gave that up before the civil 
war was over. 


XIII. He bore the frank language of his friends, 


day when he was proclaimed emperor by the army. The 
meaning of the sentence is not clear. 
* See Claud. xxxv. 


395 
VOL. II. x 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


ac philosophorum contumaciam  lenissime tulit. 
Licinium Mucianum notae impudicitiae, sed meri- 
torum fiducia minus sui reverentem, numquam nisi 
clam et hactenus retaxare sustinuit, ut apud 
communem aliquem amicum querens adderet clau- 
sulam!: “ Ego tamen vir sum." Salvium Liberalem 
in defensione divitis rei ausum dicere: “Quid ad 
Caesarem, si Hipparchus sestertium milies habet?" 
et ipse laudavit. | Demetrium Cynicum in itinere 
obvium sibi post damnationem ac neque assurgere 
neque salutare se dignantem, oblatrantem etiam 
nescio quid, satis habuit canem appellare. 

XIV. Offensarum inimicitiarumque minime memor 
exsecutorve Vitelli hostis sui filiam splendidissime 
maritavit, dotavit etiam et instruxit. — Trepidum 
eum interdicta aula sub Nerone quaerentemque, 
quidnam ageret aut quo abiret, quidam ex officio 
admissionis simul expellens abire Morboviam iusserat. 
In hune postea deprecantem non ultra verba ex- 
canduit, et quidem totidem fere atque eadem. Nam 
ut suspicione aliqua vel metu ad perniciem cuiusquam 
compelleretur tantum afuit, ut monentibus amicis 
cavendum esse Mettium Pompusianum, quod volgo 
crederetur genesim habere imperatoriam, insuper 
consulem fecerit, spondens quandoque beneficii 
memorem futurum. i 

XV. Non temere quis punitus insons reperietur? 


1 clausulam, Duker; clausulae, 2. 
2 reperietur, c (Scriverius, Salmasius); reperiretur, n. 


a See chap. vi. 4. He boasted that the rule had been at 
his disposal and that he had given it to Vespasian ; see Tac. 
Hist. 4. 4. 

> Implying that Mucianus was effeminate and unchaste. 

c A made-up name from morbus, ‘‘illness”; the ex- 
pression is equivalent to ‘‘ go to the devil.” 


306 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 


the quips of pleaders, and the impudence of the 
philosophers with the greatest patience. Though 
Licinius Mucianus,” a man of notorious unchastity, 
presumed upon his services to treat Vespasian with 
scant respect, he never had the heart to criticise him 
except privately and then only to the extent of 
. adding to a complaint made to a common friend, the 
significant words: “I at least am a man." ^ When 
Salvius Liberalis ventured to say while defending 
a rich client, * What is it to Caesar if Hipparchus 
has a hundred millions," he personally commended 
him. When the Cynic Demetrius met him abroad 
after being condemned to banishment, and without 
deigning to rise in his presence or to salute him, 
even snarled out some insult, he merely called him 
* cur." 

XIV. He was not inclined to remember or to avenge 
affronts or enmities, but made a brilliant match for 
the daughter of his enemy Vitellius, and even pro- 
vided her with a dowry and a house-keeping outfit. 
When he was in terror at being forbidden Nero's | 
court, and asked what on earth he was to do or where 
he was to go, one of the ushers put him out and told 
him to “go to Morbovia^" ; but when the man later 
begged for forgiveness, Vespasian confined his resent- 
ment to words, and those of about the same number 
and purport. Indeed, so far was he from being led 
by any suspicion or fear to cause anyone's death, that 
when his friends warned him that he must keep an 
eye on Mettius Pompusianus, since it was commonly 
believed that he had an imperial horoscope, he even 
made him consul, guaranteeing that he would one 
day be mindful of the favour. 

XV. It cannot readily be shown that any innocent 

307 
x 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


nisi absente eo et ignaro aut certe invito atque 
decepto. Helvidio Prisco, qui et reversum se ex 
Syria solus privato nomine Vespasianum salutaverat 
et in praetura omnibus edictis sine honore ac 
mentione ulla transmiserat, non ante succensuit 
quam  altercationibus  insolentissimis paene in 
ordinem redactus. Hunc quoque, quamvis relegatum 
primo, deinde et interfici iussum, magni aestimavit 
servare quoquo modo, missis qui percussores revo- 
carent; et servasset, nisi iam perisse falso renuntiatum 
esset. Ceterum neque caede cuiusquam umquam 
laetatus! iustis suppliciis inlacrimavit etiam et 
ingemuit. | 

XVI. Sola est, in qua merito culpetur, pecuniae 
cupiditas. Non enim contentus omissa sub Galba 
vectigalia revocasse, nova et gravia addidisse, auxisse 
tributa provinciis, nonnullis et duplicasse, negotia- 
tiones quoque vel privato pudendas propalam 
exercuit, coemendo quaedam tantum ut pluris 
postea distraheret. Ne candidatis quidem honores 
reisve tam innoxiis quam nocentibus absolutiones 
venditare cunctatus est. Creditur etiam procura- 
torum rapacissimum quemque ad ampliora officia ex 
industria solitus promovere, quo locupletiores mox 
condemnaret; quibus quidem volgo pro spongiis 


1 laetatus, c; omitted by the earlier mss. 


a That is, in their superscriptions ; see note on Tib. xxxii. 2. 

> Cogere (redigere) in ordinem is used of one who resists or 
does not show proper respect to a magistrate; that is, 
attempts to reduce him to the level of an ordinary citizen. 
It seems to have been originally a military expression. Cf. 
Claud. xxxviii. 1; Pliny, Epist. 1. 23. 1; Livy, 3. 51. 13. 


308 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 


person was punished save in Vespasian’s absence and 
without his knowledge, or at any rate against his will 
and by misleading him. Although Helvidius Priscus 
was the only one who greeted him on his return 
from Syria by his private name of “ Vespasian,” 
and moreover in his praetorship left the emperor 
unhonoured and unmentioned in all his edicts,” he did 
not show anger until by the extravagance of his 
railing Helvidius had all but degraded him.’ But 
even in his case, though he did banish him and later 
order his death, he was most anxious for any means 
of saving him, and sent messengers to recall those 
who were to slay him; and he would have saved him, 
but for a false report that Helvidius had already been 
done to death. Certainly he never took pleasure in 
the death of anyone, but even wept and sighed over 
those who suffered merited punishment. 

XVI. The only thing for which he can fairly be 
censured was his love of money. For not content 
with reviving the imposts which had been repealed 
under Galba, he added new and heavy burdens, 
increasing the amount of tribute paid by the pro- 
vinces, in some cases actually doubling it, and quite 
openly carrying on traffic which would be shameful 
even for a man in private life; for he would buy 
up certain commodities merely in order to distribute 
them at a profit. He made no bones of selling 
offices to candidates and acquittals to men under 
prosecution, whether innocent or guilty. He is even 
believed to have had the habit of designedly advanc- 
ing the most rapacious of his procurators to higher 
posts, that they might be the richer when he later 
condemned them ; in fact, it was common talk that 
he used these men as sponges, because he, so to 


309 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


dicebatur uti, quod quasi et siccos madefaceret et 
exprimeret umentis. 

Quidam natura cupidissimum tradunt, idque ex- 
probratum ei a sene bubulco, qui negata sibi 
gratuita libertate, quam imperium adeptum? 
suppliciter orabat, proclamaverit, vulpem pilum 
mutare, non mores. Sunt contra qui opinentur ad 
manubias et rapinas necessitate compulsum summa 
aerarii fiscique inopia, de qua testificatus sit initio 
statim principatus, professus quadringenties milies 
opus esse, ut res p. stare posset. Quod et veri 
similius videtur, quando et male partis optime usus 
est. 

XVII. In omne hominum genus liberalissimus 
explevit censum  senatorium, consulares inopes 
quingenis sestertiis annuis sustentavit, plurimas per 
totum orbem civitates terrae motu aut incendio 
affictas restituit in melius, ingenia et artes vel 
maxime fovit. 

XVIII. Primus e fisco Latinis Graecisque rhe- 
toribus annua centena constituit; praestantis poetas, 
nec non et artifices, Coae Veneris,? item Colossi 
refectorem insigni congiario magnaque mercede 
donavit; mechanico quoque grandis columnas exigua 
impensa  perducturum in Capitolium  pollicenti 


1 negata . . . gratuita libertate, II QST' ; the other mas. 


- "have negatam . . . gratuitam libertatem. 


2 adeptum, Tç ; ademptum, 0. 
$ Coae Veneris, Graevius ; coevenerit, MGT; coemerit, 
LPS!; coemit, S?T. 


a This had been increased to 1,200,000 sesterces by 
Augustus. ^ See note on Aug. xli. 2. 

¢ Doubtless referring to the statue of Venus consecrated 
by Vespasian in his temple of Peace, the sculptor of which, 


310 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 


speak, soaked them when they were dry and squeezed 
them when they were wet. 

Some say that he was naturally covetous and was 
taunted with it by an old herdsman of his, who on 
being forced to pay for the freedom for which he 
earnestly begged Vespasian when he became em- 
peror, cried: * The fox changes his fur, but not his 
nature.” Others on the contrary believe that he 
was driven by necessity to raise money by spoliation 
and robbery because of the desperate state of the 
treasury and the privy purse; to which he bore wit- 
ness at the very beginning of his reign by declaring 
that forty thousand millions were needed to set 
the State upright. This latter view seems the more 
probable, since he made the best use of his gains, 
ill-gotten though they were. 

XVII. He was most generous to all classes, mak- 
ing up the requisite estate? for senators, giving 
needy ex-consuls an annual stipend of five hundred 
thousand sesterces, restoring to a better condition 
many cities throughout the empire which had 
suffered from earthquakes or fires, and in particular 
encouraging men of talent and the arts. 

XVIII. He was the first to establish a regular 
salary of a hundred thousand sesterces for Latin 
and Greek teachers of rhetoric, paid from the privy 
purse. He also presented eminent poets with princely 
largess® and great rewards, and artists, too, such as 
the restorer of the Venus of Cos* and of the 
Colossus. To a mechanical engineer, who pro- 
mised to transport some heavy columns to the 


according to Pliny, was unknown. The Venus of Cos was 
the work of Praxiteles. 
4 The colossal statue of Nero; see Nero, xxxi. 1. 


311 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


praemium pro commento non mediocre optulit, 
operam remisit praefatus sineret se plebiculam 
pascere. | 

XIX. Ludis, per quos scaena Marcelliani theatri 
restituta  dedicabatur, vetera quoque acroamata 
revocaverat. Apellae! tragoedo quadringenta, 
Terpno Diodoroque citharoedis ducena, nonnullis 
centena, quibus minimum, quadragena sestertia 
super plurimas coronas aureas dedit. Sed et 
convivabatur assidue ac saepius recta et dapsile, 
ut macellarios adiuvaret. Dabat sicut Saturnalibus 
viris apophoreta, ita per Kal. Mart. feminis. Et 
tamen ne sic quidem pristina cupiditatis infamia 
caruit. ^ Alexandrini Cybiosacten? eum vocare 
perseveraverunt, cognomine unius e regibus suis 
turpissimarum sordium. Sed et in funere Favor 
archimimus personam eius ferens imitansque, ut 
est mos, facta ac dicta vivi, interrogatis palam 
procuratoribus, quanti funus et pompa constaret, 
ut audit sestertium centiens, exclamavit, centum 
sibi sestertia darent ac se vel in Tiberim proicerent. 

XX. Statura fuit quadrata, compactis firmisque 
membris, vultu veluti nitentis; de quo quidam 
urbanorum non infacete, siquidem petenti, ut et in 
se aliquid diceret: * Dicam," inquit, *cum ventrem 

! Apellae, Bücheler ; Apellari, mas. (apelli, pç) 


2 Cybiosacten, Torrentius from Strabo, 17. 796 ; cybio- 
tanten, Q. 


a See Aug. lxxiv. and the note. 

> See note 4 on Calig. lv. 2. 

¢ The Matronalia or feast of married women; see Hor. 
Odes, 3. 8, 1. 

7? A transliterated Greek word, xvBicáxr?s, meaning 
** dealer in square pieces (ioi) of salt fish,” 


312 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 


Capitol at small expense, he gave no mean reward 
for his invention, but refused to make use of it, 
saying: * You must let me feed my poor commons.” 

XIX. At the plays with which he dedicated the 
new stage of the theatre of Marcellus he revived 
the old musical entertainments. To Apelles, the 
tragic actor, he gave four hundred thousand sesterces ; 
to Terpnus and Diodorus, the lyre-players, two hun- 
dred thousand each ; to several a hundred thousand ; 
while those who received least were paid forty 
thousand, and numerous golden crowns were awarded 
besides. He gave constant dinner-parties, too, usually 
formally ^ and sumptuously, to help the marketmen. 
He gave gifts? to women on the Kalends of March; 
as he did to the men on the Saturnalia. 

Yet even so he could not be rid of his former ill- 
repute for covetousness. The Alexandrians per- 
sisted in calling him Cybiosactes,? the surname of 
one of their kings who was scandalously stingy. 
Even at his funeral, Favor, a leading actor of mimes, 
who wore his mask and, according to the usual custom, 
imitated the actions and words of the deceased dur- 
ing his lifetime, having asked the procurators in a 
loud voice how much his funeral procession would 
cost, and hearing the reply * Ten million sesterces," 
cried out: * Give me a hundred thousand and fling 
me even into the Tiber." 

XX. He was well built, with strong, sturdy 
limbs, and the expression of one who was straining. 
Apropos of which a witty fellow, when Vespasian 
asked him to make a joke on him also, replied 
rather cleverly : “I will, when you have finished 


¢ According to Celsus, 2. 1, quadratum is applied to a 
well-proportioned body, neither slender nor fat. 


313 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


exonerare desieris." Valitudine prosperrima usus 
est, quamvis ad tuendam eam nihil amplius quam 
fauces ceteraque membra sibimet ad numerum in 
sphaeristerio defricaret inediamque unius diei per 
singulos menses interponeret. 

XXI. Ordinem vitae hunc fere tenuit. In 
principatu maturius semper ac de nocte vigilabat ; 
dein perlectis epistulis officiorumque omnium 
breviariis, amicos admittebat, ac dum salutabatur, 
et calciabat ipse se et amiciebat; postque decisa 
quaecumque obvenissent negotia gestationi et inde 
quieti vacabat, accubante aliqua pallacarum, quas in 
locum defunctae Caenidis! plurimas constituerat; a 
secreto in balineum tricliniumque transibat. Nec 
ullo tempore facilior aut indulgentior traditur, eaque 
momenta domestici ad aliquid petendum magno 
opere captabant. 

XXII. Et super cenam autem et semper alias 
comissimus multa ioco transigebat; erat enim 
dicacitatis plurimae, etsi scurrilis et sordidae, ut ne 
praetextatis quidem verbis abstineret. Et tamen 
nonnulla eius facetissima exstant, in quibus et haec. 
Mestrium Florum consularem, admonitus ab eo 
* plaustra" potius quam * plostra ” dicenda, postero 
die * Flaurum" salutavit. Expugnatus autem a 
quadam, quasi amore suo deperiret, cum perductae 
pro concubitu sestertia quadringenta donasset, ad- 


1 Caenidis, Q ; Cenidis, MS? ; the other mas. have G(a)enidis- 


^ Cf. Macrobius, Saturn. 2. 1. 9, impudica et praetextata 
verba ; Gell. N.A. 9. 10. 4, non praetextatis sed puris hones- 
tisque verbis. Various explanations of the term are given. 
It perhaps means words such as boys use ; but see Festus, 
8. v. praetextum sermonem. 

è Plaustra was the original form of the word for ‘‘ wagons,” 


314 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 


relieving yourself He enjoyed excellent health, 
though he did nothing to keep it up except to rub 
his throat and the other parts of his body a certain 
number of times in the tennis court, and to fast one 
day in every month. 

XXI. This was in general his manner of life. 
While emperor, he always rose very early, in fact 
before daylight ; then after reading his letters and 
the reports of all the officials, he admitted his friends, 
and while he was receiving their greetings, he put 
on his own shoes and dressed himself. After des- 
patching any business that came up, he took time for 
a drive and then for a nap, lying with one of his 
concubines, of whom he had taken several after the 
death of Caenis. After his siesta he went to the 
bath and the dining-room ; and it is said that at no 
time was he more good-natured or indulgent, so that 
the members of his household eagerly watched for 
these opportunities of making requests. 

XXII. Not only at dinner but on all other occasions 
he was most affable, and he turned off many mat- 
ters with a jest; for he was very ready with sharp 
sayings, albeit of a low and buffoonish kind, so that 
he did not even refrain from obscene expressions.% 
Yet many of his remarks are still remembered which 
are full of fine wit, and among them the following. 
When an ex-consul called Mestrius Florus called his 
attention to the fact that the proper pronunciation 
was plaustra? rather than plostra, he greeted him 
next day as * Flaurus.” When he was importuned 
by a woman, who said that she was dying with love 
for him, he took her to his bed and gave her four 


but there was also a plebeian form plostra ; see Hor. Serm. 1. 
6. 42 and cf. Claudius, Clodius. 


315 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


monente dispensatore, quem ad modum summam 
rationibus vellet inferri: “Vespasiano,” inquit, 
* adamato.”’ 

XXIII. Utebatur et versibus Graecis tempestive 
satis, et de quodam procerae staturae improbiusque 
nato: 

Maxpa Bids, kpaddwy SoXuxóo tov éyxos, 
et de Cerylo liberto, qui dives admodum ob subter- 
fugiendum quandoque ius fisci ingenuum se et Lache- 
tem mutato nomine coeperat ferre : 


© Adyns, Adyxns, 
érav aroGavys,! aUis e£ apxns ? éco 
cv > KypvAos.4 
Maxime tamen dicacitatem adfectabat in deformibus 
lucris, ut invidiam aliqua cavillatione dilueret trans- 
ferretque ad sales. 

Quendam e caris ministris dispensationem cuidam 
quasi fratri petentem cum distulisset, ipsum candi- 
datum ad se vocavit ; exactaque pecunia, quantam is 
cum suffragatore suo pepigerat, sine mora ordinavit ; 
interpellanti mox ministro: * Alium tibi," ait, “ quaere 
fratrem ; hic, quem tuum putas, meus est." Mulio- 
nem in itinere quodam suspicatus ad calciandas mulas 
desiluisse,? ut adeunti litigatori spatium moramque 

1 dmo0dvps] arobaves, Q. 

2 àpxfs, Casaubon; atxapxns, M ; avxapns, G ; the rest of 
the mss. for the most part have avxapxns. 

3 oe ob, Biicheler; eov, Q. 4 l'ypuAos, Q. 

5 desiluisse, M ; the other mas. have desilisse. 

^ Iliad 7. 213. > Menander, Fr. 223. 2, Koch. 
316 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 


hundred thousand sesterces for her favours. Being 
asked by his steward how he would have the sum 
entered in his accounts, he replied: “To a passion 
for Vespasian.” 

XXIII. He also quoted Greek verses with great 
timeliness, saying of a man of tall stature, and 
monstrous parts : 


* Striding along and waving a lance that casts a long 
-= shadow," @ 


and of the freedman Cerylus, who was very rich, 
and to cheat the privy purse of its dues at his death 
had begun to give himself out as freeborn, changing 
his name to Laches : 
* O Laches, Laches, 
When you are dead, you'll change your name at 
once 
To Cerylus again." ^ 


But he particularly resorted to witticisms about 
his unseemly means of gain, seeking to diminish 
their odium by some jocose saying and to turn them 
into a jest. 

Having put off one of his favourite attendants, 
who asked for a stewardship for a pretended brother, 
he.summoned the candidate himself, and after 
compelling him to pay him as much money as 
he had agreed to give his advocate, appointed him 
to the position without delay. On his attendant’s 
taking up the matter again, he said : “ Find yourself 
another brother; the man that you thought was yours 
is mine." On a journey, suspecting that his muleteer 
had got down to shoe the mules merely to make 
delay and give time for a man with a lawsuit to 
approach the emperor, he asked how much he was 


317 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


praeberet, interrogavit quanti calciasset, et pactus 
est! lucri partem. Reprehendenti filio Tito, quod 
etiam urinae vectigal commentus esset, pecuniam ex 
prima pensione admovit ad nares, sciscitans num 
odore offenderetur; et illo negante : “ Atqui," ? in- 
quit, ^e lotio est." Nuntiantis legatos decretam ei 
publice non mediocris summae statuam colosseam, 
iussit vel continuo ponere,? cavam manum ostentans 
et paratam basim dicens. Ac ne in metu quidem ac 
periculo mortis extremo abstinuit iocis: Nam cum 
inter cetera prodigia Mausoleum derepente patuisset 
et stella crinita in caelo apparuisset, alterum ad 
Iuniam Calvinam e gente Augusti pertinere dicebat, 
alterum ad Parthorum regem qui capillatus esset ; 
prima quoque morbi accessione: * Vae," inquit, * puto 
deus fio." 

XXIV. Consulatu suo nono temptatus in Cam- 
pania motiunculis levibus protinusque urbe repetita, 
Cutilias* ac Reatina rura, ubi aestivare quotannis 
solebat, petit. Hic cum super urgentem valitudinem 
creberrimo frigidae aquae usu etiam intestina vitiasset 
nec eo minus muneribus imperatoriis ex consuetudine 
fungeretur, ut etiam legationes audiret cubans, alvo 
repente usque ad defectionem soluta, imperatorem 
ait stantem mori oportere; dumque consurgit ac 


1 et pactus est, J. Gronov. ; pactusque est, L*c ; the other 
mss. have pactus. 4 vas be atquin, M. 

3 ponere, Bentley ; the mss. have poneret or ponerent. 

4 Cutilias, c (Beroaldus); Cutillas, Q. 


a Of Augustus; see uy. c. 4. 
> The connection between the stella crinita and the long 
hair of the Parthian king is obvious; it does not seem 


318 


a - = 


THE DEIFIED VESPASIAN 


paid for shoeing the mules and insisted on a share of 
the money. When Titus found fault with him for 
contriving a tax upon public conveniences, he held 
a piece of money from the first payment to his son's 
nose, asking whether its odour was offensive to him. 
When Titus said “No,” he replied, “ Yet it comes 
from urine." On the report of a deputation that 
a colossal statue of great cost had been voted him 
at public expense, he demanded to have it set up at 
once, and holding out his open hand, said that the 
base was ready. He did not cease his jokes even 
when in apprehension of death and in extreme 
danger; for when among other portents the Mauso- 
leum * opened on a sudden and a comet appeared in 
the heavens, he declared that the former applied 
to Junia Calvina of the family of Augustus, and 
the latter to the king of the Parthians, who wore 
his hair long;^ and as death drew near, he said: 
* Woe's me. Methinks I'm turning into a god." 
XXIV. In his ninth consulship he had a slight 
illness in Campania, and returning at once to the 
city, he left for Cutilae and the country about 
Reate, where he spent the summer every year. 
There, in addition to an increase in his illness, 
having contracted a bowel complaint by too free 
use of the cold waters, he nevertheless continued 
to perform his duties as emperor, even receiving 
embassies as he lay in bed. Taken on a sudden 
with such an attack of diarrhea that he all but 
swooned, he said: * An emperor ought to die 
standing," and while he was struggling to get on 
his feet, he died in the arms of those who tried 


accidental that Calvina is connected with calvus, ‘‘ bald," 
though this word-play seems to have been overlooked. 


319 


~ 


79 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


nititur, inter manus sublevantium extinctus est V IIII. 
Kal. Iul annum agens aetatis sexagensimum ac 
nonum superque mensem ac diem septimum. 

XXV. Convenit inter omnis, tam certum eum de 
sua suorumque genitura semper fuisse, ut post 
assiduas in se coniurationes ausus sit adfirmare senatui 
aut filios sibi successuros aut neminem. Dicitur etiam 
vidisse quondam per quietem stateram media parte 
vestibuli Palatinae domus positam examine aequo, 
cum in altera lance Claudius et Nero starent, in altera 
ipse ac filii. Nec res fefellit, quando totidem annis 


parique temporis spatio utrique imperaverunt. 


Divus Titus 


I. Trrus, cognomine paterno, amor ac deliciae 
generis humani—tantum illi ad promerendam omnium 
voluntatem vel ingenii vel artis vel fortunae super- 
fuit, et, quod difficillimum est, in imperio, quando 
privatus atque etiam sub patre principe ne odio 
quidem, nedum vituperatione publica caruit—natus 
est III. Kal. Ian. insigni anno Gaiana nece, prope 

* Claudius and Nero reigned thirteen and fourteen years 
respectively ; Vespasian, ten; Titus, two; and Domitian, 
fifteen. 

320 


THE DEIFIED TITUS 


to help him, on the ninth day before the Kalends June 23, 


of July, at the age of sixty-nine years, one month 
and seven days. Harte, Yvan 

XXV. All agree that he had so much faith 
in his own horoscope and those of his family, 
that even after constant conspiracies were made 
against him he had the assurance to say to the 
senate that either his sons would succeed him 
or he would have no successor. It is also said 
that he once dreamed that he saw a balance with 
its beam on a level placed in the middle of the 
vestibule of the Palace, in one pan of which stood 
Claudius and Nero and in the other himself and 
his sons. And the dream came true, since both 
houses reigned for the same space of time and 
the same term of years.* 


Tue Deiriep Tirus 


I. Tirus, of the same surname as his father, 
was the delight and darling of the human race; 
such ability had he, by nature, art, or good fortune, 
to win the affections of all men, and that, too, 
which is no easy task, while he was emperor ; for as 
a private citizen, and even during his father's rule, 
he did not escape hatred, much less public criticism. 

He was born on the third day before the Kalends 
of January, in the year memorable for the death 
of Gaius, in a mean house near the Septizonium ^ 


* Some building of seven stories ; the famous Septizonium 
on the Palatine was the work of Septimius Severus. 


321 
VOL. II. Y 


9 A.D. 


Dec. 30, 
41 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


Septizonium sordidis aedibus, cubiculo vero perparvo 
et obscuro, nam manet adhuc et ostenditur. 

II. Educatus in aula cum Britannico simul ac 
paribus disciplinis et apud eosdem magistros in- 
stitutus. Quo quidem tempore aiunt metoposcopum 
a Narcisso Claudi liberto adhibitum, ut Britannicum 
inspiceret, constantissime affirmasse illum quidem 
nullo modo, ceterum Titum, qui tunc prope astabat, 
utique imperaturum. Erant autem adeo familiares, 
ut de potione, qua Britannicus hausta periit, Titus 
quoque iuxta cubans gustasse credatur gravique 
morbo adflictatus diu. Quorum omnium mox memor 
statuam ei auream in Palatio posuit et alteram ex 
ebore equestrem, quae circensi pompa hodieque 
praefertur, dedicavit prosecutusque est. 

III. In puero statim corporis animique dotes 
exsplenduerunt, magisque ac magis deinceps per 
aetatis gradus: forma egregia et cui non minus 
auctoritatis inesset quam gratiae, praecipuum robur, 
quanquam neque procera statura et ventre paulo 
proiectiore; memoria! singularis, docilitas ad omnis 
fere tum belli tum pacis artes. Armorum et equi- 
tandi peritissimus, Latine Graeceque vel in orando 
vel in fingendis poematibus promptus et facilis ad 
extemporalitatem usque; sed ne musicae quidem 
rudis, ut qui cantaret et psalleret iucunde scienterque. 
E pluribus comperi, notis quoque excipere velocis- 
sime solitum, cum amanuensibus suis per ludum 


1 memoria, IQ ; the other mss. have memoriae. 


« Cf. Nero, xxxiii. 2 and 3. 
322 


—- ——— lee -  — b all andi... Se 


Al ew ee 


— ag = eet ee 


THE DEIFIED TITUS 


and in a very small dark room besides ; for it still 
remains and is on exhibition. 

II. He was brought up at court in company 
with Britannicus and taught the same subjects 
by the same masters. At that time, so they say, 
a physiognomist was brought in by Narcissus, 
the freedman of Claudius, to examine Britannicus 
and declared most positively that he would never 
become emperor; but that Titus, who was standing 
near by at the time, would surely rule. The 
boys were so intimate too, that it is believed 
that when Britannicus drained the fatal draught,” 
Titus, who was reclining at his side, also tasted 
of the potion and for a long time suffered from 
an obstinate disorder. Titus did not forget all this, 
but later set up a golden statue of his friend in the 
Palace, and dedicated another equestrian statue 
of ivory and attended it in the processions in the 
Circus, where it is still carried to this day. 

III. Even in boyhood his. bodily and mental 
gifts were conspicuous and they became more 
and more so as he advanced in years. He had 
a handsome person, in which there was no less 
dignity than grace, and was uncommonly strong, 
although he was not tall of stature and had a rather 
protruding belly. His memory was extraordinary 
and he had an aptitude for almost all the arts, both 
of war and of peace. Skilful in arms and horseman- 
ship, he made speeches and wrote verses in Latin and 
Greek with ease and readiness, and even off-hand. 
He was besides not unacquainted with music, but 
sang and played the harp agreeably and skilfully. 
I have heard from many sources that he used 
also to write shorthand with great speed and would 


323 
y 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


iocumque certantem, imitarique chirographa quae- 
cumque vidisset, ac saepe profiteri maximum falsarium 
esse potuisse. 

IV. Tribunus militum et in Germania et in 
Britannia meruit summa industriae nec minore 
modestiae fama, sicut apparet statuarum et ima- 
ginum eius multitudine ac titulis per utramque 
provinciam. 

Post stipendia Foro operam dedit honestam magis 
quam assiduam, eodemque tempore Arrecinam ? 
Tertullam, patre eq. R. sed praefecto quondam 
praetorianarum cohortium, duxit uxorem et in de- 
functae locum Marciam Furnillam splendidi generis ; 
cum qua sublata filia divortium fecit. 

Ex quaesturae deinde honore legioni praepositus 
Tarichaeas? et Gamalam urbes Iudaeae validissimas 
in potestatem redegit, equo quadam acie sub 
feminibus amisso alteroque inscenso, cuius rector 
circa se dimicans occubuerat. | 

V. Galba mox tenente rem p. missus ad. gratu- 
landum, quaqua iret convertit homines, quasi 
adoptionis gratia arcesseretur. Sed ubi turbari 
rursus cuncta sensit, redit ex itinere, aditoque 
Paphiae Veneris oraculo, dum de navigatione con- 
sulit, etiam de imperii spe confirmatus est. Cuius 
brevi compos et ad perdomandam Iudaeam relictus, 
novisima Hierosolymorum oppugnatione duodecim 
propugnatores totidem sagittarum confecit ictibus, 

1 summa industriae . . . modestiae fama, ç; summae 
industriae . . . modestia et fama, Q. 


* Arrecinam, Roth; adrecidiam, Q. 
3 Taricheas, Ursinus (Tarichias, Bentley); Thracias, n. 


a See Galba xiv. 2, and note *. 
® By the accession of his father Vespasian. 


324 


THE DEIFIED TITUS 


amuse himself by playful contests with his secre- 
taries ; also that he could imitate any handwriting 
that he had ever seen and often declared that he 
might have been the prince of forgers. 

IV. He served as military tribune both in Germany 
and in Britain, winning a high reputation for energy 
and no less for integrity, as is evident from the great 
number of his statues and busts in both those 
provinces and from the inscriptions they bear. 

After his military service he pleaded in the Forum, 
rather for glory than as a profession, and at the same 
time took to wife Arrecina Tertulla, whose father, 
though only a Roman knight, had once been prefect 
of the praetorian cohorts ;^ on her death he replaced 
her by Marcia Furnilla, a lady of a very distinguished 
family, but divorced her after he had acknowledged 
a daughter which she bore him. 

Then, after holding the office of quaestor, as 
commander of a legion he subjugated the two strong 
cities of Tarichaeae and Gamala in Judaea, having 


67 A.D. 


his horse killed under him in one battle and mount- . 


ing another, whose rider had fallen fighting by his 
side. 

V. Presently he was sent to congratulate Galba on 
becoming ruler of the state, and attracted attention 
wherever he went, through the belief that he had 
been sent for to be adopted. But observing that 
everything was once more in a state of turmoil, he 
turned back, and visiting the oracle of the Paphian 
Venus, to consult it about his voyage, he was also 
encouraged to hope for imperial power. Soon realis- 
ing his hope^ and left behind to complete the 
conquest of Judaea, in the final attack on Jerusalem 
he slew twelve of the defenders with as many 


325 


68 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


eepitque ea! natali filiae suae tanto militum gaudio 
ac favore, ut in gratulatione imperatorem eum 
consalutaverint et subinde decedentem provincia 
detinuerint, suppliciter nec non et minaciter efflagi- 
tantes, aut remaneret aut secum omnis pariter 
abduceret. Unde nata suspicio est, quasi desciscere 
a patre Orientisque sibi regnum vindicare temptasset ; 
quam suspicionem auxit, postquam Alexandriam 
petens in consecrando apud Memphim bove Apide 
diadema gestavit, de more quidem rituque priscae 
religionis; sed non deerant qui sequius interpre- 
tarentur. Quare festinans in Italiam, cum Regium, 
dein Puteolos oneraria nave appulisset, Romam inde 
contendit expeditissimus inopinantique patri, velut 
arguens rumorum de se temeritatem : “Veni,” inquit, 
* pater, veni." i 

VI. Neque ex eo destitit participem atque etiam 
tutorem imperii agere. 

Triumphavit cum patre censuramque gessit una, 
eidem collega et in tribunicia potestate et in septem 
consulatibus fuit; receptaque ad se prope omnium 
officiorum cura, cum patris nomine et epistulas ipse 
dictaret et edicta conscriberet orationesque in senatu 
recitaret etiam quaestoris vice, praefecturam quoque 
praetori suscepit numquam ad id tempus nisi ab eq. 
R. administratam, egitque aliquanto incivilius et 
violentius, siquidem suspectisimum quemque sibi 


1 ea, M ; the other mss. have eam. 


. * See Aug. xiii. 2. > See Nero xv. 2, and note *. 


326 


——RRÓ$—  —— Me 0000000 


THE DEIFIED TITUS 


arrows; and he took the city on his daughter's 
birthday, so delighting the soldiers and winning 
their devotion that they hailed him as Imperator 4 
and detained him from time to time, when he would 
leave the province, urging him with prayers and even 
with threats either to stay or to take them all with 
him. This aroused the suspicion that he had tried 
to revolt from his father and make himself king of 
the East; and he strengthened this suspicion on his 
way to Alexandria by wearing a diadem at the 
consecration of the bull Apis in Memphis, an act 
quite in accord with the usual ceremonial of that 
ancient religion, but unfavourably interpreted by 
some. Because of this he hastened to Italy, and 
putting in at Regium and then at Puteoli in a trans- 
port ship, he went with all speed from there to Rome, 
where as if to show that the reports about him were 
groundless, he surprised his father with the greeting, 
* [ am here, father; I am here." 

VI. From that time on he never ceased to act as 
the emperors partner and even as his protector. 
He took part in his father's triumph and was censor 
with him. He was also his colleague in the tribu- 
nicial power and in seven consulships. He took 
upon hímself the discharge of almost all duties, 
personally dictated letters and wrote edicts in his 
fathers name, and even read his speeches in the 
senate in lieu of a quaestor? He also assumed the 
command of the praetorian guard,which before that 
time had never been held except by a Roman knight, 
and in this office conducted himself in a somewhat 
arrogant and tyrannical fashion. For whenever he 
himself regarded anyone with suspicion, he would 
secretly send some fof the Guard to the various 


327 


78 A.D. 


70, 72, 74, 
75, 76, 77, 
79 A.D» 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK, VIII 


summissis qui per theatra et castra quasi consensu 
ad poenam deposcerent, haud cunctanter oppressit. 
In his Aulum Caecinam consularem vocatum ad 
cenam ac vixdum triclinio egressum confodi iussit, 
sane urgente discrimine, cum etiam chirographum 
eius praeparatae apud milites contionis deprehen- 
disset. Quibus rebus sicut in posterum securitati 
satis cavit, ita ad praesens plurimum contraxit 
invidiae, ut non temere quis tam adverso rumore 
magisque invitis omnibus transierit ad principatum. 

VII. Praeter saevitiam suspecta in eo etiam 
luxuria erat, quod ad mediam noctem comissationes 
cum profusissimo quoque familiarium extenderet; 
nec minus libido propter exoletorum et spadonum 
greges propterque insignem reginae Berenices 
amorem, cui etiam nuptias pollicitus ferebatur; 
suspecta rapacitas, quod constabat in cognitionibus ! 
patris nundinari ‘praemiarique solitunv; denique 
propalam alium Neronem et opinabantur et praedica- 
bant. At illi ea fama pro bono cessit conversaque 
est in maximas laudes neque vitio ullo reperto et 
contra virtutibus summis. 

Convivia instituit iucunda magis quam profusa. 
Amicos elegit, quibus etiam post eum principes ut 
et sibi et rei p. necessariis adquieverunt praecipueque 
sunt usi. Berenicen statim ab urbe dimisit invitus 

1 cognitionibus, Torrentius ; contionibus, n. 


328 


THE DEIFIED TITUS 


theatres and camps, to demand their punishment as 
if by consent of all who were present; and then he 
would put them out of the way without delay. 
Among these was Aulus Caecina, an ex-consul, whom 
he invited to dinner and then ordered to be stabbed 
almost before he Jeft the dining-room; but in this 
case he was led by a pressing danger, having got 
possession of an autograph copy of an harangue 
which Caecina had prepared to deliver to the soldiers. 
Although by such conduct he provided for his safety 
in the future, he incurred such odium at the time 
that hardly anyone ever came to the throne with 
so evil a reputation or so much against the desires 
of. all. 

VII. Besides cruelty, he was also suspected of 
riotous living, since he protracted his revels until 
the middle of the night with the most prodigal of his 
friends ; likewise of unchastity because of his troops 
of catamites and eunuchs, and his notorious passion 
for queen Berenice, to whom it was even said that 
he promised marriage. He was suspected of greed 
as well; for it was well known that in cases which 
came before his father he put a price on his influence 
and accepted bribes. In short, people not only 
thought, but openly declared, that he would be a 
second Nero. But this reputation turned out to his 
advantage and gave place to the highest praise, 
when no fault was discovered in him, but on the 
contrary the highest virtues. 

His banquets were pleasant rather than extrava- 
gant. He chose as his friends men whom succeeding 
emperors also retained as indispensable alike to them- 
selves and to the State, and of whose services they 
made special use. Berenice he sent from Rome at 


329 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


invitam. Quosdam e gratissimis delicatorum quan- 
quam tam artifices saltationis, ut mox scaenam 
tenuerint, non modo fovere prolixius, sed spectare 
omnino in publico coetu supersedit. 

Nulli civium quicquam ademit; abstinuit alieno, 
ut si quis umquam ; ac ne concessas quidem ac solitas 
conlationes recepit. Et tamen nemine ante se munifi- 
centia minor, amphitheatro dedicato thermisque iuxta 
celeriter ! exstructis munus edidit apparatissimum lar- 
gissimumque ; dedit et navale proelium in veteri nau- 
machia, ibidem et gladiatores atque uno die quinque 
milia omne genus ferarum. 

VIII. Natura autem benevolentissimus, cum ex in- 
stituto Tiberi omnes dehinc Caesares beneficia a 
superioribus concessa principibus aliter rata? non 
haberent, quam si eadem iisdem et ipsi dedissent, 
primus praeterita omnia uno confirmavit edicto nec a 
se peti passus est. In ceteris vero desideriis hominum 
obstinatissime tenuit, ne quem sine spe dimitteret ; 
quin et admonentibus domesticis, quasi plura polli- 
ceretur quam praestare posset, non oportere ait 
quemquam a sermone principis tristem discedere ; 
atque etiam recordatus quondam super cenam, quod 
nihil cuiquam toto die praestitisset, memorabilem 
illam meritoque laudatam vocem edidit: “ Amici, 
diem perdidi." 

1 celeriter, Calderinus, (in note on Mart. Spect. 2.7; cele- 
briter, A. 2 rata, inserted Ly Egnatius. 


a See note on Vesp. ix. > See Aug. xliii. 1. — 
¢ When the water had been let out; cf. Nero, xxvii. 2. 


339 


THE DEIFIED TITUS 


once, against her will and against his own. Some of 
his most beloved paramours, although they were 
such skilful dancers that they later became stage 
favourites, he not only ceased to cherish any longer, 
but even to witness their public performances. 

He took away nothing from any citizen. He 
respected others’ property, if anyone ever did; in 
fact, he would not accept even proper and customary 
presents. And yet he was second to none of his 
predecessors in munificence. At the dedication of 
the amphitheatre% and of the baths which were 
hastily built near it he gave a most magnificent 
and costly gladiatorial show. He presented a sham 
sea-fight too in the old naumachia,? and in the same 
place a combat of gladiators, exhibiting five thousand 
. wild beasts of every kind in a single day. 

VIII. He was most kindly by nature, and whereas 
in accordance with a custom established by Tiberius, 
all the Caesars who followed him refused to regard 
favours granted by previous emperors as valid, unless 
they had themselves conferred the same ones on the 
same individuals, Titus was the first to ratify them 
all in a single edict, without allowing himself to be 
asked. Moreover, in the case of other requests 
made of him, it was his fixed rule not to let anyone 
go away without hope. Even when his household 
officials warned him that he was promising more 
than he could perform, he said that it was not right 
for anyone to go away sorrowful from an interview 
with his emperor. On another occasion, remember- 
ing at dinner that he had done nothing for anybody 
all that day, he gave utterance to that memorable 
and praiseworthy remark: “ Friends, I have lost a 


day.” 
331 


80 A.D. 


2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


Populum in primis universum tanta per omnis 
occasiones comitate tractavit, ut proposito gladiatorio 
munere, non ad suum, sed ad spectantium arbitrium 
editurum se professus sit; et plane ita fecit. Nam 
neque negavit quicquam petentibus et ut quae vellent 
peterent ultro adhortatus est. Quin et studium ar- 
maturae Thraecum prae se ferens saepe cum populo 
et voce et gestu ut fautor cavillatus est, verum maie- 
state salva nec minus aequitate. Ne quid popularitatis 
praetermitteret, nonnumquam in thermis suis admissa 
plebe lavit. 

. Quaedam sub eo fortuita ac tristia acciderunt, ut 
conflagratio Vesuvii! montis in Campania, et in- 
cendium Romae per triduum totidemque noctes, 
item pestilentia quanta non temere alias. In iis tot . 
adversis ac talibus non modo principis sollicitudinem 
sed et parentis affectum unicum praestitit, nunc con- 
solando per edicta, nunc opitulando quatenus sup- 
peteret facultas. Curatores restituendae Campaniae e 
consularium numero sorte duxit ; bona oppressorum in 
Vesuvio,? quorum heredes non exstabant, restitutioni 
afflictarum civitatium attribuit. Urbis incendio nihil 
publice nisi periisse testatus,? cuncta praetoriorum 
suorum ornamenta operibus ac templis destinavit prae- 
posuitque compluris ex equestri ordine, quo quaeque 

1 Vesuvii] ve*bii, M ; vesubii, G. 

? Vesuvio, M ; vesubio, G. 

3 nichil nisi sibi perisse testatus publice, Y ; nichil nisi sibi 
publice perisse testatus, OT ; nihil publice perisse testatus, 
Roth, following a ms. of Torrentius. 


^ By humorously pretending to wrangle with those who 
favoured other gladiators than the Thracians; see Index, 
s.v. gladiator. 


332 


THE DEIFIED TITUS 


The whole body of the people in particular he 
treated with such indulgence on all occasions, that 
once at a gladiatorial show he declared that he 
would give it, “not after his own inclinations, but 
those of the spectators " ; and what is more, he kept 
his word. For he refused nothing which anyone 
asked, and even urged them to ask for what they 
wished. Furthermore, he openly displayed his 
partiality for Thracian gladiators and bantered the 
people about it by words and gestures, always 
however preserving his dignity, as well as observing 
justice. Not to omit any act of condescension, he 
sometimes bathed in the baths which he had built, 
in company with the common people. 


There were some dreadful disasters during his 


reign, such as the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 
Campania, a fire at Rome which continued three 
days and as many nights, and a plague the like of 
which had hardly ever been known before. In these 
many great calamities he showed not merely the 
concern of an emperor, but even a father's sur- 
passing love, now offering consolation in edicts, and 
now lending aid so far as his means allowed. He 
chose commissioners by lot from among the ex- 
consuls for the relief of Campania ; and the property 
of those who lost their lives by Vesuvius and had no 
heirs left alive he applied to the rebuilding of the 
buried cities. During the fire in Rome he made no 
remark except “I am ruined," ? and he set aside all 
the ornaments of his villas for the public buildings and 
temples, and put several men of the equestrian order 
in charge of the work, that everything might be done 


` > Implying that it was his personal loss, which he would 
make good. l 


333 


79 A.D. 
80 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


maturius peragerentur. Medendae valitudini leni- 
endisque morbis nullam divinam humanamque opem 
non adhibuit inquisito omni sacrificiorum remediorum- 
que genere. 

Inter adversa temporum et delatores mandatores- 
que! erant ex licentia veteri. Hos assidue in Foro 
flagellis ac fustibus caesos ac novissime traductos per 
amphitheatri harenam partim subici ac venire im- 
peravit, partim in asperrimas insularum avehi. Utque 
etiam similia quandoque ausuros perpetuo coerceret, 
vetuit inter cetera de eadem re pluribus legibus agi 
quaerive de cuiusquam defunctorum statu ultra certos 
annos. 

IX. Pontificatum maximum ideo se professus acci- 
pere ut puras servaret manus, fidem praestitit, nec 
auctor posthac cuiusquam necis nec conscius, quamvis 
interdum ulciscendi causa non deesset, sed periturum 
se potius quam perditurum adiurans. Duos patricii 
generis convictos in  adfectatione imperii nihil 
amplius quam ut desisterent monuit, docens princi- 
patum fato dari, si quid? praeterea desiderarent 
promittens se tributurum. Et confestim quidem ad 
alterius matrem quae procul aberat, cursores suos 
misit, qui anxiae salvum filium nuntiarent, ceterum 
ipsos non solum familiari cenae adhibuit, sed et 

1 mandatoresque, X; amendatoresque, M ; amandator- 


esque, (5. 
2 quid, GN56; the other mss. have quod. 


* To propitiate the gods, who were supposed to inflict such 
evils upon mankind by way of punishment. 

® The office was seldom taken so seriously. Julius Caesar, 
for instance, held it during his campaigns in Gaul. 


334 


THE DEIFIED TITUS 


with the greater dispatch. For curing the plague 
and diminishing the force of the epidemic there was 
no aid, human or divine, which he did not employ, 
searching for every kind of sacrifice ^ and all kinds of 
medicines. 

Among the evils of the times were the informers 
and their instigators, who had enjoyed a long stand- 
ing licence. After these had been soundly beaten in 
the Forum with scourges and cudgels, and finally led 
in procession across the arena of the amphitheatre, 
he had some of them put up and sold, and others 
deported to the wildest of the islands. To further 
discourage for all time any who might think of 
venturing on similar practices, among other precau- 
tions he made it unlawful for anyone to be tried 
under several laws for the same offence, or for any 
inquiry to be made as to the legal status of any 
deceased person after a stated number of years. 

IX. Having declared that he would accept the 
office of pontifex maximus? for the purpose of keeping 
his hands unstained, he was true to his promise ; for 
after that he neither caused nor connived at the death 
of any man, although he sometimes had no lack of 
reasons for taking vengeance ; but he swore that he 
would rather be killed than kill. When two men of 
patrician family were found guilty of aspiring to the 
throne, he satisfied himself with warning them to 
abandon their attempt, saying that imperial power 
was the gift of fate, and promising that if there was 
anything else they desired, he himself would bestow it. 
Then he sent his couriers with all speed to the mother 
of one of them, for she was some distance off, to 
relieve her anxiety by reporting that her son was safe ; 
and he not only invited the men themselves to dinner 


335 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


insequenti die gladiatorum spectaculo circa se ex 
industria conlocatis oblata sibi ferramenta pugnan- 
tium inspicienda porrexit. Dicitur etiam cognita 
utriusque genitura imminere ambobus periculum 
adfirmasse, verum quandoque et ab alio, sicut evenit. 

Fratrem insidiari sibi non desinentem, sed paene 
ex professo sollicitantem exercitus, meditantem 
fugam, nequé occidere neque seponere ac ne in 
minore quidem honore habere sustinuit, sed, ut a 
primo imperii die, consortem successoremque testari 
perseveravit, nonnumquam secreto precibus et lacrimis 
orans, ut tandem mutuo erga se animo vellet esse. 

X. Inter haec morte praeventus est maiore homi- 
num damno quam suo. 

Spectaculis absolutis, in quorum fine populo coram 
ubertim fleverat, Sabinos petit aliquanto tristior, quod 
sacrificanti hostia aufugerat quodque tempestate 
serena tonuerat. Deinde ad primam statim man- 
sionem febrim nanctus, cum inde lectica trans- 
ferretur, suspexisse dicitur dimotis pallulis caelum, 
multumque conquestus eripi sibi vitam immerenti ; 
neque enim exstare ullum suum factum paenitendum 
excepto dum taxat uno. Id quale fuerit, neque ipse 
tunc prodidit neque cuiquam facile succurrat. Quidam 
opinantur consuetudinem recordatum, quam cum 


a The weapons of ores were regularly examined by 
the editor, or giver of the games, to see if they were sharp 
enough; cf. Dio, 68. 3, who tells a similar story of the 
emperor Nerva. 

> Possibly Domitian’s charge was true; cf, Dom, ii. 3. 


336 


THE DEIFIED TITUS 


among his friends, but on the following day at a 
gladiatorial show he purposely placed them near 
him, and when the swords of the contestants were 
offered him,* handed them over for their inspection. 
It is even said that inquiring into the horoscope 
of each of them, he declared that danger threatened 
them both, but at some future time and from 
another, as turned out to be the case. 

Although his brother never ceased plotting 
against him, but almost openly stirred up the armies 
to revolt and meditated flight to them, he had not 
the heart to put him to death or banish him 
from the court, or even to hold him in less honour 
than before. On the contrary, as he had done from 
the very first day of his rule, he continued to declare 
that he was his partner and successor, and sometimes 
he privately begged him with tears and prayers to be 
willing at least to return his affection. 

X. In the meantime he was cut off by death, 
to the loss of mankind rather than to his own. After 
finishing the public games, at the close of which he 
wept bitterly in the presence of the people, he went 
to the Sabine territory, somewhat cast down because 
a victim had escaped as he was sacrificing and 
because it had thundered from a clear sky. Then at 
the very first stopping place he was seized with a 
fever, and as he-was being carried on from there in a 
litter, it is said that he pushed back the curtains, 
looked up to heaven, and lamented bitterly that his 
life was being taken from him contrary to his deserts ; 
for he said that there was no act of his life of which 
he had cause to repent, save one only. Whatthis was 
he did not himself disclose at the time, nor could any- 
one easily divine. Some think that he recalled the 


337 
VOL, II. Z 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


fratris uxore habuerit; sed nullam habuisse per- 
sancte Domitia iurabat, haud negatura, si qua omnino 
fuisset, immo etiam gloriatura, quod illi promptissi- 
mum erat in omnibus probris. 

XI. Excessit in eadem qua pater villa Id. Sept. 
post biennium ae menses duos diesque XX quam 
successerat patri, altero et quadragesimo aetatis 
anno. Quod ut palam factum est, non secus atque 
in domestico luctu maerentibus publice cunctis, 
senatus prius quam edicto convocaretur ad curiam 
concurrit, obseratisque adhuc foribus, deinde apertis, 
tantas mortuo gratias egit laudesque congessit, 
quantas ne vivo quidem umquam atque praesenti. 


DoMrTIANUS 


I. Domitianus natus est VIIII. Kal Novemb. 
patre consule designato inituroque mense insequenti 
honorem, regione urbis sexta ad Malum Punicum, 
domo quam postea in templum "gentis Flaviae 
convertit. Pubertatis ac primae adulescentiae tem- 
pus tanta inopia tantaque infamia gessisse fertur, ut 


@ The old homestead at Cutilae, near Reate; see Veap. 
xxiv. That this continued to be a villa rustica is implied in 
Vesp. ii. 1. 

* Various quarters and streets of the city were designated 


338 


DOMITIAN 


intimacy which he had with his brother’s wife; but 
Domitia swore most solemnly that this did not exist, 
although she would not have denied it if it had been 
in the least true, but on the contrary would have 
boasted of it, as she was most ready to do of all her 
scandalous actions. 

XI. He died in the same farmhouse ^ as his father, 
on the Ides of September, two years two months 
and twenty days after succeeding Vespasian, in the 
forty-second year of his age. When his death was 
made known, the whole populace mourned as they 
would for a loss in their own families, the senate 
hastened to the House before it was summoned by 
proclamation, and with the doors still shut, and then 
with them open, rendered such thanks to him and 
heaped such praise on him after death as they had 
never done even when he was alive and present. 


DoMiTIAN 


I. Domitian was born on the ninth day before the 
Kalends of November of the year when his father 
was consul elect and was about to enter on the 
office in the following month, in a street of the sixth 
region called “the Pomegranate,” ? in a house which 
he afterwards converted into a temple of the 
Flavian family. He is said to have passed the 
period of his boyhood and his early youth in great 


in this way ; cf. ad Capita Bubula, Aug. v. ; ad Pirum, Mart. 
1. 117. 6. Ad Malum Punicum was a street on the Quirinal 
hill, probably corresponding with the modern Via delle 
Quatro Fontane ; see Platner, Topography of Rome, p. 485. 


339 
z 2 


Sept. 18, 
81 A.D. 


Oct. 24, 
51 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


nullum argenteum vas in usu haberet. Satisque 
constat Clodium Pollionem praetorium virum, in 
quem est poema Neronis quod inscribitur * Luscio,” 
chirographum eius conservasse et nonnumquam 
protulisse noctem sibi pollicentis ; nec defuerunt qui 
affirmarent, corruptum | Domitianum et a Nerva 
successore mox suo. Bello Vitelliano confugit in 
Capitolium cum patruo Sabino ac parte praesentium 
copiarum, sed irrumpentibus adversariis et ardente 
templo apud aedituum clam pernoctavit, ac mane 
Isiaci celatus habitu interque sacrificulos variae! 
superstitionis cum se trans Tiberim ad condiscipuli 
sui matrem comite uno contulisset, ita latuit, ut 
scrutantibus qui vestigia subsecuti erant, deprehendi 
non potuerit. Post victoriam demum progressus et 
Caesar consalutatus honorem praeturae urbanae 
consulari potestate suscepit titulo tenus, nam ? iuris 
dictionem ad collegam proximum transtulit, ceterum 
omnem vim dominationis tam licenter exercuit, ut 
iam tum qualis futurus esset ostenderet. Ne? 
exsequar singula, contractatis multorum uxoribus 
Domitiam Longinam Aelio Lamiae nuptam etiam 
in matrimonium abduxit, atque uno die super XX 
officia urbana aut peregrina distribuit, mirari se 


1 variae, 2; vanae, ¢ and the editors. 
2 nam, J. Gronov. ; quam, 2; quia, ç. 
3 ne, IIQ ; the other mas. have nec. 


a Of. Otho, xii. 1, at the end. è See note on Galba, i. 
* As son of the eniperor. 4 That is, in the provinces. 


340 


PEE 


SE EE — m 


DOMITIAN 


poverty and infamy. For he did not possess a single 
piece of plate and it is a well known fact that 
Claudius Pollio, à man of praetorian rank, against 
whom Nero's poem entitled “ The One- -eyed Man" 
is directed, preserved a letter in Domitian's hand- 
writing and sometimes exhibited it, in which the 
future emperor promised him an assignation ; and 
there have not been wanting those who declared 
that Domitian was also debauched by Nerva, 
who succeeded him. In the war with Vitellius 
he took refuge in the Capitol with his paternal 
uncle Sabinus and a part of the forces under 
him. When the enemy forced an entrance and the 
temple was fired, he hid during the night with the 
guardian of the shrine, and in the morning, disguised 
in the garb of a follower of Isis? and mingling with 
the priests of that fickle superstition, he went 
across the Tiber with a single companion to the 
mother of one of his school-fellows. There he was 
so effectually concealed, that though he was closely 
followed, he could not be found, in spite of a 
thorough search. It was only after the victory that - 
he ventured forth and after being hailed as Caesar,? 
he assumed the office of city praetor with consular 
powers, but only in name, turning over all the judicial 
business to his next colleague. But he exercised 
all the tyranny of his high position’ so lawlessly, - 
that it was even then apparent what sort of a man 
he was going to be. Not to mention all details, 
after making free with the wives of many men, he 
went so far as to marry Domitia Longina, who was 
the wife of Aelius Lamia, and in a single day he 
assigned more than twenty positions in the city and 
abroad, which led Vespasian to say more than once 


341 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


Vespasiano dictitante, quod successorem non et sibi 
mitteret. 

II. Expeditionem quoque in Galliam Germanias- 
que neque necessariam et dissuadentibus paternis 
amicis incohavit, tantum ut fratri se et opibus et 
dignatione adaequaret. 

Ob haec correptus, quo magis et aetatis et condi- 
cionis admoneretur, habitabat cum patre una sellam- 
que eius ac fratris, quotiens  prodirent, lectica 
sequebatur ac triumphum utriusque Iudaicum equo 
albo comitatus est. Quin et e sex! consulatibus non 
nisi unum ordinarium gessit eumque cedente ac 
suffragante fratre. Simulavit et ipse mire modestiam 
in primisque poeticae studium, tam insuetum antea 
sibi quam postea spretum et abiectum, recitavitque 
etiam publice. Nec tamen eo setius, cum Vologaesus 
Parthorum rex auxilia adversus Alanos ducemque 
alterum ex Vespasiani liberis depoposcisset, omni 
ope contendit ut ipse potissimum mitteretur; et 
quia discussa res est, alios Orientis reges ut idem 
postularent donis ac  pollicitationibus sollicitare 
temptavit. 

Patre defuncto diu cunctatus an duplum donativum 
militi offerret, numquam iactare dubitavit relictum 
se participem imperii, sed fraudem testamento 
adhibitam ; neque cessavit ex eo insidias struere 


1 quin et e sex, Ihm (quin ex, Bentley); qui sex or quis ex, 
MGRLP*; the rest of the mss. have in sex. ` 

^ He was but eighteen years old at the time. 

> The usual procedure for a youthful prince; cf. 7*5. vi. 4. 

c See note on Galba, vi. 1l. The reference is to his consul- 
ships before he became emperor ; see chap. xiii. 3. 

4 That is, twice as large as his brother's. 

* Titus had the ability to do this; cf. Tit. iii. 2, at the end. 


342 


DOMITIAN 


that he was surprised that he did not appoint the 
emperor's successor with the rest. 

II. He began an expedition against Gaul and the 
Germanies, which was uncalled.for and from which 
his father’s friends dissuaded him, merely that he 
might make himself equal to his brother in power 
and rank. For this he was reprimanded, and to 
give him a better realisation of his youth? and 
position, he had to live with his father, and when 
they appeared in public he followed the emperor's 
chair and that of his brother in a litter, while he 
also attended their triumph over Judaea riding on 
a white horse. Moreover, of his six consulships 
only one was a regular one, and he obtained that 
only because his brother gave place to him and 
recommended his appointment. 

He himself too made a remarkable pretence of 
modesty and especially of an interest in poetry, an 
art which had previously been as unfamiliar to him 
as it was later despised and rejected, and he even 
gave readings in public. Yet in spite of all this, 
when Vologaesus, king of the Parthians, had asked 
for auxiliaries against the Alani and for one of 
Vespasian's sons as their leader, Domitian used every 
effort to have himself sent rather than Titus; and 
because the affair came to nothing, he tried by gifts 
and promises to induce other eastern kings to make 
the same request. 

On the death of his father he hesitated for some 
time whether to offer a double largess? to the 
soldiers, and he never had any compunction about 
saying that he had been left a partner in the im- 
perial power, but that the will had been tampered 
with.^ And from that time on he never ceased to 


343 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


fratri clam palamque,! quoad correptum gravi vali- 
tudine, prius quam plane efflaret animam, pro 
mortuo deseri iussit; defunctumque nullo praeter- 
quam consecrationis honore dignatus, saepe etiam 
carpsit obliquis orationibus et edictis. 

III. Inter initia principatus cotidie secretum sibi 
horarum sumere solebat nec quicquam amplius quam 
muscas captare ac stilo praeacuto configere, ut cuidam 
interroganti, essetne quis intus cum Caesare, non 
absurde responsum sit a Vibio Crispo, ne muscam 
quidem, Deinde uxorem Domitiam, ex qua in 
secundo suo consulatu filium tulerat alteroque anno 
quam imperium adeptus est amisit? consalutavit 
Augustam ; eandem Paridis histrionis amore deper- 
ditam repudiavit intraque breve tempus inpatiens 
discidii quasi efflagitante populo reduxit. 

Circa administrationem autem imperii aliquamdiu 
se varium praestitit, mixtura? quoque aequabili 
vitiorum atque virtutum, donec virtutes quoque in 
vitia deflexit; quantum coniectare licet, super ingenii 
naturam inopia rapax, metu saevus. 

IV. Spectacula assidue magnifica et sumptuosa 
edidit non in amphitheatro modo, verum et in Circo, 
ubi praeter sollemnes bigarum quadrigarumque 
cursus proelium etiam duplex, equestre ac pedestre, 
commisit ; at in amphitheatro navale quoque. Nam 


! palamque, 7; et palam, L; the other mss. have palam. 
? quam . . . amisit, supplied by Ihm. 
3 mixturaque, Lipsius ; ; mixtura prope, Bentley. 


a See chaps. ix. and xi. 1. ^ See note on Fesp. ix. 1. 


344 


— MÀ o O a m me 


DOMITIAN 


plot against his brother secretly and openly, until Titus 
was seized with a dangerous illness, when Domitian 
ordered that he be left for dead, before he had 
actually drawn his last breath. And after his death 
.he bestowed no honour upon him, save that of 
deification, and he often assailed his memory in 
ambiguous phrases, both in his speeches and in his 
edicts. 

III. At the beginning of his reign he used to 
spend hours in seclusion every day, doing nothing 
but catch flies and stab them with a keenly-sharpened 
stylus. Consequently when someone once asked 
whether anyone was in there with Caesar, Vibius 
Crispus made the witty reply: “Not even a fly." 
Then he saluted his wife Domitia as Augusta. He 
had had a son by her in his second consulship, whom 
he lost the next year; but he divorced her because 
of her infatuation for the actor Paris, though he 
could not bear the separation from her and took her 
back, alleging that the people demanded it. 

In his administration of the government he for 
some time showed himself inconsistent, with about 
an equal number of virtues and vices, but finally he 
turned the virtues also into vices; for so far as one 
may guess, it was contrary to his natural disposition ^ 
that he was made rapacious through need and cruel 
through fear. 

IV. He constantly gave grand and costly enter- 
tainments, both in the amphitheatre® and in the 
Circus, where in addition to the usual races between 
two-horse and four-horse chariots, he also exhibited 
two battles, one between forces of infantry and the 
other by horsemen ; and he even gave a naval battle 
in the amphitheatre. Besides he gave hunts of wild 


345 


2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


venationes gladiatoresque et noctibus ad lychnuchos. 
nec virorum modo pugnas, sed et feminarum, 
Praeterea quaestorii muneribus, quae olim omissa 
revocaverat, ita semper interfuit, ut populo potestatem 
faceret bina paria e suo ludo postulandi eaque 
novissima aulico apparatu induceret. Ac per omne 
gladiatorum spectaculum ante pedes ei stabat 
puerulus coccinatus parvo portentosoque capite, cum 
quo plurimum fabulabatur, nonnumquam serio. 
Auditus est certe, dum ex eo quaerit, ecquid! 
sciret, cur sibi visum esset ordinatione proxima 
Aegypto praeficere Mettium Rufum. Edidit navalis 
pugnas paene iustarum classium, effosso et circum- 
structo iuxta Tiberim lacu, atque inter maximos 
imbres perspectavit. 

Fecit et ludos saeculares, —M ratione tem- 
porum ad annum non quo Claudius proxime, sed quo 
olim Augustus ediderat; in iis circensium die, quo 
facilius centum missus peragerentur, singulos e 
septenis spatiis ad quina corripuit. 

Instituit et quinquennale certamen Capitolino Iovi 
triplex, musicum equestre gymnicum, et aliquanto 
plurium quam nunc est coronatorum. Certabant 
enim et prosa oratione Graece Latineque ac praeter 
citharoedos chorocitharistae quoque et psilocitha- 

1 ecquid, second Roman edition ; et quid, Q (et qui, X). 

a See note on Claud. xxi. 2. 


d See note on Claud, xxi. 3. 
¢ As well as in poetry. 


346 


SE S Lue 


DOMITIAN 


beasts, gladiatorial shows at night by the light of 
torches, and not only combats between men but 
between women as well. He was always present too 
atthe games given by the quaestors, which he revived 
after they had been abandoned for some time, and 
invariably granted the people the privilege of calling 
for two pairs of gladiators from his own school, and 
brought them in last in all the splendour of the 
court. During the whole of every gladiatorial show 
there always stood at his feet a small boy clad in 
scarlet, with an abnormally small head, with whom 
he used to talk a great deal, and sometimes 
seriously. At any rate, he was overheard to ask 
him if he knew why he had decided at the last 
appointment day to make Mettius Rufus praefect of 
Egypt. He often gave sea-fights almost with regular 
fleets, having dug a pool near the Tiber and sur- 
rounded it with seats; and he continued to witness 


. the contests amid heavy rains. 


He also celebrated Secular games,* reckoning 
the time, not according to the year when Claudius 
had last given them, but by the previous calculation 
of Augustus. In the course of these, to make it 
possible to finish a hundred races on the day of the 
. contests in the Circus, he diminished the number of 
. laps from seven to five.® 
. He also established a quinquennial contest in 
` honour of Jupiter Capitolinus of a threefold char- 
` acter, comprising music, riding, and gymnastics, 
and with considerably more prizes than are awarded 
nowadays. For there were competitions in prose ` 

declamation* both in Greek and in Latin; and in 
addition to those of the lyre-players, between 
choruses of such players and in the lyre alone, 


347 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


ristae, in stadio vero cursu etiam virgines.! Certamini 
praesedit crepidatus purpureaque amictus toga 
Graecanica, capite gestans coronam auream cum 
effigie Iovis ac Iunonis Minervaeque, adsidentibus 
Diali sacerdote et collegio Flavialium pari habitu, 
nisi quod illorum coronis inerat et ipsius imago. 
Celebrabat et in Albano quotannis Quinquatria 
Minervae, cui collegium instituerat, ex quo sorte 
ducti magisterio fungerentur ederentque eximias 
venationes et scaenicos ludos superque oratorum ac 
poetarum certamina. 

Congiarium populo nummorum trecenorum ter 
dedit atque inter spectacula muneris largissimum 
epulum Septimontiali sacro, cum? quidem senatui 
equitique panariis, plebei sportellis cum  obsonio 
distributis initium vescendi primus fecit; dieque 
proximo omne genus rerum missilia sparsit, et quia 
pars maior intra popularia deciderat, quinquagenas 
tesseras in singulos cuneos equestris ac senatorii 
ordinis pronuntiavit. 

V. Plurima et amplissima opera incendio absumpta 
restituit, in quis et Capitolium, quod rursus arserat ; 
sed omnia sub titulo tantum suo ac sine ulla pristini 
auctoris memoria. Novam autem excitavit aedem 

1 virgines, Lipsius; virginis, Q. 

2 sacro cum, J. Gronov. ; sacro (quidem), ¢ (T'orrentius) ; 
Sacrorum, Q. 


a Established for the worship of the deified Flavian 
emperors, after the manner of the Augustales ; see note on 
Claud. vi. 2. > See Aug. lxxi. 3. 

¢ While the spectators remained in their seats; cf. Dio, 
67. 4. 

4 Represented in many cases by tesserae, or tickets; see 
note ? on Aug. xli. 2. 


348 


Du e PP P _ a 


DOMITIAN 


without singing; while in the stadium there were 
races even between maidens. He presided at the 
competitions in half-boots, clad in a purple toga in 
the Greek fashion, and wearing upon his head a 
golden crown with figures of Jupiter, Juno, and 
Minerva, while by his side sat the priest of Jupiter 
and the college of the Flaviales,* similarly dressed, 
except that their crowns bore his image as well. He 
celebrated the Quinquatria?^ too every year in honour 
of Minerva at his Alban villa, and established for her 
a college of priests, from which men were chosen 
by lot to act as officers and give splendid shows 
of wild beasts and stage plays, besides holding con- 
tests in oratory and poetry. 

He made a present to the people of three hundred 
sesterces each on three occasions, and in the course 
of one of his shows in celebration of the feast of 
the Seven Hills gave a plentiful banquet; distributing 
large baskets of victuals to the senate and knights, 
and smaller ones to the commons; and he himself 
was the first to begin to eat. On the following 
day he scattered gifts of all sorts of things? to be 
scrambled for, and since the greater part of these 
fell where the people sat, he had five hundred tickets 
thrown into each section occupied by the senatorial 
and equestrian orders. 

V. He restored many splendid buildings which 
had been destroyed by fire, among them the 
Capitolium, which had again been burned, but 
in all cases with the inscription of his own name 
only, and with no mention of the original builder. 
Furthermore, he built a new temple on the Capitoline 


* In 80; it had previously been destroyed by fire in 69; 
see Vit. xv. 3. 


349 


82 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


in Capitolio Custodi Iovi et forum quod nunc 
Nervae vocatur, item Flaviae templum gentis et 
stadium et odium et naumachiam, e cuius postea 
lapide Maximus Circus deustis utrimque lateribus 
exstructus est. 

Vl. Expeditiones partim sponte suscepit, partim 
necessario: sponte in Chattos, necessario unam in 
Sarmatas legione cum legato simul caesa; in Dacos 
duas, primam  Oppio Sabino consulari oppresso, 
secundam Cornelio Fusco praefecto cohortium prae- 
torianarum, cui belli summam commiserat. De 
Chattis Dacisque post varia proelia duplicem trium- 
phum egit, de Sarmatis lauream modo Capitolino 
Iovi rettulit. 

Bellum civile motum a L. Antonio, superioris 
Germaniae praeside, confecit absens felicitate mira, 
cum ipsa dimicationis hora resolutus repente Rhenus 
transituras ad Antonium copias barbarorum in- 
hibuisset. De qua victoria praesagiis prius quam 
nuntiis comperit, siquidem ipso quo dimicatum erat 
die statuam eius Romae insignis aquila cireumplexa 
pinnis clangores laetissimos edidit; pauloque post 
occisum Antonium adeo vulgatum est, ut caput 
quoque adportatum eius vidisse se plerique con- 
tenderent. 


4 Who finished and dedicated it; it was also called the 
Forum Transitorium because it connected the Forum of 
Augustus with the Forum Pacis, as well as the Subura with 
the Forum Romanum. It occupied a part of the Argiletum. 

^ Or Music Hall. * See chap. iv. 2. 

4 Tac Agr. 39 says that his unjustified triumph over 
the Germans (and the Dacians) was a laughing-stock. 


359 


DOMITIAN 


hill in honour of Jupiter Custos and the forum 
which now bears the name of Nerva; likewise 
a temple to the Flavian family, a stadium, an Odeum,? 
and a pool for sea-fights.© From the stone used 
in this last the Circus Maximus was afterwards rebuilt, 
when both sides of it had been destroyed by fire. 

Vl. His campaigns he undertook partly without 
provocation and partly of necessity. That against 
the Chatti was uncalled for, while the one against 
the Sarmatians was. justified by the destruction 
of a legion with its commander. He made two 
against the Dacians, the first when Oppius Sabinus 
an ex-consul was defeated, and the second on the 
overthrow of Cornelius Fuscus, prefect of the 
praetorian guard, to whom he had entrusted the 
conduct of the war. After several battles of varying 
success he celebrated a double triumph over the 
Chatti and the Dacians.4 His victories over the 
Sarmatians he commemorated merely by the offering 
of a laurel crown to Jupiter of the Capitol. 

A civil war which was set on foot by Lucius 
Antonius, governor of Upper Germany, was put 
down in the emperor's absence by a remarkable 
stroke of good fortune ; for at the very hour of the 
battle the Rhine suddenly thawed and prevented 
his barbarian allies from crossing over to Antonius. 
Domitian learned of this victory through omens 
before he actually had news of it, for on the very 
day when the decisive battle was fought a magnifi- 
cent eagle enfolded his statue at Rome with its 
wings, uttering exultant shrieks; and soon after- 
-wards the report of Antony's death became so cur- 
rent, that several went so far as to assert positively 
that they had seen his head brought to Rome. 


351 


84 A.D. 


86 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


VII. Multa etiam in communi rerum usu novavit : 
sportulas publicas sustulit revocata rectarum cenarum 
consuetudine; duas circensibus gregum! factiones 
aurati purpureique panni ad quattuor  pristinas 
addidit; interdixit histrionibus scaenam, intra domum 
quidem exercendi artem iure concesso; castrari 
mares vetuit; spadonum, qui residui apud mangones 
erant, pretia moderatus est. Ad summam quondam 
ubertatem vini, frumenti vero inopiam existimans 
nimio vinearum studio neglegi arva, edixit, ne quis 
in Italia novellaret utque in provinciis vineta suc- 
ciderentur, relicta ubi plurimum dimidia parte ; nec 
exsequi rem perseveravit. | Quaedam ex maximis 
officiis inter libertinos equitesque R. communicavit. 
Geminari legionum castra prohibuit nec plus quam 
mille nummos a quoquam ad signa deponi, quod L. 
Antonius apud duarum legionum hiberna res novas 
moliens fiduciam cepisse etiam ex depositorum summa 
videbatur. Addidit et quartum stipendium militi 
aureos ternos. 

VIII. lus diligenter et industrie dixit, plerumque 

1 gregum, Beroaldus; grecum, 80. 


a See Nero, xvi. 2. > See Aug. Ixxiv. 

e See Calig. lv. 2. 4 See chap. xiv. 2. 

* That is, those which had formerly been restricted to the 
senatorial order. 

/ Where the soldiers deposited their surplus money with 
the general for safe keeping, until the end of their term of 
service ; see Veget. 2. 20 and for fuller details Grenfell, Hunt, 
and Hogarth, ** Fayoum Towns and their Papyri," pp. 252 ff., 
where the accounts of two soldiers of about the year 180 are 
published, 


352 


a —Á— 


— ÓM—— "He oy ee ee 


DOMITIAN 


VII. He made many innovations also in common 
customs. He did away with the distribution of 
food to the people^ and revived that of formal 
dinners. He added two factions of drivers in the 
Circus, with gold and purple as their colours, to 
the four former ones.^ He forbade the appearance 
of actors on the stage, but allowed the practice 
of their art in private houses. He prohibited 
the castration of males, and kept down the price 
of the eunuchs that remained in the hands of 
the slave dealers. Once upon the occasion of 
a plentiful wine crop, attended with a scarcity 
of grain, thinking that the fields were neglected 
through too much attention to the vineyards, he 
made an edict forbidding anyone to plant more 
vines in Italy and ordering that the vineyards in 
the provinces be cut down, or but half of them 
at most be left standing; but he did not persist in 
carrying out the measure.¢ He opened some of 
the most important offices of the court ¢ to freedmen 
and Roman knights. He prohibited the uniting 
of two legions in one camp and the deposit of more 
than a thousand sesterces by any one soldier at 
headquarters, because it was clear that Lucius 
Antonius had been especialy led to attempt a 
revolution by the amount of such deposits in the 
combined winter quarters of two legions. He 
increased the pay of the soldiers one fourth, by the 
addition of three gold pieces each year.9 

VIII. He administered justice scrupulously and 
conscientiously, frequently holding special sittings 

9 That is, raised the amount from nine to twelve aurei. 


The aureus contained 100 sesterces and was equal to a little 
over a pound sterling, or five dollars. 


353 
VOL. II. A A 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


et in Foro pro tribunali extra ordinem ; ambitiosas 
centumvirorum sententias rescidit ; reciperatores, ne 
se perfusoriis assertionibus accommodarent, identidem 
admonuit; nummarios iudices cum suo quemque 
consilio notavit. ^ Auctor et tribunis plebis fuit 
aedilem sordidum repetundarum accusandi iudicesque 
in eum a senatu petendi. Magistratibus quoque 
urbieis provinciarumque praesidibus —coercendis 
tantum curae adhibuit, ut neque modestiores umquam 


neque iustiores exstiterint ; e quibus plerosque post 


illum reos omnium criminum vidimus. Suscepta 
correctione ! morum licentiam theatralem promiscue 
in equite spectandi inhibuit ; scripta famosa vulgoque 
edita, quibus primores viri ac feminae notabantur, 
abolevit non sine auctorum ignominia ; quaestorium 
virum, quod gesticulandi saltandique studio teneretur, 
movit senatu; probrosis feminis lecticae usum 
ademit iusque capiendi legata  hereditatesque ; 
equitem R. ob reductam in matrimonium uxorem, 
cui dimissae adulterii crimen intenderat, erasit 
iudicum albo; quosdam ex utroque ordine lege 
Scantinia condemnavit ; incesta Vestalium virginum, 
a patre quoque suo et fratre neglecta, varie ac severe 
coercuit, priora capitali supplicio, posteriora more 
veteri. Nam cum Oculatis sororibus, item Varronillae 
liberum mortis permisisset arbitrium corruptoresque 


1 correctione, Lo ; the other mss. have correptione. 


a That is, to gain favour with influential men or their 
advocates ; cf. Trb. xxxiii. > Cf. Nero, xvii. 

¢ That is, all who sat in judgment on the same case. 
4 As censor. * De nefanda, Venere. 


354 


ee 


DOMITIAN 


on the tribunal in the Forum. He rescinded such 
decisions of the Hundred Judges as were made from 
interested motives.” He often warned the arbiters? 
not to grant claims for freedom made under false 
pretences. He degraded jurors who accepted bribes, 
together with all their associates. He also induced 
the tribunes of the commons to prosecute a corrupt 
aedile for extortion, and to ask the senate to appoint 
jurors in the case. He took such care to exercise 
restraint over the city officials and the governors 
of the provinces, that at no time were they more 
honest or just, whereas after his time we have 
seen many of them charged with all manner of 
offences. Having undertaken the correction of public 


88 A.D. 


morals,? he put an end to the licence at the theatres, : 


where the general public occupied the seats reserved 
for the knights; did away with the prevailing 
publication of scurrilous lampoons, in which dis- 
tinguished men and women were attacked, and 
imposed ignominious penalties on their authors; 
expelled an ex-quaestor from the senate, because 
he was given to acting and dancing; deprived 
notorious women of the use of litters, as well as of 
the right to receive inheritances and legacies ; 
struck the name of a Roman knight from the list 
of jurors, because he had taken back his wife 
after divorcing her and charging her with adultery ; 
condemned several men of both orders, offenders 
against the Scantinian law ;¢ and the incest of Vestal 
virgins, condoned even by his father and his brother, 
he punished severely in divers ways, at first by 
capital punishment, and afterwards in the ancient 
fashion. For while he allowed the sisters Oculata 
and also Varronilla free choice of the manner of 


355 


AA 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


earum relegasset, mox Corneliam maximam virginem 
absolutam olim, dein longo intervallo repetitam 
atque convictam defodi imperavit stupratoresque 
virgis in Comitio ad necem caedi, excepto praetorio 
viro, cui, dubia etiam tum causa et incertis quaes- 
tionibus atque tormentis de semet professo, exsilium 
indulsit. Ac ne qua religio deum impune contami- 
naretur, monimentum, quod libertus eius e lapidibus 
templo Capitolini lovis destinatis filio exstruxerat, 
diruit per milites ossaque et reliquias quae inerant 
mari mersit. 

IX. Inter initia usque adeo ab omni caede abhor- 
rebat, ut absente adhuc patre recordatus Vergili 
versum : 


* Impia quam caesis gens est epulata iuvencis ” 


edicere destinarit, ne boves immolarentur. Cupidi- 
tatis quoque atque avaritiae vix suspicionem ullam 
aut privatus umquam aut princeps aliquamdiu 
dedit, immo e diverso magna saepe non _ absti- 
nentiae modo sed etiam liberalitatis experimenta. 
Omnis circa se largissime prosecutus nihil prius 
aut acrius monuit quam ne quid sordide facerent. 
Relictas sibi hereditates ab iis, quibus liberi 
erant, non recepit. Legatum etiam ex testa- 
mento Rusti! Caepionis, qui caverat ut quotannis 


1 Rusti, ç (Torrentius, Burman); rusci, 0. 


a Georg. 2. 537. 
356 


DOMITIAN 


their death, and banished their paramours, he later 
ordered that Cornelia, a chief-vestal who had been 
acquitted once but after a long interval again arraigned 
and found guilty, be buried alive ; and her lovers were 
beaten to death with rods in the Comitium, with the 
exception of an ex-praetor, whom he allowed to 
go into exile, because he admitted his guilt while 
the case was still unsettled and the examination 
and torture of the witnesses had led to no result. 
To protect the gods from being dishonoured with 
impunity by any sacrilege, he caused a tomb which 
one of his freedmen had built for his son from stones 
intended for the temple of Jupiter of the Capitol 
to be destroyed by the soldiers and the bones and 
ashes contained in it thrown into the sea. 

IX. In the earlier part of his reign he so shrank 
from any form of bloodshed, that while his father 
was still absent from the city, he planned to issue an 
edict that no oxen should be offered up, recalling 
the line of Vergil, 


* E'er yet an impious race did slay and feast upon 
bullocks." ^ 


He was equally free from any suspicion of love of 
gain or of avarice, both in private life and for some 
time after becoming emperor; on the contrary, he 
often gave strong proofs not merely of integrity, but 
even of liberality. He treated all his intimates 
most generously, and there was nothing which he 
urged them more frequently, or with greater insist- 
ence, than that they should be niggardly in none of 
their acts. He would not accept inheritances left 
him by those who had children. He even annulled 
a legacy in the will of Rustus Caepio, who had 


357 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


ingredientibus curiam senatoribus certam summam 
viritim praestaret heres suus, irritum fecit. Reos, 
qui ante quinquennium proximum apud aerarium 
pependissent, universos discrimine liberavit nec 
repeti nisi intra annum eaque condicione permisit, 
ut accusatori qui causam non teneret exsilium poena 
esset. Scribas quaestorios negotiantis ex consuetudine 
sed contra Clodiam legem venia in praeteritum 
donavit. Subsiciva, quae divisis per veteranos agris 
carptim superfuerunt, veteribus possessoribus ut usu 
capta concessit. Fiscales calumnias magna calum- 
niantium poena repressit, ferebaturque vox eius: 
* Princeps qui delatores non castigat, irritat." 

X. Sed neque in clementiae neque in abstinentiae 
tenore permansit, et tamen aliquanto celerius ad 
saevitiam descivit quam ad cupiditatem. Discipulum 
Paridis pantomimi impuberem! adhuc et cum 
maxime aegrum, quod arte formaque non absimilis 
magistro videbatur, occidit; item Hermogenem 
Tarsensem propter quasdam in historia figuras, 
librariis etiam, qui eam descripserant, cruci fixis. 
Patrem familias, quod Thraecem murmilloni parem, 
munerario imparem dixerat, detractum spectaculis 


! impuberem, Basle ed. of 1533; puberem,8O. 


* Probably referring to new senators, entering the House 
for the first time. 

^ Nothing is known of this law. Livy, 21. 63. 3-4 men- 
tions a law of Q. Claudius, which forbade senators to engage 
in business, and that law may have had a chapter referring 
to the scribae quaestorii and other ** civil servants” ; or, as 
some suppose, Publius Clodius may have passed such a law. 


358 


DOMITIAN 


provided that his heir should yearly pay a specified 
sum to each of the senators on his entrance into the 
House." He cancelled the suits against those who had 
been posted as debtors to the public treasury for more 
than five years, and would not allow a renewal except 
within a year and on the condition that an accuser who 
did not win his suit should be punished with exile. 
Scribes of the quaestors who carried on business, 
which had become usual although contrary to the 
Clodian law," he pardoned for past offences. Parcels 
of land which were left unoccupied here and there 
after the assignment of lands to the veterans he 
granted to their former owners as by right of posses- 
sion. He checked false accusations designed for 
the profit of the privy purse^ and inflicted severe 

e penalties on offenders; and a saying of his was 
current, that an emperor who does not punish 
informers hounds them on. 

X. But he did not continue this course of mercy 
or integrity, although he turned to cruelty some- 
what more speedily than to avarice. He put to 
death a pupil of the pantomimic actor Paris, who 
was still a beardless boy and ill at the time, because 
in his skill and his appearance he seemed not unlike 
his master ;4 also Hermogenes of Tarsus because of 
some allusions in his History, besides crucifying even 
the slaves who had written it out. A householder who 
said that a Thracian gladiator was a match for the 
murmillo, but not for the giver of the games,’ he 
caused to be dragged from his seat and thrown into 


c That is, charges which resulted in the confiscation of the 
goods of the accused to the privy purse. — ? See chap. iii. 1. 

* Implying unfairness on the part of Domitian, who 
favoured the Thracians; cf. Pliny, Paneg. xi. and xxxiii. 


359 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


in harenam canibus obiecit cum hoc titulo: * Impie 
locutus parmularius.”’ 

2 Complures senatores, in iis aliquot consulares, 
interemit; ex quibus Civicam Cerealem in ipso 
Asiae proconsulatu, Salvidienum Orfitum, Acilium 
Glabrionem in! exsilio, quasi molitores rerum novarum, 
ceteros levissima quemque de causa. Aelium 
Lamiam ob suspiciosos quidem, verum et veteres et 
innoxios iocos, quod post abductam ? uxorem laudanti 
vocem suam “ Eutacto " dixerat quodque Tito hortanti 
se ad alterum matrimonium responderat: jj xoi ov 

3 yaunoo Oéras; Salvium Cocceianum, quod Othonis 
imperatoris patrui sui diem natalem celebraverat; 
Mettium Pompusianum,? quod habere imperatoriam 
genesim vulgo ferebatur et quod depictum orbem ə 
terrae in membrana‘ contionesque regum ac ducum 
ex Tito Livio circumferret quodque servis nomina | 
Magonis et Hannibalis indidisset; Sallustium 
Lucullum Britanniae legatum, quod lanceas novae | 

formae appellari Luculleas passus esset; lIunium 


Rusticum, quod Paeti Thraseae et Helvidi? Prisci 
laudes edidisset appellassetque eos sanctissimos 
. viros; cuius criminis occasione philosophos omnis 
4 urbe Italiaque summovit. Occidit et Helvidium 
filium, quasi scaenico exodio sub persona Paridis et 
1 in, added by Torrentius. 
2 abductam, 7'>; adductam, Q0. 
3 Pompusianum, Roth (cf. Vesp. xiv.); Pomposianum, Q. 
4 ss a Scriverius; membranis, ¢ ; membranas, Q. 


5 Macé, Suétone, p. 413, would insert Herennium Senecionem 
quod before Helvidi. 


a There is an added insult in parmulurius, ‘ one armed 
with the buckler," **a Thracian,” as applied to a Roman 
citizen (pater familias). 


360 


eee, ee + 


DOMITIAN 


the arena to dogs, with this placard: “ A favourer of 
the Thracians who spoke impiously.” * 

He put to death many senators, among them 
several ex-consuls, including Civica Cerealis, at the 
very time when he was proconsul in Asia, Salvidienus 
Orfitus, Acilius Glabrio while he was in exile—these 
on the ground of plotting revolution, the rest on any 
charge, however trivial. He slew Aelius Lamia for 
joking remarks, which were reflections on him, it is 
true, but made long before and harmless. For when 
Domitian had taken away Lamia’s wife," the latter 
replied to someone who praised his voice: *I prac- 
tise continence" ;^ and when Titus urged him to 
marry again, he replied: “ Are you too looking for a 
wife?" He put to death Salvius Cocceianus, 
because he had kept the birthday of the emperor 
Otho, his paternal uncle; Mettius Pompusianus, 
because it was commonly reported that he had an 
imperial nativity and carried about a map of the world 
on parchment and ‘speeches of the kings and 
generals from Titus Livius, besides giving two of his 
slaves the names of Mago and Hannibal; Sallustius 
Lucullus, governor of Britain, for allowing some 
lances of a new pattern to be called * Lucullean," 
after his own name; Junius Rusticus, because he 
had published eulogies of Paetus Thrasea and 
Helvidius Priscus and called them the most upright 
of men; and on the occasion of this charge he 
banished all the philosophers from the city and from 
Italy. He also executed the younger Helvidius, 
alleging that in a farce composed for the stage he 
had under the characters of Paris and Oenone 


> See chap. i. 3. 
c Part of a course of training; cf. Nero, xx. l. 


361 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


Oenones divortium suum cum uxore taxasset; 
Flavium Sabinum alterum e patruelibus, quod eum 
comitiorum consularium die destinatum perperam 
praeco non consulem ad populum, sed imperatorem 
pronuntiasset. 

Verum aliquanto post civilis belli victoriam saevior, 
plerosque partis adversae, dum etiam latentis 
conscios investigat,! novo quaestionis genere distorsit 
immisso per obscaena igne; nonnullis et manus 
amputavit. Satisque constat duos solos e notioribus 
venia donatos, tribunum laticlavium et centurionem 
qui se, quo facilius expertes culpae ostenderent 
impudicos probaverant et ob id neque apud ducem 
neque apud milites ullius momenti esse potuisse. 

XI. Erat autem non solum magnae, sed etiam 
callidae inopinataeque saevitiae.  Actorem? sum- 
marum pridie quam cruci figeret in cubiculum 
vocavit, assidere in toro iuxta coegit, securum 
hilaremque dimisit, partibus etiam de cena dignatus 
est. Arrecinum? Clementem consularem, unum e 
familiaribus et emissariis suis, capitis condemnaturus 
in eadem vel etiam maiore gratia habuit, quoad 
novissime simul gestanti, conspecto delatore eius: 
* Vis," inquit, * hunc nequisimum servum cras 
audiamus ? " 

Et quo contemptius abuteretur patientia hominum, 
numquam tristiorem sententiam sine praefatione cle- 
mentiae pronuntiavit, ut non aliud iam certius atrocis 
exitus signum esset quam principii lenitas. Quosdam 

! investigat; Stephanus ; investigato, Q; per conscios in- 
vestigatos, Casaubon. 


? actorem, c (Torrentius) ; auctorem, Q. 
3 Arrecinum, MQN ; arretinum, A. 


362 


V —Hüa— —M A — P Pte 


Lm PP —P— OO gee —— EE, a om RNC HR 


DOMITIAN 


censured Domitian's divorce from his wife; Flavinus 
Sabinus too, one of his cousins, because on the day 
of the consular elections the crier had inadvertently 
announced him to the people as emperor elect, 
instead of consul. 

After his victory in the civil war he became even 
more cruel, and to discover any conspirators who were 
in hiding, tortured many of the opposite party by a 
new form of inquisition, inserting fire in their privates ; 
and he cut off the hands of some of them. It is certain 
that of the more conspicuous only two were par- 
doned, a tribune of senatorial rank and a centurion, 
who the more clearly to prove their freedom from 
guilt, showed that they were of shameless unchastity 
and could therefore have had no influence with the 
general or with the soldiers. 

XI. His savage cruelty was not only excessive, 
but also cunning and sudden. He invited one of 
his stewards to his bed-chamber the day before 
crucifying him, made him sit beside him on his 
couch, and dismissed him in a secure and gay frame 
of mind, even deigning to send him a share of his 
dinner. When he was on the point of condemning 
the ex-consul Arrecinius Clemens, one of his 
intimates and tools, he treated him with as great 
favour as before, if not greater, and finally, as he 
was taking a drive with him, catching sight of his 
accuser he said: “Pray, shall we hear this base 
slave to-morrow ? ” 

To abuse men’s patience the more insolently, he 
never pronounced an unusually dreadful sentence 
without a preliminary declaration of clemency, so 
that there came to be no more certain indication 
of a cruel death than the leniency of his preamble. 


363 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


maiestatis reos in curiam induxerat, et cum praedi- 
xisset experturum se illa die quam carus senatui 
esset, facile perfecerat ut etiam more maiorum 
puniendi condemnarentur ; deinde atrocitate poenae 
conterritus, ad leniendam invidiam intercessit his 
verbis—neque enim ab re fuerit ipsa cognoscere—: 
* Permittite, patres conscripti, a pietate vestra 
impetrari, quod scio me difficulter impetraturum, ut 
damnatis liberum mortis arbitrium indulgeatis; nam 
et parcetis oculis vestris et intellegent me omnes 
senatui interfuisse." 

XII. Exhaustus operum ac munerum inpensis 
stipendioque, quod adiecerat, temptavit quidem ad 
relevandos castrenses sumptus numerum militum 
deminuere; sed cum et obnoxium se barbaris per 
hoc animadverteret neque eo setius in explicandis 
oneribus haereret, nihil pensi habuit quin praedaretur 
omni modo. Bona vivorum ac mortuorum usque- 
quaque quolibet et accusatore et crimine corripie- 
bantur. Satis erat obici qualecumque factum 
dictumve! adversus maiestatem principis. Confisca- 
bantur alienissimae hereditates vel uno exsistente, 
qui diceret audisse se ex defuncto, cum viveret, 
heredem sibi Caesarem esse. Praeter ceteros 
Iudaicus fiscus acerbissime actus est; ad quem 
deferebantur, qui vel inprofessi? Iudaicam viverent 

1 dictumve, 87; dictumque, 8. 


2 vel inprofessi, J. F. Gronov; velut inprofessi, MGTS ; 
velut professi, X. 


a See Nero, xlix. 2. 
^ A tax of two drachmas a head, imposed by Titus in 


return for free permission to practise their religion; see 
Josephus, Bell. Jud. 7. 6. 6. 


364 


DOMITIAN 


He had brought some men charged with treason 
into the senate, and when he had introduced the 
matter by saying that he would find out that day 
how dear he was to the members, he had no diffi- 
culty: in causing them to be condemned to suffer 
the ancient method of punishment. Then appalled 
at the cruelty of the penalty, he interposed a veto, 
to lessen the odium, in these words (for it will be 
of interest to know his exact language): * Allow me, 
Fathers of the senate, to prevail on you by your love 
for me to grant a favour which I know I shall obtain 
with difficulty, namely that you grant the condemned 
free choice of the manner of their death ; for thus 
you will spare your own eyes and all men will know 
that I was present at the meeting of the senate.” 

XII. Reduced to financial straits by the cost of 
his buildings and shows, as well as by the additions 
which he had made to the pay of the soldiers, he 
tried to lighten the military expenses by diminishing 
the number of his troops; but perceiving that in 
this way he exposed himself to the attacks of the 
barbarians, and nevertheless had difficulty in easing 
his burdens, he had no hesitation in resorting to every 
sort of robbery. The property of the living and the 
dead was seized everywhere on any charge brought 
by any accuser. It was enough to allege any action 
or word derogatory to the majesty of the prince. 
Estates of those in no way connected with him were 
confiscated, if but one man came forward to declare 
that he had heard from the deceased during his life- 
time that Caesar was his heir. Besides other taxes, 
that on the Jews’ was levied with the utmost rigour, 
and those were prosecuted who without publicly 
acknowledging that faith yet lived as Jews, as well 


365 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


vitam vel dissimulata origine imposita genti tributa 
non pependissent.  Interfuisse me adulescentulum 
memini, cum a procuratore frequentissimoque consilio 
inspiceretur nonagenarius senex, an circumsectus 
esset. 

Ab iuventa minime civilis animi, confidens etiam 
et cum verbis tum rebus immodicus, Caenidi patris 
concubinae ex Histria reversae osculumque, ut 
assuerat, offerenti manum praebuit ; generum fratris 
indigne ferens albatos et ipsum ministros habere, 


proclamavit : 


Ovx dyaÓóv ToAvkotpayi. 


XIII. Principatum vero adeptus neque in senatu 
iactare dubitavit et patri se et fratri imperium 
dedisse, illos sibi reddidisse, neque in. reducenda 
post divortium uxore edicere revocatam! eam in 
pulvinar suum. Adclamari etiam in amphitheatro 
epuli die libenter audiit: ‘“‘ Domino et dominae 
feliciter!" Sed et Capitolino certamine cunctos 
ingenti consensu precantis, ut Palfurium Suram 
restitueret pulsum olim senatu ac tunc de oratoribus 
coronatum, nullo responso dignatus tacere tantum 
modo iussit voce praeconis. Pari arrogantia, cum 
procuratorum suorum nomine formalem dictaret 
epistulam, sic coepit: * Dominus et deus noster hoc 
fieri iubet." Unde institutum posthac, ut ne 


1 revocatam, Salmasius ; vocatam, 2 


4 These were doubtless Christians, whom the Romans 
commonly confounded with the Jews. 


> See Vesp. iii. c Iliad. 2. 204. 
4 Pulvinar here means the couch for the images of the 
gods ; cf. Aug. xlv. 1. * See chap. iv. 5. 


/ See note on Aug. liii. 1. 9 See chap. iv. 4. 
366 


DOMITIAN 


as those who concealed their origin and did not pay 
the tribute levied upon their people.” I recall being 
present in my youth when the person of a man ninety 
years old was examined before the procurator and a 
very crowded court, to see whether he was circum- 
cised. 

From his youth he was far from being of an affable 
disposition, but was on the contrary presumptuous 
and unbridled both in act and in word. When his . 
father’s concubine Caenis? returned from Histria 
and offered to kiss him as usual, he held out his 
hand to her. He was vexed that his brother's son- 
in-law had attendants clad in white, as well as he, 
and uttered the words 


* Not good is a number of rulers.” * 


XIII. When he became emperor, he did not hesi- 
tate to boast in the senate that he had conferred their 
power on both his father and his brother, and that 
they had but returned him his own; nor on taking 
back his wife after their divorce, that he had 
«c recalled her to his divine couch." 4 He delighted to 
hear the people in the amphitheatre shout on his 
feast day : :* * Good Fortune attend ouf Lord/ and 
Mistress." Even more, in the Capitoline competi- 
tion when all the people begged him with great 
unanimity to restore Palfurius Sura, who had been 
banished some time before from the senate, and on 
that occasion received the prize for oratory, he 
deigned no reply, but merely had a crier bid them 
be silent. With no less arrogance he began as follows 
in dictating a circular letter in the name of his pro- 
. curators, “Our Master and our God bids that this be 
done." And so the custom arose of henceforth 


367 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


scripto quidem ac sermone cuiusquam appellaretur 
aliter. Statuas sibi in Capitolio non nisi aureas 
et argenteas poni permisit ac ponderis certi. Ianos 
"arcusque cum quadrigis et insignibus triumphorum 
per regiones urbis tantos ac tot exstruxit, ut cui- 
dam Graece inscriptum sit: “Arci.” !  Consulatus 
septemdecim cepit, quot? ante eum nemo; ex 
quibus septem medios continuavit, omnes autem 
paene titulo tenus gessit nec quemquam ultra Kal. 
Mai., plerosque ad Idus usque Ianuarias. Post autem 
duos triumphos Germanici cognomine assumpto 
Septembrem mensem et Octobrem ex appellationi- 
bus suis Germanicum Domitianumque transnomina- 
vit, quod altero suscepisset imperium, altero natus 
esset. 

XIV. Per haec terribilis cunctis et invisus, tandem 
oppressus est insidiis ? amicorum libertorumque inti- 
morum simul et uxoris. Annum diemque ultimum 
vitae iam pridem suspectum habebat, horam etiam 
nec non et genus mortis. Adulescentulo Chaldaei 
cuncta praedixerant; pater quoque super cenam 
quondam fungis abstinentem palam irriserat ut 
ignarum sortis suae, quod non ferrum potius timeret. 
Quare pavidus semper atque anxius minimis etiam 
suspicionibus praeter modum commovebatur. Ut 
edicti de excidendis vineis propositi gratiam faceret, 

1 arci, MGS, = àpre? (Turnebus). 


2 quot, c ; quod, Q. 
3 insidiis, G'; conspiratione, after intimorum, YON. 


a Arci is a transliteration of the Greek word &pxet with a 
pun on its resemblance in sound to arcus, ** arch.' 


368 


DOMITIAN 


addressing him in no other way even in writing or in 
conversation. He suffered no statues to be set up in 
his honour in the Capitol, except of gold and silver 
and of a fixed weight. He erected so many and such 
huge vaulted passage-ways and arches in the various 
regions of the city, adorned with chariots and trium- 
phal emblems, that on one of them someone wrote 
in Greek: “It is enough."^ He held the consulship 
seventeen times, more often than any of his pre- 
decessors. Of these the seven middle ones were in 
successive years, but all of them he filled in name 
only, continuing none beyond the first of May and 
few after the Ides of January. Having assumed 
the surname Germanicus after his two triumphs, he 
renamed the months of September and October from 
his own names, calling them * Germanicus" and 
* Domitianus," because in the former he had come 
to the throne and was born in the latter. 

XIV. In this way he became an object of terror 
and hatred to all, but he was overthrown at last by a 
conspiracy of his friends and favourite freedmen, to 
which his wife was also privy. He had long since 
had a premonition of the last year and day of his 
life, and even of the very hour and manner of his 
death. In his youth astrologers had predicted all 
this to him, and his father once even openly ridiculed 
him at dinner for refusing mushrooms, saying that he 
showed himself unaware of his destiny in not rather 
fearing the sword. Therefore he was at all times 
timorous and worried, and was disquieted beyond 
measure by even the slightest suspicions. It is 
thought that nothing had more effect in inducing 
him to ignore his proclamation about cutting down 


369 
VOL. Il. B B 


71, 72, 77 
(cos. v), 80, 
82-88, 90, 
92, 95 A.D. 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


non alia magis re compulsus creditur, quam quod 
sparsi libelli cum his versibus erant : 


Kdv! pe dayns éri pilav, cpus ere xaprodopycw, 
doaov émiomeioat col, Tpáye, Üvopévo. 


Eadem formidine oblatum a senatu novum et excogi- 
tatum honorem, quamquam omnium talium appeten- 
tissimus, recusavit, quo decretum erat ut, quotiens 
gereret consulatum, equites R. quibus sors obtigisset, 
trabeati et cum hastis militaribus praecederent eum 
inter lictores apparitoresque. 

Tempore vero suspecti periculi appropinquante 
sollicitior in dies porticuum, in quibus spatiari consu- 
erat, parietes phengite lapide distinxit, e cuius 
splendore per imagines quidquid a tergo fieret 
provideret. Nec nisi secreto atque solus plerasque 
custodias, receptis quidem in manum catenis, audie- 
bat. Utque domesticis persuaderet, ne bono quidem 
exemplo audendam ? esse patroni necem, Epaphrodi- 
tum a libellis capitali poena condemnavit, quod post 
destitutionem Nero in adipiscenda morte manu eius 
adiutus existimabatur. 

XV. Denique Flavium Clementem patruelem suum 
contemptissimae inertiae, cuius filios etiam tum 


1 küy, Roth; koi, Q; cf. C.I.L. iv. 3407, 6. 
2 audendam, pZ? ; audiendam, Q. 


@ See chap. vii. 2. è Of. Ovid, Fasti, 1. 357. 

* À toga ornamented with horizontal stripes of purple, 
worn by the knights on public occasions, as well as by the 
ad kings and the consuls; Tac. Ann. 3. 2; Val. Max. 

(2. 9. 

4 According to Pliny, N.H. 36. 163, a hard, white, trans- 
lucent stone discovered in Cappodocia in the reign of Nero. 
According to Tzetzes, Lyc. 98, peyylrns = ceAnvirns, ** moon- 


370 


DOMITIAN 


the vineyards ^ than the circulation of notes contain- 
ing the following lines: 


* Gnaw at my root, an you will; even then shall I 
have juice in plenty 
To pour upon thee, O goat, when at the altar you 
stand." ò 


It was because of this same timorousness that 
although he was most eager for all such honours, he 
refused a new one which the senate had devised 
and offered to him, a decree, namely, that whenever 
he held the consulship Roman knights selected by 
lot should precede him among his lictors and 
attendants, clad in the trabea^ and bearing lances. 

As the time when he anticipated danger drew 
near, becoming still more anxious every day, he 
lined the walls of the colonnades in which he used to 
walk with phengite stone,7 to be able to see in its 
brilliant surface the reflection of all that went on 
behind his back. And he did not give a hearing 
to any prisoners except in private and alone, even 
holding their chains in his hands. Further, to con- 
vince his household that one must not venture to 
kill a patron even on good grounds, he condemned 
Epaphroditus, his confidential secretary, to death, 
because it was believed that after Nero was aban- 
doned * the freedman's hand had aided him in taking 
his life./ 

XV. Finally he put to death his own cousin 
Flavius Clemens, suddenly and on a very slight 
suspicion, almost before the end of his consulship; 


stone." Pliny also mentions similar mirrors of black obsidian ; 
N.H. 36. 196. 
e Cf. Nero, xl. 2. J See Nero, xlix. 4. 


371 
B B 2 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


parvulos successores palam destinaverat abolitoque ! 
priore nomine alterum Vespasianum appellari, 
alterum Domitianum, repente ex tenuissima suspicione 
tantum non in ipso eius consulatu interemit. Quo 
maxime facto maturavit sibi exitium. 

Continuis octo mensibus tot fulgura facta nuntia- 
taque sunt, ut exclamaverit: **Feriat iam, quem 
volet." actum de caelo Capitolium templumque 
Flaviae gentis, item domus Palatina et cubiculum 
ipsius, atque etiam e basi statuae triumphalis titulus 
excussus vi procellae in monimentum proximum 
decidit. Arbor, quae privato adhuc Vespasiano 
eversa surrexerat, tunc rursus repente corruit. 
Praenestina Fortuna, toto imperii spatio annum 
novum commendanti laetam eandemque semper 
sortem dare assueta, extremo tristissimam reddidit? 
nec sine sanguinis mentione. 

Minervam, quam superstitiose colebat, somniavit 
excedere sacrario negantemque? ultra se tueri eum 
posse, quod exarmata esset a Iove. Nulla tamen re 
perinde commotus est quam responso casuque Ascle- 
tarionis* mathematici. Hune delatum nec infitian- 
tem iactasse se quae providisset ex arte, sciscitatus 
est, quis ipsum maneret exitus; et affirmantem fore 

1 abolitoque, N ; et abolito, T; abolito, MGX (Bentley). 

2 reddidit, Y; the other mss have reddit. 

3 negantemque, mss.; negantem, Stephanus; negantem 
quoque, Oudendorp ; lacuna before negantemque, Roth. 


4 Asclationis, F. Cumont, Cat. Codd. Astrol. Graec. v. 
p. 205, n. 1. 


a It was evidently on a metal plate, attached to the marble 
base. ^ See Vesp. v. 4. 
e Fortuna Primigenia ; cf. Tib. Ixiii. 1. 


37? 


DOMITIAN 


and yet Flavius was a man of most contemptible 
laziness and Domitian had besides openly named his 
sons, who were then very young, as his successors, 
changing their former names and calling the one 
Vespasian and the other Domitian. And it was by 
this deed in particular that he hastened his own 
destruction. 

For eight successive months so many strokes of 
lightning occurred and were reported, that at last he 
cried : “ Well, let him now strike whom he will." The 
temple of Jupiter of the Capitol was struck and that 
of the Flavian family, as well as the Palace and the 
emperor's own bedroom. The inscription too on the 
base of a triumphal statue of his was torn off in a 
violent tempest and fell upon a neighbouring tomb. 
The tree which had been overthrown when Vespasian 
was still a private citizen but had sprung up anew,? 
then on a sudden fell down again. Fortune of 
Praeneste * had throughout his whole reign, when he 
commended the new year to her protection, given 
him a favourable omen and always in the same words. 
Now at last she returned a most direful one, not 
without the mention of bloodshed. 

He dreamed that Minerva, whom he worshipped 
with superstitious veneration, came forth from her 
shrine and declared that she could no longer protect 
bim, since she had been disarmed by Jupiter. Yet 
there was nothing by which he was so much dis- 
turbed as a prediction of the astrologer Ascletarion 
and what befell him. When this man was accused 
before the emperor and did not deny that he had 
spoken of certain things which he had foreseen 
through his art, he was asked what his own end 
would be. When he replied that he would shortly 


373 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


ut brevi laceraretur a canibus, interfici quidem sine 
mora, sed ad coarguendam temeritatem artis sepeliri 
quoque accuratissime imperavit. Quod cum fieret, 
evenit ut repentina tempestate deiecto funere 
semiustum cadaver discerperent canes, idque ei 
cenanti a mimo Latino, qui praeteriens forte animad- 
verterat, inter ceteras diei fabulas referretur. 

XVI. Pridie quam periret, cum oblatos tubures 
servari iussisset in crastinum, adiecit: * Si modo uti 
licuerit," et conversus ad proximos affirmavit fore ut 
sequenti die luna se in aquario cruentaret factumque 
aliquod exsisteret, de quo loquerentur homines per 
terrarum orbem. At circa mediam noctem ita est 
exterritus, ut e strato prosiliret. Dehinc mane haru- 
spicem ex Germania missum, qui consultus de fulgure 
mutationem rerum praedixerat, audiit condemna- 
vitque. Ac dum exulceratam in fronte verrucam 
vehementius scalpit, profluente sanguine : * Utinam," 
inquit, “hactenus.” Tunc horas requirenti pro quinta, 
quam metuebat, sexta ex industria nuntiata est. 
His velut transacto iam periculo laetum festinantem- 
que ad corporis curam Parthenius cubiculo praepositus 
convertit, nuntians esse qui magnum nescio quid 


a Including the burning of the body, to prevent the fulfil- 
ment of the prophecy. 


374 


DOMITIAN : 


be rent by dogs, Domitian ordered him killed at 
once; but to prove the fallibility of his art, he 
ordered besides that his funeral be attended to with 
the greatest care.^ While this was being done, it 
chanced that the pyre was overset by a sudden 
storm and that the dogs mangled the corpse, which 
was only partly consumed; and that an actor of 
farces called Latinus, who happened to pass by and 
see the incident, told it to Domitian at the dinner 
table, with the rest of the day’s gossip. 

XVI. The day before he was killed he gave 
orders to have some apples which were offered 
him kept until the following day, and added: “If 
only I am spared to eat them”; then turning to 
his companions, he declared that on the following 
day the moon would be stained with blood in 
Aquarius, and that a deed would be done of which 
men would talk all over the world. At about mid- 
night he was so terrified that he leaped from his 
bed. The next morning he conducted the trial of 
a soothsayer sent from Germany, who when con- 
sulted about the lightning strokes had foretold a 
change of rulers, and condemned him to death. 
While he was vigorously scratching a festered wart 
on his forehead, and had drawn blood, he said: 
* May this be all.” Then he asked the time, and 
by pre-arrangement the sixth hour was announced. 
to him, instead of the fifth, which he feared. Filled 
with joy at this, and believing all danger now past, 
he was hastening to the bath, when his chamberlain 
Parthenius changed his purpose by announcing that 
someone had called about a matter of great moment 


375 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


afferret, nec differendum. Itaque summotis omnibus 
in cubiculum se recepit atque ibi occisus est. 

XVII. De insidiarum caedisque genere haec fere 
divulgata sunt. Cunctantibus conspiratis, quando et 
quo modo, id est lavantemne an cenantem adgrede- 
rentur, Stephanus, Domitillae procurator et tunc 
interceptarum pecuniarum reus, consilium operam- 
que obtulit. Ac sinisteriore brachio velut aegro 
lanis fasciisque per aliquot dies ad avertendam 
suspicionem obvoluto, sub ipsam horam dolonem! 
interiecit ; professusque conspirationis indicium et ob 
hoc admissus legenti traditum a se libellum et 
attonito suffodit inguina. Saucium ac repugnantem 
adorti Clodianus cornicularius et Maximus Partheni 
libertus et Satur decurio cubiculariorum et quidam e 
gladiatorio ludo vulneribus septem contrucidarunt. 
Puer, qui curae Larum cubiculi ex consuetudine 
assistens interfuit caedi, hoc amplius narrabat, iussum 
se a Domitiano ad primum statim vulnus pugionem 
pulvino subditum porrigere ac. ministros vocare, 
neque ad caput quidquam excepto capulo et praeterea 
clausa omnia repperisse ; atque illum interim arrepto 
deductoque ad terram Stephano conluctatum diu, 
dum modo ferrum extorquere, modo quanquam 
laniatis digitis oculos effodere conatur. 

1 dolonem, Ferrarius; dolum, 2; dolo, 8. 
a Niece of Domitian, è See Aug. vii. 1. 


376 


DOMITIAN 


and would not be put off. Then he dismissed all 
his attendants and went to his bedroom, where he 
was slain. 

XVII. Concerning the nature of the plot and the 
manner of his death, this is about all that became 
known. As the conspirators were deliberating when 
and how to attack him, whether at the bath or at 
dinner, Stephanus, Domitilla’s* steward, at the time 
under accusation for embezzlement, offered his aid 
and counsel. To avoid suspicion, he wrapped up his 
left arm in woollen bandages for some days, pre- 
tending that he had injured it, and concealed in 
them a dagger. Then pretending to betray a con- 
spiracy and for that reason being given an audience, 
he stabbed the emperor in the groin as he was 
reading a paper which the assassin handed him, and 
stood in a state of amazement. As the wounded 
prince attempted to resist, he was slain with seven 
wounds by Clodianus, a subaltern, Maximus, a freed- 
man of Parthenius, Satur, decurion of the chamber- 
lains, and a gladiator from the imperial school. A 
boy who was engaged in his usual duty of attending 
to the Lares in the bedroom, and so was a witness 
of the murder, gave this additional information. He 
was bidden by Domitian, immediately after he was 
dealt the first blow, to hand him the dagger hidden 
under his pillow and to call the servants ; but he found 
nothing at the head of the bed save the hilt, and 
besides all the doors were closed. Meanwhile the 
emperor grappled with Stephanus and bore him to 
the ground, where they struggled for a long time, 
Domitian trying now to wrest the dagger from his 
assailant’s hands and now to gouge out his eyes with 
his lacerated fingers. 


377 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


Occisus est XIIII. Kal. Octb. anno aetatis quadra- 
gensimo quinto, imperii quinto decimo. Cadaver 
eius populari sandapila per vispillones! exportatum 
Phyllis? nutrix in suburbano suo Latina via funeravit, 
sed reliquias templo Flaviae gentis clam intulit 
cineribusque Iuliae Titi filiae, quam et ipsam educa- 
rat, conmiscuit. 

XVIII. Statura fuit procera, vultu modesto 
ruborisque pleno, grandibus oculis, verum acie hebe- 
tiore; praeterea pulcher ac decens, maxime in 
iuventa, et quidem toto corpore exceptis pedibus, 
quorum digitos restrictiores habebat; postea calvitio 
quoque deformis et obesitate ventris et crurum graci- 
litate, quae tamen ei valitudine longa remacruerant. 
Commendari se verecundia oris adeo sentiebat, ut 
apud senatum sic quondam iactaverit : * Usque adhue 
certe et animum meum probastis et vultum." Cal- 
vitio ita offendebatur, ut in contumeliam suam 
traheret, si cui alii ioco vel iurgio obiectaretur ; 
quamvis libello, quem de cura capillorum ad amicum 
edidit, haec etiam, simul illum seque consolans, 
inseruerit : 

* Ody ópdqs,? otos Kaya kaAós re uéyas TE; 
Eadem me tamen manent capillorum fata, et forti 


! vespillones, An . a as ps; Phyllix, 2. 
* PGS, 44. 


a This in its connection suggests the blush of modesty, but 
cf. Tac. Agr. 45, ille vultus et rubor quo se contra pudorem 
muniebat; and in general, Sen. Epist. 11. 3. Doubtless 
ene ruddy complexion was a recommendation in his 
youth. 


378 


— EE, 


DOMITIAN 


He was slain on the fourteenth day before the si ae 
Kalends of October in the forty-fifth year of his age 
and the fifteenth of his reign. His corpse was 
carried out on a common bier by those who bury the 
poor, and his nurse Phyllis cremated it at her 
suburban estate on the Via Latina; but his ashes she 
secretly carried to the temple of the Flavian family 
and mingled them with those of Julia, daughter of 
Titus, whom she had also reared. 

XVIII. He was tall of stature, with a modest 
expression and a high colour.” His eyes were large, 
but his sight was somewhat dim. He was handsome 
and graceful too, especially when a young man, and 
indeed in his whole body with the exception of his 
feet, the toes of which were somewhat cramped. In 
later life he had the further disfigurement of bald- 
ness, a protruding belly, and spindling legs, though 
the latter had become thin from a long illness. He 
was so conscious that the modesty of his expression 
was in his favour, that he once made this boast in 
the senate: “So far, at any rate, you have approved 
my heart and my countenance.” He was so sensi- 
tive about his baldness, that he regarded it as a 
personal insult if anyone else was twitted with that 
defect in jest or in earnest; though in a book “On 
the Care of the Hair,’ which he published and 
dedicated to a friend, he wrote the following by way 
of consolation to the man and himself: 


* Do you not see that I too am tall and comely to 
look on ?^ 


And yet the same fate awaits my hair, and I bear 


> Iliad, 21. 108. 
379 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


animo fero comam in adulescentia senescentem. 
Scias nec gratius quicquam decore nec brevius." 

XIX. Laboris impatiens pedibus per urbem non 
temere ambulavit, in expeditione et agmine equo 
rarius, lectica assidue vectus est. Armorum nullo, 
sagittarum vel praecipuo studio tenebatur. Centenas 
varii generis feras saepe in Albano secessu conficien- 
tem spectavere plerique atque etiam ex industria ita 
quarundam capita figentem, ut duobus ictibus quasi 
cornua efficeret. Nonnumquam in pueri procul 
stantis praebentisque pro scopulo dispansam dexterae 
manus palmam sagittas tanta arte derexit,! ut omnes 
per intervalla digitorum innocue evaderent. 

XX. Liberalia studia imperii initio neglexit, quan- 
quam bibliothecas incendio absumptas impensis- 
sime reparare curasset, exemplaribus undique petitis 
missisque Alexandream qui describerent emendarent- 
que. Numquam tamen aut historiae carminibusve 
noscendis operam ullam aut stilo vel necessario dedit. 
Praeter commentarios et acta Tiberi Caesaris nihil 
lectitabat ; epistulas orationesque et edicta alieno? 
formabat ingenio. Sermonis tamen nec inelegantis, 
dictorum interdum etiam notabilium: ** Vellem," 
inquit, “tam formosus esse, quam Maecius sibi 

! derexit, ç ; derexerit, Q; the other mss. have direxit. 


2 alieno, >; alfeno, MGT; the greater number of the X class 
have alieno alfeno. 


a Cf. Tit. v. 2. The bow and arrow were not included by 
the Romans in the term arma. > Cf. chap. ii. 2. 

¢ The great library of Ptolemy Philadelphus at Alexandria 
was destroyed during Caesars Alexandrine war. The 
Pergamene library was given by Antony to Cleopatra and 
transferred to Alexandria, where it was kept in the temple 


380 


DOMITIAN 


with resignation the ageing of my locks in youth. Be 
assured that nothing is more pleasing than beauty, 
but nothing shorter-lived.” 

XIX. He was incapable of exertion and seldom 
went about the city on foot, while on his campaigns 
and journeys he rarely rode on horseback, but was 
regularly carried in a litter. He took no interest 
in arms, but was particularly devoted to archery.* 
There are many who have more than once seen him 
slay a hundred wild beasts of different kinds on his 
Alban estate, and purposely kill some of them with 
two successive shots in such a way that the arrows 
gave the effect of horns. Sometimes he would have 
a slave stand at a distance and hold out the palm of 
his right hand for a mark, with the fingers spread ; 
then he directed his arrows with such accuracy that 
they passed harmlessly between the fingers. 

XX. At the beginning of his rule he neglected 
liberal studies,’ although he provided for having the 
libraries, which were destroyed by fire,^ renewed at 
very great expense, seeking everywhere for copies of 
the lost works, and sending scribes to Alexandria to 
transcribe and correct them. Yet he never took any 
pains to become acquainted with history or poetry, or 
even to acquiring an ordinarily good style. He read 
nothing except the memoirs and transactions of 
Tiberius Caesar; for his letters, speeches and pro- 
clamations he relied on others talents. Yet his 
conversation was not inelegant, and some of his 
sayings were even noteworthy, “How I wish," said 
he “ that I were as fine looking as Maecius thinks he 


of Serapis. It was frequently damaged during civil disturb- 
ances. Burmann thinks that the reference is to the latter ; 
but the plural suggests both. 


381 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


, 


videtur ” ; et cuiusdam caput varietate capilli subru- 
tilum et incanum perfusam nivem mulso dixit. 

XXI. Condicionem principum miserrimam aiebat, 
quibus de coniuratione comperta non crederetur nisi 
occisis. 

Quotiens otium esset, alea se oblectabat, etiam 
profestis diebus matutinisque horis, ac lavabat de die 
prandebatque ad satietatem, ut non temere super 
cenam praeter Matianum malum et modicam in 
ampulla potiunculam sumeret. Convivabatur fre- 
quenter ac large, sed paene raptim; certe non ultra 
solis occasum nec ut postea comissaretur. Nam ad 
horam somni nihil aliud quam solus secreto 
deambulabat. a 

XXII. Libidinis nimiae, assiduitatem concubitus 
velut exercitationis genus clinopalen! vocabat; erat- 
que fama, quasi concubinas ipse develleret? nata- 
retque inter vulgatissimas meretrices. Fratris filiam 
adhuc virginem oblatam in matrimonium sibi cum 
devinctus Domitiae nuptiis pertinacissime recusasset, 
non multo post alii conlocatam corrupit ultro et 
quidem vivo etiam tum Tito; mox patre ac viro 
orbatam ardentissime palamque dilexit, ut etiam 
causa mortis exstiterit coactae conceptum a se 
abigere. 


! clinopalem, Q. 
2 develleret, G ; the other mss. have divelleret. 


. * Named after C. Matius, a friend of Augustus and a 
writer on cookery and gardening. > Cf. Juv. ii. 32 f. 


382 


DOMITIAN 


is.” He declared too that the head of a certain man, 
whose hair had changed colour in such a way that it 
was partly reddish and partly grey, was like * snow on 
which mead had been poured." 

XXI. He used to say that the lot of princes Was 
most unhappy, since when they discovered a con- 
spiracy, no one believed them unless they had been 
killed. 

Whenever he had leisure he amused himself with 
playing at dice, even on working days and in the 
morning hours. He went to the bath before the 
end of the forenoon and lunched to the point 
of satiety, so that at dinner he rarely took anything 
except a Matian apple% and a moderate amount 
of wine from a jug. He gave numerous and 
generous banquets, but usually ended them early ; 
in no.case did he protract them beyond sunset, 
or follow them by a drinking bout. In fact, he did 
nothing until the hour for retiring except walk alone 
in a retired place. 

XXIl. He was excessively lustful. His constant 
sexual intercourse he called bed-wrestling, as if it 
were a kind of exercise. It was reported that he 
depilated his concubines with his own hand and 
swam with common prostitutes. After persistently 
refusing his niece, who was offered him in marriage 
when she was still à maid, because he was entangled 
in an intrigue with Domitia, he seduced her shortly 
afterwards when she became the wife of another, 
and that too during the lifetime of Titus. Later, 
when she was bereft of father and husband, he 
loved her ardently and without disguise, and even 
became the cause of her death by compelling her to 
get rid of a child of his by abortion." 


383 


to 


THE LIVES OF THE CAESARS, BOOK VIII 


XXIII. Occisum eum populus indifferenter, miles 
gravissime tulit statimque Divum appellare conatus 
est, paratus et ulcisci, nisi duces defuissent ; quod 
quidem paulo post fecit expostulatis ad poenam 
pertinacissime caedis auctoribus. Contra senatus 
adeo laetatus est, ut repleta certatim curia non 
temperaret, quin mortuum contumeliosissimo atque 
acerbissimo adclamationum genere laceraret, scalas 
etiam inferri clipeosque et imagines eius coram 
detrahi et ibidem solo affligi iuberet, novissime 
eradendos ubique titulos abolendamque omnem 
memoriam decerneret. 

Ante paucos quam occideretur menses cornix in 
Capitolio elocuta est: éora: mávra kaXós, nec defuit 
qui ostentum sic interpretaretur : 


* Nuper Tarpeio quae sedit culmine cornix 
‘Est bene’ non potuit dicere, dixit: * Erit.' " 


Ipsum etiam Domitianum ferunt somniasse gibbam 
sibi pone cervicem auream enatam, pro certoque 
habuisse beatiorem post se laetioremque portendi rei 
publicae statum,! sicut sane brevi evenit abstinentia 
et moderatione insequentium principum. 


1 rerum statum publice, M; rei statum publicae, G; 
statum rei publicae, X.  ' 


a Votive shields, adorned with the emperor’s image ; see 
Calig. xvi. 4. * Cf. Plin. Paneg. lii. 

¢ The Capitoline hill was sometimes called mons Tapeius, 
from the Tarpeian Rock at its south-west corner. It was 


384 


| 


DOMITIAN 


XXIII. The people received the news of his death 
with indifference, but the soldiers were greatly 
grieved and at once attempted to call him the 
Deified Domitian ; while they were prepared also to 
avenge him, had they not lacked leaders. This, 
however, they did accomplish a little later by most 
insistently demanding the execution of his mur- 
derers. The senators on the contrary were so 
overjoyed, that they raced to fill the House, where 
they did not refrain from assailing the dead emperor 
with the most insulting and stinging kind of out- 
cries. They even had ladders brought and his 
shields and images torn down before their eyes and 
dashed upon the ground; finally they passed a 
decree that his inscriptions should everywhere be 
erased, and all record of him obliterated.^ 

A few months before he was killed, a raven 
perched on the Capitolium and cried * All will be 
well," an omen which some interpreted as follows : 


“High on the gable Tarpeian* a raven but lately 
alighting, 
Could not say ‘It is well,’ only declared ‘It will 
be.’ 93 


Domitian himself, it is said, dreamed that a golden 
hump grew out on his back, and he regarded 
this as an infallible sign that the condition of the 
empire would be happier and more prosperous after 
his time; and this was shortly shown to be true 
through the uprightness and moderate rule of the 
succeeding emperors. 


not, however, the original name of the hill, as some Roman 
antiquarians supposed. 


385 
VOL. Il. cc 


= 09m ee prr mm 
[= 


PART II 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


cc 2 


PREFATORY NOTE 


"Tur manuscripts of the Dialogus and Agricola of 
Tacitus contain also a treatise “On Grammarians 
and Rhetoricians," attributed to Suetonius. This 
work was used by Gellius (Noct. Att. 15. 11) and by 
Hieronymus, but a£tér the latter's day was lost for 
many centuries. 

About the middle of the fifteenth century,! in the 
course of a journey through Germany and Denmark, 
Enoc of Ascoli? found the two works of Tacitus 
and the treatise on Grammarians and Rhetoricians, 
apparently at Hersfeld and in a single codex, and 
brought them to Italy. This codex is now lost,’ 
but some eighteen copies of the De Grammaticis e 
Rhetortbus are in existence, all belonging to the 
fifteenth century, which show remarkable differences 
in reading, considering that they are derived from 
a single archetype, and are separated from it by so 
short a time. These manuscripts, not all of which 
have been collated, fall into two classes, distinguished 
from each other by the presence or absence of the 
index of names at the beginning of the treatise. 


1 The date is variously given: 1455, Teuffel, Gesch. d. 
rim. lL4t.9; 1457-8, Gudeman, Grund. z. Gesch. d. kl. 
Phil.; etc. 

? Enoc's discovery of this manuscript has been doubted by 
some, but is now accepted by most scholars. 

? Except for one quaternio, now at Esinus (Jesi). 


388 


-— € 


PREFATORY NOTE 


Roth in his edition of 1858 asserted the superiority 
of the former class, and Ihm is inclined to agree with 
him.! For a list of the better codices with their sigla 
see footnote on p. 395. 

Owing to the late date of all the manuscripts, the 

early printed editions are of some value in the 
criticism of the text; see the Bibliographical Note, 
p. 394. 
E The work begins with an index, containing a list 
of the grammarians and rhetoricians who are to be 
discussed, which, as has been said, is omitted by 
some of the manuscripts. This is followed by an 
introduction on the origin and development of 
grammatical studies at Rome, and the connection 
of grammar with rhetoric, after which the individual 
representatives of the subject are treated. The 
part devoted to rhetoricians also begins with an 
introduction on the history of the study, but the 
work comes to an end after dealing with five of the 
fifteen persons named in the index. 

It has been generally recognized that this treatise 
on “ Grammarians and Rhetoricians" formed part 
of a larger work by Suetonius, entitled De Viris 
Illustribus, which treated of Romans who were 
eminent in the field of literature.? It seems to 
have consisted of five divisions, devoted respectively 
to Poets, Orators, Historians, Philosophers, and 
Grammarians and Rhetoricians under one head. 
The order of the various divisions, or books, cannot 
be determined.? 


1 Rhein. Museum, 61 (1906), p. 543. 

2 See Volume I, p. xi. 

3 Hieronymus used the De Viris Illustribus of Suetonius 
as his model in the composition of a work of the same title, 


389 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


- To judge from the personages treated by Suetonius 
and those whom he omits, the De Viris lllustribus 
appears to have been written between 106 and 113. 
It was therefore his earliest work, and is in all 
probability the one to which Pliny refers! As was 
the case with the Lives of the Caesars, he apparently 
set as his limit the close of the reign of Domitian, 
so that Juvenal, Tacitus and the younger Pliny were 
not included. 

While the greater part of the De Viris Illustribus 
has been lost, some passages of considerable length, 
in addition to the ** Grammarians and Rhetoricians,’’ 
have been recovered from various sources. These 
consist of Lives of various Roman writers, prefixed 
to their works by way of introduction.2 None of 
these has come down to us in its original form, and 
they differ greatly in the amount of abridgment or 
of interpolation to which they have been subjected. 
Those which may properly be included in an edition 
of Suetonius are the following. 

From the book on Poets (De Poetis), to which an 
index of thirty-three names has been compiled from 
the references in Hieronymus,’ we have a Life of 
Terence, preserved in the Commentary of Aelius 
Donatus, of the fourth century, and ascribed by 


devoted to the worthies of the Church, as well as in his 
translation and enlargement of the ** Chronicle " of Eusebius. 
From the latter numerous fragments of the De Viris 
Illustribus of Suetonius have been recovered, and the general 
plan of bis work made out. 

1 See Volume I, p. x, footnote 1. 

? For the manuscripts and their sigla see pp. 450 and 
451. 

3 This is given on p. 450. 


390 


PREFATORY NOTE 


him to Suetonius. A Life of Horace, which is found 
in some of the manuscripts, is not directly attributed 
to Suetonius, but is believed to be his because of 
the occurrence in it of certain statements which are 
credited to Suetonius by the scholiasts.! A very 
fragmentary Life of Lucan is assigned to Suetonius 
also on internal evidence. 

With regard to the ultimate authorship of these 
three Lives there is little, if any, difference of 
opinion. With regard to three others the agreement 
is not so general, but they are assigned to Suetonius 
by some scholars. These are the Life of Vergil, 
in Donatus Commentary, where it is followed 
by an introduction to the Bucolics from Donatus’ 
own hand; a Life of Tibullus, greatly abridged; 
and a Life of Persius. The last is directly attributed 
to Valerius Probus, but in spite of this is believed 
by many to be Suetonian.? 

The discussion of the varieties of poety, found in 
Diomedes, Grammatici Latim, i. 482. 14 ff. K., was 
assigned to Suetonius by Reifferscheid and printed 
in his edition of 1860. Schanz also includes this 
among the fragments of the De Pins lllustribus,? 
but on insufficient grounds; see Teuffel, Geschichte 
der römischen Literatur, 6th ed., iii, p. 57 and the 
literature there cited. 

From the Orators (De Oratoribus), with an index 
of fifteen names, only the brief abstract of the Life 
of Passienus Crispus has come down to us, preserved 
in the scholia Pithoeana on Juvenal 4. 81, where 


1 See for example Porphyrio on Epist. 2. 1. 1. 

2 See especially G. Kórtge, Im Suet. de Viris Ill. libros 
Inquisitionum Caput Primum, Halis Saxonum, 1899, pp. 41 ff. 

3 Gesch. d. rom, Lüt., in Müller's Handbuch, viii. 3, p. 53. 


391 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


Passienus is confused with Vibius Crispus. Although 
his source is not given by the scholiast, the Life is 
generally attributed to Suetonius. Since in the ex- 
cerpts from the De Oratoribus made by Hieronymus 
we find no orator earlier than Cicero, it has been 
inferred that Suetonius began his biographies with 
Cicero and treated the earlier orators in a general 
introduction. 

From the Historians, with an index of six names, 
we have only the Life of Pliny the Elder, which 
is attributed to Suetonius in the manuscripts which 
contain it. Here Suetonius seems to have begun 
with Sallust, discussing the earlier historians in his 
introduction. 

. From the De Philosophis we have only an index 
of three names, Marcus Terentius Varro, Publius 
Nigidius Figulus, and Lucius Annaeus Seneca, which 
have been recovered from Hieronymus. 

As in the Lives of the Caesars, Suetonius’ sources 
for the Lives of Illustrious Men were in the main 
literary, in particular Varro, the previous writers 
of books of the same title ade Santra and 
Hyginus), Asconius and Fenestella. In part through 
these writers, and perhaps in part directly, his 
work goes back to the Greek authors Antigonus 
of Carystos, Aristoxenes, Satyros, and Hermippos. 
He also made some use of private letters, public 
documents, hearsay evidence and personal recol- 
lection. 

The Text of the De Grammaticis et Rhetoribus is in 
a less satisfactory condition than that of the Caesars. 
Some manuscipts of the better class have not yet 
been collated, and Ihm’s untimely death has pre- 
vented or indefinitely postponed the publication of 


392 


PREFATORY NOTE 


the second volume of his edition with the text of 
the fragments. New recensions of the Lives have 
appeared in various editions of the authors in 
question and one of the Life of Vergil by E. Diehl 
in the Kleine Texte für theologische und philologische 
Vorlesungen und Uebungen, Bonn, 1911. 


393 


4 


 . BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE 


Tuere are three editions of the De Grammaticis et 
Rhetoribus that rank as principes: one of uncertain 
authorship and date, believed by some to have been 
.published by Nicolas Jensen at Venice in 1472, a 
Venetian edition of 1474, and one issued at Florence 
in 1478. Other early editions are the Aldine, 1508, 
based upon the three principes, and those of 
R. Stephanus, E. Vinetus, and Achilles Statius. 
In more recent times separate editions have been 
published by L. Tross, 1841, Fr. Osann, Giessen, 
1854, L. Roth, Leipzig, 1858, and A. Reifferscheid, 
Leipzig, 1860. The last two are still the standard 
texts. The De Viris Illustribus was first published 
with the Caesars by Antonius Gryphius at Lyons in 
1566 and Th. Pulmann at Antwerp, in 1574. "They 
were followed by Casaubon, and his edition, as well 
as others of those mentioned on p. xxvii of Volume I, 
contains the fragments. In 1863 H. Doergens 
published an edition at Leipzig with a German trans- 
lation and a commentary. The only translation 
into English, so far as I know, is that of T. Forester 
in the Bohn library ; see Volume I, p. xxviii. 


394 


— — 4. T 


DE GRAMMATICIS ET 
RHETORIBUS 


Severa of the better manuscripts have before or 
after the title the following Index: Grammatici: 
[Aelius Praeconius],  Saevius Nicanor, Aurelius 
Opilius, M. Antonius Gnipho, M. Pompilius Andro- 
nicus, L. Orbilius (Pupillus), L. Ateius Philologus, 
P. Valerius Cato, Cornelius Epicadius, (Staberius 
Eros), Curtius Nicias, Lenaeus, Q. Caecilius (Epirota), 
M. Verrius Flaccus, L. Crassicius, Scribonius 
Aphrodisius, C. Iulius Hyginus, C. Melissus, 
M. Pomponius Marcellus, Q. Remmius Palaemon, 
(M.) Valerius Probus. Rhetores : (L.) Plotius Gallus, 
L. Voltacilius Plotus, M. Epidius, Sex. Clodius, 
C. Albucius Silus, L. Cestius Pius, M. Porcius 
Latro, Q. Curtius Rufus, L. Valerius Primanus, 
Verginius Flavus, L. Statius Ursulus, P. Clodius 
Quirinalis, M. Antonius Liberalis, Sex. Iulius 
Gabinianus, M. Fabius Quintilianus, [M. Tullius 
Tiro |.? 

The following Sigla are used: V=codex Vati- 
canus, 1862; L — codex Leidensis, formerly Perizoni- 
anus; N — codex Neapolitanus, formerly Farnesianus; 
O = codex Ottobonianus, 1455 ; G = codex Gudianus, 
93; I=codex Vaticanus, 1518; W = codex Vindo- 
bonensis, 711 (see Ihm, Rk. Mus. 61. 543 ff). 

! The names in brackets are omitted by Reifferscheid ; 


those in parenthesis are added by him. 
2 Julius Tiro, mss. 


395 


DE GRAMMATICIS 


I. Grammatica Romae ne in usu quidem olim, 
nedum in honore ullo erat, rudi scilicet ac bellicosa 
etiam tum civitate, necdum magnopere liberalibus 
disciplinis vacante. Initium quoque eius mediocre 
exstitit, siquidem antiquissimi doctorum, qui iidem! 
et poetae et semigraeci erant (Livium et Ennium 
dico, quos utraque lingua domi forisque docuisse 
adnotatum est) nihil amplius quam Graecos inter- 
pretabantur, aut si quid ipsi Latine composuissent 
praelegebant. Nam quod nonnulli tradunt duos 
libros * De Litteris Syllabisque," item * De Metris " 
ab eodem Ennio editos, iure arguit L. Cotta non 
poetae sed posterioris Ennii esse, cuius etiam “ De 
Augurandi Disciplina" volumina ferantur. 

II. Primus igitur, quantum opinamur, studium 
grammaticae in urbem intulit Crates Mallotes, Ari- 
starchi aequalis, qui missus ad senatum ab Attalo 
rege inter secundum ac tertium Punicum bellum 
sub ipsam Ennii mortem, cum regione Palatii pro- 
lapsus in cloacae foramen crus fregisset, per omne 
legationis simul et valitudinis tempus plurimas 

! qui iidem, Stephanus; qui idem, Lachmann; quidem, 
VLOIG ; quidam, N. 

a See note on T'ib. lxx. 3. 


è Livius Andronicus came from Tarentum, and Ennius was 
a native of Rudiae in Calabria. 


396 


| 


Ou — O_o 


ON GRAMMARIANS” 


I. Tux study of Grammar was not even pursued at 
Rome in early days, still less held in any esteem ; and 
naturally enough, since the state was then still uncul- 
tivated and given to war, and had as yet little leisure 
for liberal pursuits. The beginnings of the subject, 
too, were humble, for the earliest teachers, who were 
also both poets and Italian è Greeks (I refer to Livius 
and Ennius, who gave instruction in both tongues at 
home and abroad, as is well known), did no more 
than interpret the Greeks or give readings from 
whatever they themselves had composed in the Latin 
language. For while some tell us that this same 
Ennius published a book * On Letters and Syllables ” 
and another * On Metres," Lucius Cotta is right in 
maintaining that these were not the work of the 
poet, but of a later Ennius, who is also the author 
of the volumes * On the Science of Augury." 

II. In my opinion then, the first to introduce the 
study of grammar into our city was Crates of Mallos, 
a contemporary of Aristarchus. He was sent to the 
senate by king Attalus between the second and third 
Punic wars, at about the time when Ennius died ; 
and having fallen into the opening of a sewer in the 
Palatine quarter and broken his leg, he held numerous 
and frequent conferences during the whole time both 
of his embassy and of his convalescence, at which he 


397 


109 B.c. 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


acroasis subinde fecit assidueque disseruit, ac nostris 
exemplo fuit ad imitandum. Hactenus tamen imi- 
tati, ut carmina parum adhuc divolgata vel de- 
functorum amicorum vel si quorum aliorum  pro- 
bassent, diligentius retractarent ac legendo commen- 
tandoque etiam! ceteris nota facerent; ut C. Octavius 
Lampadio Naevii * Punicum Bellum," quod uno 
volumine et continenti scriptura expositum divisit in 
septem libros; ut postea Q. Vargunteius Annales 
Ennii, quos certis diebus in magna frequentia 
pronuntiabat; ut Laelius Archelaus Vettiusque 
Philocomus Lucilii saturas familiaris sui, quas legisse 
se apud Archelaum Pompeius Lenaeus, apud Philo- 
comum Valerius Cato praedicant. 

III. Instruxerunt auxeruntque ab omni parte 
grammaticam L. Aelius Lanuvinus generque Aelii 
Ser. Clodius, uterque eques Ro. multique ac varii et 
in doctrina et in re p. usus. Aelius cognomine 
duplici fuit; nam et Praeconinus,? quod pater eius 
praeconium fecerat, vocabatur, et Stilo, quod ora- 
tiones nobilissimo cuique scribere solebat; tantum 
optimatium fautor, ut Metellum * Numidicum in 
exsilium comitatus sit. Servius, cum librum soceri 
nondum editum fraude intercepisset, et ob hoc 
repudiatus pudore ac taedio secessisset ab urbe, in 
podagrae morbum incidit; cuius impatiens veneno 

! etiam, NGOIW ; et, VL. 


2 Praeconinus, Beroaldus ; ; Praeconius or Preconius, mss. 
3 Stilo, aere ; istilo, mes. 


À Metellum, W (Roth) ; the other mss. have M. Metellum. 
a praeco. 


> From stylus, an instrument for writing ; see note on Jud. 
lxxxii. 2. 


398 


eee ee A A 


= e r Ay — BD —— = 


ON GRAMMARIANS 


constantly gave instruction, and thus set an example 
for our countrymen to imitate. Their imitation, 
however, was confined to a careful criticism of poems 
which had as yet but little circulation, either those of 
deceased friends or others that met with their 
approval, and to making them known to the public 
by reading and commenting on them. For example, 
Gaius Octavius Lampadio thus treated the “ Punic 
War" of Naevius, which was originally written in a 
single volume without a break, but was divided by 
Lampadio into seven books. At a later time Quintus 
Vargunteius took up the “ Annals” of Ennius, which 
he expounded on set days to large audiences; and 
Laelius Archelaus and Vettius Philocomus the satires 
of their friend Lucilius, which Lenaeus Pompeius 
prides himself on having read with Archelaus, and 
Valerius Cato with Philocomus. . 

III. The foundations of the study were laid, and i 
was advanced in all directions, by Lucius Aelius of 
Lanuvium and his son-in-law Servius Clodius, both 
of whom were Roman knights and men of wide and 
varied experience in scholarship and statecraft. 

Aelius had two surnames, for he was called 
Praeconinus because his father had followed the 
occupation of a crier,* and Stilo? because he used 
to. write speeches for all the great men of the 
day; and he was so devoted to the aristocratic 
party, that he accompanied Metellus Numidicus into 
exile. 

Servius stole one of his father-in-law's books before 
it was published, and being in consequence disowned, 
left the city through shame and remorse, and fell ill 
of the gout. Unable to endure the pain, he applied 
a poisonous drug to his feet, which finally killed him, 


399 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


sibi perunxit pedes et enecuit ita, ut parte ea corporis 
quasi praemortua ! viveret. 

Posthac magis ac magis et gratia et cura artis 
increvit, ut ne clarissimi quidem viri abstinuerint quo 
minus et ipsi aliquid de ea scriberent, utque tem- 
poribus quibusdam super viginti celebres scholae 
fuisse in urbe tradantur; pretia vero grammaticorum 
tanta mercedesque tam magnae, ut constet Lutatium 
Daphnidem, quem Laevius Melissus per cavillatio- 
nem nominis Panos dydrynpa? dicit, DCC. milibus 
nummum a Q. Catulo emptum ac brevi manumis- 
sum, L. Appuleium ab Eficio Calvino equite Romano 
praedivite quadringenis annuis conductum ? multos 
edoceret. Nam in provincias quoque grammatica 
penetraverat, ac nonnulli de notissimis doctoribus 
peregre docuerunt, maxime in Gallia Togata ; inter 
quos Octavius Teucer et Pescennius* Iaccus et 
Oppius Chares; hic quidem ad ultimam aetatem, 
et cum iam non ingressu modo deficeretur sed et 
visu. 

IV. Appellatio grammaticorum Graeca consuetudine 
invaluit; sed initio litterati vocabantur. Cornelius 
quoque Nepos libello quo distinguit litteratum ab 
erudito, litteratos quidem vulgo appellari ait eos qui 

1 praemortua, Stephanus; praemortui or premortui, mas. 
* n e Toup (Reiferscheid); &yacua, Bawm.-Crusius 

oth). 3 
3 conductum, Aeifferscheid ; conductos, mss. except G, 


which has conductum ut. 
4 Pescennius, Roth ; Sescennius or Fescennius, mss. 


a The pun consists in likening him to the Sicilian Daphnis, 
the ‘‘ideal shepherd,” whom Pan taught to play the 
shepherd's pipe. If we read &Éyacua, the meaning is ‘‘the 
prodigy (or ‘wonder-child’) of Pan." The early commen- 
tators saw a reference to Pan’s love for the flocks and 


400 


ON GRAMMARIANS 


after he had lived for a time with that part of his 
body as it were prematurely dead. 

After this the science constantly grew in favour 
and popularity, so much so that even the most 
eminent men did not hesitate to make contributions to 
it, while at times there are said to have been more 
than twenty well-attended schools in the city. 
The grammarians too were so highly esteemed, and 
their compensation was so ample, that Lutatius 
Daphnis, whom Laevius Melissus, punning on his 
name, often called the “ darling of Pan," ^ is known 
to have been bought for seven hundred thousand 
sesterces and soon afterwards set free, while Lucius 
Appuleius was hired for four hundred sesterces a 
year by Eficius Calvinus, a wealthy Roman knight, 
to teach a large school.^ 

In-fact, Grammar even made its way into the 
provinces, and some of the most famous teachers 
gave instruction abroad, especially in Gallia Togata, 
including Octavius Teucer, Pescennius Iaccus and 
Oppius Chares ; indeed the last named taught until 
the very end of his life, when he could no longer 
walk, or even see. 

IV. The term grammaticus became prevalent 
through Greek influence, but at first such men were 
called iitterati.^ Cornelius Nepos, too, in a little book 
in which he explains the difference between ütteratus 
and eruditus? says that the former is commonly 
shepherds (cf. Verg. Buc. ii. 33.) and an implication that 
Lutatius was rusticus or pecus. 

> The text is certainly corrupt and the meaning is un- 
certain ; see Ihm, Rh. Mus. 61, p. 550. 

c ** Men of letters," from littera, while grammaticus is from 
the corresponding Greek word ypdupa. 

4 ** Man of learning, scholar." 

^ 401 

VOL. II. DD 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


aliquid diligenter! et acute scienterque possint aut 
dicere aut scribere, ceterum proprie sic appellandos 
poetarum interpretes, qui a Graecis grammatici nomi- 
nentur. Eosdem litteratores vocitatos Messala Cor- 
vinus in quadam epistula ostendit, non esse sibi 
dicens rem cum Furio Bibaculo, ne cum Ticida 
quidem aut litteratore Catone; significat enim haud 
dubie Valerium Catonem, poetam simul grammati- 
cumque notissimum. Sunt qui litteratum a littera- 
tore distinguant, ut Graeci grammaticum a 
grammatista, et illum quidem absolute, hunc medio- 
criter doctum existiment. Quorum opinionem 
Orbilius etiam exemplis confirmat; namque apud 
maiores ait, cum familia alicuius venalis produceretur, 
non temere quem litteratum in titulo, sed littera- 
torem inscribi solitum esse, quasi non perfectum 
litteris, sed imbutum. 

Veteres grammatici et rhetoricam docebant, ac 
multorum de utraque arte commentarii feruntur. 
Secundum quam consuetudinem posteriores quoque 
existimo, quanquam iam  diseretis professionibus, 
nihilo minus vel retinuisse vel instituisse et ipsos 
quaedam genera meditationum? ad eloquentiam 
praeparandam, ut problemata, paraphrasis, allocu- 
tiones, ethologias? atque alia hoc genus ; ne scilicet 
sicci omnino atque aridi pueri rhetoribus traderentur. 
Quae quidem omitti iam video, desidia quorundam et 
infantia; non enim fastidio putem. Me quidem 

! aliquid diligenter, NGIOW ; diligenter aliquid, VL. 

? meditationum, OW, G in margin, N as correction (cf. 


Gell. xx. 5. 9) ; the other mss. have institutionum. 
* ethologias, Beroaldus ; aethiologias, mas. 


a Sicct and aridi both mean ‘‘ dry, juiceless." 
402 


ON GRAMMARIANS 


applied to those who can speak or write on any subject 
accurately, cleverly and with authority ; but that it 
should strictly be used of interpreters of the poets, 
whom the Greeks call grammatici. That these were 
also called Aferatores is shown by Messala Corvinus in 

one of his letters, in which he says: “I am not 
` concerned with Furius Bibaculus, nor with Ticidas 
either, or with the /tterator Cato." For he un- 
questionably refers to Valerius Cato, who was famous 
both as a poet and as a grammarian. Some however 
make a distinction between /tteratus and litterator, as 
the Greeks do between grammaticus and grammatista, 
using the former of a master of his subject, the 
latter of one moderately proficient. Orbilius too 
supports this view by examples, saying: “In the 
days of our forefathers, when anyone’s slaves were 
offered for sale, it was not usual except in special 
cases to advertise any one of them as litteratus but 
rather as litterator, implying that he had a smattering 
of letters, but was not a finished scholar." 

The grammarians of early days taught rhetoric 
as well, and we have treatises from many men on 
both subjects. It was this custom, I think, which 
led those of later times also, although the two 
professions had now become distinct, nevertheless 
either to retain or to introduce certain kinds of 
exercises suited to the training of orators, such as 
problems, paraphrases, addresses, character sketches 
and similar things; doubtless that they might not 
turn over their pupils to the rhetoricians wholly 
ignorant and unprepared.” But I observe that such 
instruction is now given up, because of the lack of 
application and the youth of some of the pupils ; for 
I do not believe that it is because the subjects are 

403 
D D 2 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


adolescentulo, repeto quendam Principem nomine 
alternis diebus declamare, alternis disputare, non- 
nullis vero mane! disserere, post meridiem remoto 
pulpito declamare solitum. — Audiebam etiam, 
memoria patrum quosdam e grammatici statim ludo 


transisse in Forum atque in numerum praestantissi- - 


morum patronorum receptos. . 

Clari professores et de quibus prodi possit aliquid 
dum taxat a nobis, fere hi fuerunt. 

V. Saevius Nicanor primus ad famam dignationem- 
que docendo pervenit, fecitque praeter commentarios, 
quorum tamen pars maxima intercepta dicitur, 
saturam quoque, in qua libertinum se ac duplici 
cognomine esse per haec indicat : 


* Saevius Nicanor Marci libertus negabit ; 
Saevius Posthumius vero? idem ac Marcus 
docebit.” 


Sunt qui tradant, ob infamiam quandam eum in 
Sardiniam secessisse ibique diem obisse. 

VI. Aurelius Opilius, Epicurei cuiusdam libertus, 
philosophiam primo, deinde rhetoricam, novissime 
grammaticam docuit. Dimissa autem schola, 
Rutilium Rufum damnatum in Asiam secutus, ibidem 
Smyrnae 8 simul consenuit, composuitque variae 
eruditionis aliquot volumina, ex quibus novem unius 


1 vero mane] mane vero, mss. 

2 Posthumius vero, E. H. Brewster, Class. Phil. ix. (to he 
published); pot huius, VL; posthus, O; post hog, G; 
post h’, J. 3 Zmyrnae, V. 


a The text and the meaning are uncertain, but it is obvious 
from the receding sentence that we must have two cog- 
nomina. The man's name appears to have been M. Saevius 
Postumius Nicanor. Thus he was Saevius Nicanor, Saevius 


404 


Ld 


ON GRAMMARIANS 


underrated. I remember that at any rate when I 
was a young man, one of these teachers, Princeps by 
name, used to declaim and engage in discussion on 
alternate days; and that sometimes he would give 
instruction in the morning, and in the afternoon re- 
move his desk and declaim. I used to hear, too, that 
within the memory of our forefathers some passed 
directly from the grammar school to the Forum and 
took their place among the most eminent advocates. 

The following list includes about all the distin- 
guished teachers of the subject, at least those of 
whose life I am able to give any account. 

V. Saevius Nicanor was the first to attain to fame 
and recognition through his teaching, and besides 
his commentaries, the greater part of which, however, 
are said to be stolen, he wrote a satire, in which he 
shows by the following lines that he was a freedman 
and had two surnames ; 


* Saevius Nicanor, the freedman of Marcus, may 
deny this; but Saevius Postumius, who is the same 
man, and a Marcus as well, will prove it." * 


Some write that because of some disgrace he retired 
to Sardinia and there died. 
. VL Aurelius Opilius, freedman of an Epicurean, 
first taught philosophy, afterwards rhetoric, and 
finaly grammar. But when Rutilius Rufus was 
banished, he gave up his school and followed him to 
Asia, where he lived with him in Smyrna to old age. 
He wrote several books on various learned topics, 


Postumius, and Marcus. The meaning of the verbs and of the 
lines as a whole is obscured by the lack of a context. The 
textual variants show that the mss. had the spelling Posthu- 
mius. 


405 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


corporis, quia! scriptores ac poetas sub clientela 
Musarum iudicaret, non absurde et fecisse et in- 
scripsisse ? se ait ex numero divarum et appellatione. 
Huius cognomen in plerisque indicibus et titulis per 
unam L litteram ? scriptum animadverto, venum ipse 
id per duas effert in parastichide libelli, qui inscribitur 
“ Pinax." 

VII. M. Antonius Gnipho, ingenuus in Gallia 
natus sed expositus, a nutritore suo manumissus 
institutusque ( Alexandriae quidem, ut aliqui tradunt, 
in contubernio Dionysi Scytobrachionis; quod equi- 
dem non temere crediderim, cum temporum ratio vix 
congruat) fuisse dicitur ingenii magni, memoriae 
singularis, nec minus Graece quam Latine doctus ; 
praeterea comi facilique natura, nec unquam de 
mercedibus pactus, eoque plura ex liberalitate dis- 
centium consecutus. Docuit primum in Divi Iulii 
domo pueri adhuc,* deinde in sua privata. Docuit 
autem et rhetoricam, ita ut quotidie praecepta elo- 
quentiae traderet, declamaret vero nonnisi nundinis. 
. Scholam eius claros quoque viros frequentasse aiunt, 
in iis M. Ciceronem, etiam cum praetura fungeretur. 
Scripsit multa, quamvis annum aetatis quinquagesi- 
mum non excesserit. Etsi Ateius Philologus duo tan- 
tum volumina “ De Latino Sermone " reliquisse eum 
tradit; nam cetera scripta discipulorum eius esse, 

1 quia, Ernesti ; qui quia, mss. 

? jnscripsisse, Wolf; scripsisse, mss. (se scripsisse, O). 


3 L litteram, J. F. Gronov ; litteram or literam, mss. 
* adhuc, omitted by L. 


a The Tablet. > See note on Tib. vii. 2. 
¢ That is, the man who found and reared him. 


406 


ON GRAMMARIANS 


nine of which, so he tells us, forming a single work, 
he appropriately made to correspond with the 
number of the Muses, and called them by their 
names, because he considered writers and poets to 
be under the protection of those divinities. I 
observe that his surname is given in numerous cata- 
logues and titles with a single L, but he himself 
writes it with two in an acrostic in a little book of 
his called “ Pinax." 4 

VII. Marcus Antonius Gnipho was born in Gaul 
of free parents, but was disowned.’ He was set free 
by his foster-father® and given an education, at 
Alexandria, according to some, and in intimate 
association with Dionysius Scytobrachion; but this 
I can hardly credit for chronological reasons. It 
is said that he was a man of great talent, of 
unexampled powers of memory, and well read not 
only in Latin but in Greek as well; that his dis- 
position, too, was kindly and good-natured, and that 
he never made any stipulation about his fees, and 
therefore received more from the generosity of his 
pupils. He first gave instruction in the house of the 
Deified Julius, when the latter was still a boy, 
and then in his own home. He taught rhetoric too, 
giving daily instruction in speaking, but declaiming 
only once a week.4 They say also that distinguished 
men attended his school, including Cicero even 
while he was praetor. Although he did not live 
beyond his fiftieth year, he wrote a great deal. 
Ateius Philologus, however, declares that he left 
but two volumes, * On the Latin Language," main- 
taining that the other works attributed to him 
were those of his pupils and not his own. Yet 


* Literally, ** on market days”; see note on Aug. xcii. 2. 
407 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


non ipsius; in quibus et suum alicubi reperiri nomen, 
ut hoc * # + 
VIII. M. Pompilius Andronicus, natione Syrus, 
studio Epicureae sectae desidiosior in professione 
grammatica! habebatur minusque idoneus ad tuen- 
dam scholam. Itaque cum se in urbe non solum 
Antonio Gniphoni, sed ceteris etiam deterioribus 
postponi videret, Cumas transiit ibique in otio vixit 
et multa composuit; verum adeo inops atque egens, 
ut coactus sit praecipuum illud opusculum suum 
“Annalium Ennii Elenchorum" XVI. milibus num- 
mum cuidam vendere, quos libros Orbilius suppressos 
redemisse se dicit vulgandosque curasse nomine 
auctoris. | 
IX. L.? Orbilius Pupillus Beneventanus, morte 

parentum, una atque eadem die inimicorum dolo 
interemptorum, destitutus, primo apparituram magi- 
stratibus fecit; deinde in Macedonia corniculo, mox 
equo meruit ; functusque militia, studia repetit, quae 
iam inde a puero non leviter attigerat; ac profes- 
sus diu in patria, quinquagesimo demum anno 
Romam consule Cicerone transiit docuitque maiore 
fama quam emolumento. Namque iam persenex 
pauperem se et habitare sub tegulis quodam scripto 
fatetur. Librum etiam, cui est titulus “ Perialogos," 3 

2 YA NOGIW ; grammaticae, VL. 

2 L., added by Roth. 

* Perialogos, mas. ; weptadyhs, Toup. 


a Elenchus is a transliteration of the Greek fAeyxos, ‘‘re- 
futation," ** cross-examination." The work was apparent? 
an attack on the Annals, like those on the writings of Vergil; 
cf. the Life of Vergil, 44 and 45. 

è That is, in a garret. 

¢ The word is evidently corrupt ; perhaps we should read 
Perialges (wxepiadyhs), “The Sorrowful Man.” Turnebus 


408 


—- PA, NND 7 


ON GRAMMARIANS 


his own name is sometimes found in them, for 
example # # «s 

VIII. Marcus Pompilius Andronicus, a native of 
Syria, because of his devotion to the Epicurean sect 
was considered somewhat indolent in his work as a 
grammarian and not qualified to conduct a school. 
Therefore, realizing that he was held in less esteem 
at Rome, not only than Antonius Gnipho, but than 
others of even less ability, he moved to Cumae, 
where he led a quiet life and wrote many books. 
But he was so poor and needy that he was 
forced to sell that admirable little work of his, 
** Criticisms of the Annals of Ennius " ^ to someone 
or other for sixteen thousand sesterces. Orbilius 
tells us that he bought up these books after they had 
been suppressed, and caused them to be circulated 
under their author's name. 

IX. Lucius Orbilius Pupillus of Beneventum, left 
alone in the world by the death of his parents, both 
of whom were slain on the selfsame day by 
treacherous enemies, at first earned a living as an 
attendant on the magistrates. He then served asa 
subaltern in Macedonia, and later in the cavalry. 
After completing his military service, he resumed his 
studies, to which he had given no little attention from 
boyhood; and after teaching for a long time in his 
native place, he at last went to Rome in his fiftieth 
year, when Cicero was consul, where he gave instruc- 
tion with greater renown than profit. For in one of 
his books, written when he was well on in years, he 
admits that he was poor and lived under the tiles.^ 
He also wrote a book called * Perialogos," * full of 


suggested wep) àAoylas, a treatise on the folly of teachers in 
submitting to such unjust treatment. 


409 


68 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


edidit continentem querelas de iniuriis, quas pro- 
fessores neglegentia aut ambitione parentum accipe- 
rent. Fuit autem naturae acerbae, non modo in 
antisophistas, quos omni occasione! laceravit, sed 
etiam in discipulos, ut et Horatius significat “ plago- 
sum " eum appellans, et Domitius Marsus scribens: 


* Si quos Orbilius ferula scuticaque cecidit." 


Ac ne principum quidem virorum insectatione absti- 
nuit; siquidem ignotus adhuc cum iudicio frequenti 
testimonium diceret, interrogatus a Varrone diversae 
partis advocato, quidnam ageret et quo artificio 
uteretur, gibberosos se de sole in umbram transferre 
respondit; quod Murena gibber erat. Vixit prope 
ad centesimum aetatis annum, amissa iam pridem 
memoria, ut versus Bibaculi docet : 


* Orbilius ubinam est, litterarum oblivio ? ” 


Statua eius Beneventi ostenditur in Capitolio ad 
sinistrum latus marmorea habitu sedentis ac palliati, 
appositis duobus scriniis. Reliquit filium Orbilium,? 
et ipsum grammaticum professorem. 

X. L.8 Ateius Philologus libertinus Athenis est 
natus. Hunc Capito Ateius notus iuris consultus 
inter grammaticos rhetorem, inter rhetores gram- 
maticum fuisse ait. De eodem Asinius Pollio in libro, 
quo Sallustii scripta reprehendit ut nimia priscorum 

1 omni in occasione, mss. except W, in which in 18 stricken 
out ; cf. Claud. xlii. 1. 


2 Orbilium, bracketed for omission by Reif. 
3 I., added by Roth. 


a Cf. Tib. xi. 3. > Epist. 2. 1. 70. 

* Varro Murena. Macrobius, Saturn. 2. 6, tells the same 
story of Galba, father of the emperor (cf. Galba, iii), but gives 
the reply of Orbilius as: in sole gibbos soleo fricare, **1 rub 
humps in the sun." Neither remark seems to have any point 
410 


ON GRAMMARIANS 


complaints of the wrongs which teachers suffered from 
the indifference or selfishness of parents. Indeed he 
was sour-tempered, not only towards rival scholars, 
whom he assailed at every opportunity, but also to- 
wards his pupils, as Horace implies when he calls him 
“the flogger,” ^ and Domitius Marsus in the line: * 


< Whomever Orbilius thrashed with rod or with 
whiplash of leather." 


He did not even refrain from gibes at men of dis- 
tinction ; for when he was still obscure and was 
giving testimony in a crowded court-room, being 
asked by Varro, the advocate on the other side, 
what he did and what his profession was, he replied : 
* [ remove hunchbacks from the sun into the shade." 
Now Murena*^ was hunchbacked. Orbilius lived to 
be nearly a hundred, having long since lost his 
memory, as is shown by the verse of Bibaculus: 


* Where is Orbilius, pray, great learning's tomb?’ 


His marble statue may be seen at Beneventum, on 
the left side of the capitol, representing him seated 
and clad in a Greek mantle, with two book-boxes by 
his side. He left a son Orbilius, who was also a 
teacher of grammar. 

X. Lucius Ateius Philologus was a freedman, born 
at Athens. The well-known jurist Ateius Capito 
says that he was “a rhetorician among grammarians 
and a grammarian among rhetoricians." ^ Asinius 
Pollio, too, in the book in which he criticizes the 
writings of Sallust, as marred by an excessive effort 


except the allusion to Murena’s deformity, unless Suetonius's 

version means ''I put them into the background," or ‘‘ con- 

them to obscurity.” The commentators confine them- 
edes to quoting Macrobius. 


411 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


verborum affectatione oblita, ita tradit: “In eam 
rem adiutorium ei fecit maxime quidem! Ateius Prae- 
textatus nobilis grammaticus Latinus, declamantium 
deinde auditor atque praeceptor, ad summam Philolo- 
gus ab semet nominatus." Ipse ad Laelium Hermam 
-scripsit, se in Graecis litteris magnum processum 
-habere et in Latinis nonnullum, audisse Antonium 
Gniphonen eiusque f haere postea docuisse. Prae- 
cepisse autem multis et claris iuvenibus, in quis 
Appio quoque et Pulchro Claudiis fratribus, quorum 
etiam comes in provincia fuerit. Philologi appella- 
tionem assumpsisse videtur, quia sic ut Eratosthenes, 
qui primus hoc cognomen sibi vindicavit, multiplici 
variaque doctrina censebatur. Quod sane ex com- 
mentariis eius apparet, quanquam paucissimi exstent ; 
de quorum tamen copia sic altera ad eundem Her- 
mam epistula significat: “ Hylen nostram aliis 
memento commendare, quam omnis generis coegi- 
mus, uti scis, octingentos in libros.” Coluit postea 
familiarissime C. Sallustium et eo defuncto Asinium 
Polionem, quos historiam componere aggressos, 
alterum breviario rerum omnium Romanarum, ex 
quibus quas vellet eligeret, instruxit, alterum prae- 
ceptis de ratione scribendi. Quo magis' miror Asi- 
nium credidisse, antiqua eum verba et figuras solitum 
esse colligere Sallustio; cum sibi sciat nihil? aliud 


1 quidem, O. Jahn; quidam, mas. 
? nihil, GI W ; the other mss. have nil 


a The text is corrupt and no satisfactory emendation has 
as yet been proposed; see Ihm, Ah. Mus. 61, p. 551. Vahlen, 
Index Lectionum, Berlin, 1877, suggested theoremata, which 
would give the meaning ‘‘and afterwards taught his (Gni- 
pho's) theories." 

> A Greek word, equivalent to Siva, meaning literally 
“timber” for building, and used metaphorically of material 


412 


i 


| 
| 


—— A mma 
au ] 


Se 


- 


ON GRAMMARIANS 


for archaism, writes as follows : “ He was especially 
abetted in this by Ateius Praetextatus, a famous 
Latin grammarian, afterwards a critic and teacher of 
declamation, and finally self-styled Philologus.” 
Ateius himself wrote to Laelius Hermas that he had 
made great progress in Greek letters and some in 
Latin, had been a pupil of Antonius Gnipho » + #,¢ 
and afterwards a teacher; further, that he had given 
instruction to many eminent young men, including 
the brothers Appius and Claudius Pulcher, whom he 
had also accompanied to their province. He seems 
to have assumed the title Philologus, because like 
Eratosthenes, who was first to lay claim to that sur- 
name, he regarded himself as a man of wide and 
varied learning. And that he was such is evident 
from his commentaries, though very few of them 
survive ; but he gives some idea of their number in a 
second letter to the aforesaid Hermas: * Remember 
to recommend my Hyle? to others ; as you know, it 
consists of material of every kind, collected in eight 
hundred books." He was afterwards a close friend of 
Gaius Sallustius, and after Sallust's death, of Asinius 
Pollio ; and when they set about writing history, he 
provided the one with an epitome of all Roman 
story, from which to select what he wished, and the 
other with rules on the art of composition. This 
makes me wonder all the more that Asinius believed 
that Ateius used to collect archaic words and ex- 
pressions for Sallust; for he knows that the 
grammarian's strongest recommendation to him was 
in a rough form; here of material for oratory. Silva is 
also applied technically to hasty and more or less extempore 
productions; cf. Quint. 10. 3. 17, diversum est huic eorum 
vitium, qui primo decurrere per materiam stilo quam 


velocissimo volunt et sequentes calorem atque impetum ex 
tempore scribunt ; hanc silvam vocan. 413 


- 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


suadere quam ut noto civilique et proprio sermone 
utatur, vitetque maxime obscuritatem Sallustii et 
audaciam in translationibus. : 

XI. P.! Valerius Cato, ut nonnulli tradiderunt, 
Burseni cuiusdam libertus ex Gallia ; ipse libello, cui 
est titulus “ Indignatio," ingenuum se natum ait et 
pupillum relictum, eoque facilius licentia Sullani 
temporis exutum patrimonio. Docuit multos et 
nobiles, visusque est peridoneus praeceptor, maxime 
ad poeticam tendentibus, ut quidem apparere vel his 
versiculis potest : 

* Cato grammaticus, Latina Siren, 

Qui solus legit ac facit poetas.”’ 
Is scripsit praeter grammaticos libellos etiam poe- 
mata, ex quibus praecipue probantur * Lydia" et 
* Diana." “ Lydiae” Ticida meminit: 
* Lydia doctorum maxima cura liber ;” 
* Dianae " Cinna : 

* Saecula permaneat nostri Dictynna Catonis.” 
Vixit ad extremam senectam, sed in summa pauperie ? 
et paene inopia, abditus modico gurgustio, post- 
quam Tusculana villa creditoribus cesserat, ut auctor 
est Bibaculus : 

* Si quis forte mei domum Catonis, 

Depictas minio assulas,* et illos 
Custodis videt hortulos Priapi : 
Miratur, quibus ille disciplinis 

1 P., added by Roth. 3 pauperie] pauperiem, mas. 

3 inopia] inopiam, mss. 

4 assulas, Beroaldus; assylas, G ; assyllas, NOI ; asillas, 


* That is, his own, without borrowing or imitation. 
414 


ON GRAMMARIANS 


to use familiar, unassuming, natural* language, 
especially avoiding Sallust’s obscurity and his bold 
figures of speech. 

XI. Publius Valerius “Cato, according to some 
writers, was the freedman of a certain Bursenus from 
Gaul; but he himself, in a little work called 
** Indignation,’ declares that he was freeborn but was 
left an orphan; so that he was the more easily 
stripped of his patrimony in the lawless times of 
Sulla. He had many distinguished pupils and was 
regarded as a very competent teacher, especially of 
those who had a bent for poetry, as indeed is 
especially evident from these verses: 

** Cato, teacher of letters, Siren Latin-born, 

He, and none other, poets reads and makes.” 
Besides books of a grammatical character, he wrote 
poems also, of which the most highly esteemed are 
the “ Lydia " and the * Diana."  Ticidas says of the 
former : 

* Lydia, a book most dear to cultured minds." 
And Cinna of the latter : 

* For ages may our Cato's Dian ® live." 

He reached an advanced age, but in extreme poverty 

and almost in destitution, buried in a little hovel, 
> after he had given up his villa at Tusculum to his 

creditors, as Bibaculus tells us : 

** If haply one has seen my Cato's house, 

His shingles stained with red, 

His garden over which Priapus watched : 

One can but wonder by what training he 


^ Dictynna is a name of-Diana as goddess of tbe chase, from 
) Bíkrvor, ‘ hunting-net." 


415 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


Tantam sit! sapientiam assecutus, 
Quem tres cauliculi, selibra farris. 
Racemi duo tegula sub una 

Ad summam prope nutriant senectam.” 


Et rursus : 


“ Catonis modo, Galle, Tusculanum 
Tota creditor urbe venditabat. 
Mirati sumus, unicum magistrum, 
Summum grammaticum, optimum poetam 
Omnes solvere posse quaestiones, 
Unum difficile expedire nomen. 
En cor Zenodoti, en iecur Cratetis.” 


XII. Cornelius Epicadus, L. Cornelii Sullae dicta- 
toris libertus calatorque in sacerdotio augurali, filio 
quoque eius Fausto gratissimus fuit; quare nunquam 
non utriusque se libertum edidit. Librum autem, 
quem Sulla novissimum * De Rebus Suis" imperfec- 
tum reliquerat, ipse supplevit. 

XIII. Staberius Eros suomet aere? emptus de 
catasta et propter litterarum studium manumissus, 
docuit inter ceteros Brutum et Cassium. Sunt qui 
tradant tanta eum honestate praeditum, ut tempori- 
bus Sullanis proscriptorum liberos gratis et sine 
mercede ulla in disciplinam receperit. 

XIV. Curtius Nicias haesit Cn. Pompeio et C. 
Memmio ; sed cum codicillos Memmi ad Pompei 


! git sapientiam, L (Pontanus) ; sapientiam sit, VNGOI. 
? suomet aere, Roth ; nametra, mss. The text 18 corrupt 
and the meaning most uncertain; see Ihm, Rh. Mus. 61, 
p. 551. 


* Unum expedire nomen, ‘‘ make shift to find one name,” as 
surety for his debts. 


416 


ON GRAMMARIANS 


To such a height of wisdom has attained, 
That three small cabbages, half a pound of meal, 
And clusters twain of grapes beneath one roof 
Suffice for him when well-nigh at life’s end.” 
And again: 
** Gallus, but now our Cato's creditor 
His Tusculanum offered through the town. 
We wondered that the master without peer, 
The great grammarian, chief among our poets, 
Could solve all questions, solvent^ could not be. 
Lo! Crates’ heart, mind of Zenodotus." v 


XII. Cornelius Epicadius was a freedman of Lucius 
Cornelius Sulla, the dictator, and one of his servants ¢ 
in the augural priesthood, besides being a great 
favourite of his son Faustus. Therefore he always 
declared that he was the freedman of both. He 
himself supplied the last book of Sulla's * Auto- 
biography," which the dictator left unfinished. 

XIII. Staberius Eros was purchased with his own 
savings at a public sale 4 and formally manumitted 
because of his devotion to literature. He numbered 
among his pupils Brutus and Cassius. Some say 
that he was so noble-minded that in the times of 
Sulla he admitted the children of the proscribed to 
his school free of charge and without any fee. 

XIV. Curtius Nicias was an adherent of Gnaeus 
Pompeius and Gaius Memmius ; but having brought 

> That is, ‘what a fate for a man with such a mind and 
heart." Cor here, as often, =‘‘ intelligence," and iecur may 
have the same meaning, although it is commonly spoken of 
as the seat of the emotions, especially anger and the like. 

c The calatores, literally **summoners," were attendants 
on the augurs and other religious officials. 

4 Catasta was the scaffolding or platform on which slaves 
were exposed to view at public sales. 

417 

VOL Il. E E 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


uxorem de stupro pertulisset, proditus ab ea, Pom- 
peium offendit, domoque ei interdictum est. Fuit et 
M. Ciceronis familiaris; in cuius epistula ad Dolabel- 
lam haec de eo legimus: “ Nihil Romae geritur quod 
te putem scire curare, nisi forte scire vis, me inter 
Niciam nostrum et Vidium iudicem esse. Profert 
alter, opinor duobus versiculis, expensum Niciae ; ! 
alter Aristarchus hos obelizei : ego tanquam criticus 
antiquus? iudicaturus sum, utrum sint ro? zotyrov an 
mapenBeBrAynpeva.®”’ Item ad Atticum: “De Nicia 
quod scribis, si ita me haberem ut eius humanitate 
frui possem, in primis vellem mecum illum habere ; 
sed mihi solitudo et recessus provincia est. Praeterea 
nosti Niciae nostri imbecillitatem, mollitiam, con- 
suetudinem victus. Cur ergo illi molestus esse velim, 
cum mihi ille iucundus esse non possit? Voluntas 
tamen eius mihi grata est." Huius * De Lucilio " 
libros etiam Santra * comprobat. 

XV. Lenaeus, Magni Pompei libertus et paene 
omnium expeditionum comes, defuncto eo filiisque 
eius schola se sustentavit ; docuitque in Carinis ad 
Telluris, in qua regione Pompeiorum domus fuerat, 
ac tanto amore erga patroni memoriam exstitit, ut 
Sallustium historicum, quod eum oris probi, animo 
inverecundo scripsisset, acerbissima satura laceraverit, 


! Niciae, omitted by VLNGW ; added from Cicero by OI. 

2 antiquus] antiquos, mss. 

3 woimrob an vapeuBeBAmuévoi, omitted by the mss. ; restored 
from Cicero by Aldus. 

* Santra, Statius ; satyra or satura, mss. (W. has santyra 
corr. to satyra). 


@ Ad Fam. 9. 10. 
> The critical mark used to indicate spurious or inter- 
polated lines ; that is, Vidius denies the debt. 


418 


ON GRAMMARIANS 


a note from Memmius to Pompey’s wife with an 
infamous proposal, he was betrayed by her, lost 
favour with Pompey, and was forbidden his house. 
He was an intimate friend of Marcus Cicero too, and 
in a letter of the orator's to Dolabella ^ we read these 
words about Nicias: *I think there is nothing going 
on in Rome which you are interested in knowing, 
unless perhaps you would like to know that I am 
acting as arbiter between our friend Nicias and Vidius. 
The one presents a note for payment, consisting of 
two lines, I believe. The other, like an Aristarchus, 
marks them with an obelus.” I, like a critic of old, 
am to decide whether they are the poet's, or a 
forgery.” In another letter to Atticus: “As to 
what you write of Nicias, if I were in a position to 
enjoy his learned society, I should particularly like 
to have him with me; but my province is solitude 
and retirement. Besides you know our friend Nicias' 
weakness, self-indulgence, and mode of life. Why 
then should I wish to bore him, when he can give 
me no pleasure? Nevertheless I appreciate his 
desire." Santra likewise commends his books “On 
Lucilius." 

XV. Lenaeus, freedman of Pompey the Great and 
his companion in almost all his campaigns, on the 
death of his patron and his sons supported himselt 
by a school, teaching in the Carinae,? near the 
temple of Tellus, the quarter of the city in which the 
house of the Pompeys was formerly situated. He was 
so devoted to his patron's memory, that because the 
historian Sallust wrote that Pompey had “an honest 
face but a shameless character," he tore Sallust to 
pieces in a biting satire, calling him **a debauchee, a 


c Ad Att. 12. 26. 4 See note on Tib. xv. 1. 
419 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


lastaurum et lurconem et nebulonem popinonemque 
appellans, et vita scriptisque monstrosum, praeterea 
priscorum Catonisque verborum  ineruditissimum 
furem. Traditur autem puer adhuc Athenis! sub. 
reptus, refugisse in patriam, perceptisque liberalibus 
disciplinis, pretium suum domino? rettulisse, verum 
ob ingenium atque doctrinam gratis manumissus. 

XVI. Q. Caecilius Epirota, Tusculi natus, libertus 
Attici? equitis Romani, ad quem sunt Ciceronis 
epistulae, cum filiam patroni nuptam M. Agrippae 
doceret, suspectus in ea et ob hoc remotus, ad 
Cornelium Gallum se contulit vixitque una familiaris- 
sime, quod ipsi Gallo inter gravissima crimina ab 
Augusto obicitur. Post deinde damnationem mor- 
temque Galli scholam aperuit, sed ita ut paucis et 
tantum adulescentibus  praeciperet, praetextato 
nemini, nisi si cuius parenti hoc officium negare 
non posset. Primus dicitur Latine ex tempore 
disputasse, primusque Vergilium et alios poetas novos 
praelegere coepisse, quod etiam Domitii Marsi 
versiculus indicat : 


*Epirota, tenellorum nutricula vatum." 


XVII. M.* Verrius Flaccus libertinus docendi 
genere maxime claruit. Namque ad exercitanda 
discentium ingenia aequales inter se committere 
solebat, proposita non solum materia quam scribe- 

! Athenis, N. Heinsius; catenis, VLNGO ; tacenis, I. 

* domino, NGOIW ; the other mss. omit. 


3 Attici, Beroaldus; Satti, etc., mss. 
* M., added by Roth. 


^ Cf. Aug. lxvi. 1-2. 
420 


ts 


A wee 4 - 


ON GRAMMARIANS 


gourmandizer, a spendthrift, and a tippler, a man 
whose life and writings were monstrous, and who 
was besides an ignorant pilferer of the language of 
the ancients and of Cato in particular." It is further 
said that when Lenaeus was still a boy he was stolen 
from Athens, made his escape and returned to his 
native land, and after acquiring a liberal education, 
offered the price of his liberty to his former master, 
but received his freedom as a gift because of his 
ability and learning. 

XVI. Quintus Caecilius Epirota, born at Tusculum, 
was a freedman of Atticus, a Roman knight, the 
correspondent of Cicero. While he was teaching his 
patron’s daughter, who was the wife of Marcus 
Agrippa, he was suspected of improper conduct 
towards her and dismissed ; whereupon he attached 
himself to Cornelius Gallus and lived with him on 
most intimate terms, a fact which Augustus made 
one of his heaviest charges against Gallus himself. 
After the conviction and death of Gallus he opened 
a school, but took few pupils and only grown up 
young men, admitting none under age, except those 
to whose fathers he was unable to refuse that favour. 
He is said to have been the first to hold extempore 
discussions in Latin, and the first to begin the 
practice of reading Vergil and other recent poets, a 
fact also alluded to by Domitius Marsus in the verse : 


* Epirota, fond nurse of fledgling bards.” 


XVII. Marcus Verrius Flaccus, a freedman, gained 
special fame by his method of teaching. For to stimu- 
late the efforts of his pupils, he used to pit those of 
the same advancement against one another, not only 
setting the subject on which they were to write, but 


421 


25 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


rent, sed et praemio quod victor auferret. Id erat 
liber aliquis antiquus pulcher aut rarior. Quare ab 
Augusto quoque nepotibus eius praeceptor electus, 
transiit in Palatium cum tota schola, verum ut ne 
quem ! amplius posthac discipulum reciperet ; docuit- 
que in atrio Catulinae domus, quae pars Palatii tunc 
erat, et centena sestertia in annum accepit. De- 
cessit aetatis exactae sub Tiberio. Statuam habet 
Praeneste, in inferiore? fori parte contra? hemicy- 
clium, in quo fastos a se ordinatos et marmoreo 
parieti incisos publicarat. 

XVIII. L. Crassicius, genere Tarentinus, ordinis 
libertini, cognomine Pasicles, mox Pansam se trans- 
nominavit. Hic initio circa scenam versatus est, dum 
mimographos adiuvat; deinde in pergula* docuit, 
donec commentario ** Zmyrnae ” edito adeo inclaruit, 
ut haec de eo scriberentur: 


** Uni Crassicio se credere Zmyrna probavit ; 
Desinite indocti coniugio hanc petere ! 
Soli Crassicio se dixit nubere velle, 
Intima cui soli nota sua exstiterint.”’ 


Sed cum edoceret® iam multos ac nobiles, in iis 
Iullum 5 Antonium, triumviri filium, ut Verrio quoque 


1 ne quem, OW; neque, VLNGI. 

? inferiore, VLW ; superiore, NOGI. 

3 contra, NOI; circa, VLG; cf. Vahlen, Index Lectionum, 
Berlin, 1877. 

* pergula, Ven. ed. of 1474, Beroaldus; percula, OW; 
parcula, VLNGI. 

5 The mss. have et doceret, except O, which omits et ; W 
indicates a lacuna before et. © Iulum, OI; Iulium, VLN«G. 


^ Q. Lutatius Catulus ; see chap. iii. and Index. 
ò A semi-circular place for sitting; applied also by 
Vitruvius, 9. 9. 1, to a kind of sundial. 


422 


ON GRAMMARIANS 


also offering a prize for the victor to carry off. This 
was some old book, either beautiful or rare. He was 
therefore chosen by Augustus as the tutor of his 
grandsons and he moved to the Palace with his whole 
school, but with the understanding that he should 
admit no more pupils. He gave instruction in the 
hall of the house of Catulus, which at that time 
formed part of the Palace, and was paid a hundred 
thousand sesterces a year. He died at an advanced 
age under Tiberius. His statue stands at Praeneste in 
the upper part of the forum near the hemicycle,? 
on which he exhibited the calendar* which he had 
arranged and inscribed upon its marble walls. 
XVIII. Lucius Crassicius, a Tareatine by birth and 
a freedman by position, had the surname Pasicles, 
which he afterwards changed to Pansa. He was 
at first connected with the stage, as an assistant to 
the writers of farces; then he gave instruction in 
a school? until he became so famous through the 
publication of his commentary on the * Zmyrna," 
that the following verses were written about him: 


* Zmyrna will trust her fate but to Crassicius ; 
Cease then to woo her, ye unlettered throng. 
She has declared none other will she wed, 
Since he alone her hidden charms doth know." 


But when he had already attracted many pupils of 
high rank, including Iullus Antonius, the triumvir's 
son, so that he was a rival even of Verrius Flaccus, 


c The Fasti Praenestint, of which fragments have come 
down to us. 

4 A pergula was an upper floor or balcony on the front of a 
house ; such balconies were used as shops, studios, schools, 
and the like ; cf. Aug. xciv. 12. 


423 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


Flacco compararetur, dimissa repente schola, transiit 
ad Q. Sexti philosophi sectam. 

XIX. Scribonius Aphrodisius, Orbilii servus atque 
discipulus, mox a Scribonia Libonis filia, quae prior 
Augusti uxor fuerat, redemptus et manumissus, 
docuit quo Verrius tempore, cuius etiam libris ** De 
Orthographia" rescripsit, non sine insectatione 
studiorum morumque eius. 

XX. C. Iulius Hyginus, Augusti libertus, natione 
Hispanus, (nonnulli Alexandrinum putant et a 
Caesare puerum Romam adductum Alexandria capta) 
studiose et audiit et imitatus est Cornelium Alexan- 
drum grammaticum Graecum, quem propter anti- 
quitatis notitiam Polyhistorem multi, quidam His- 
toriam vocabant. Praefuit Palatinae bibliothecae, 
nec eo secius plurimos docuit ; fuitque familiarissimus 
Ovidio poetae et Clodio Licino! consulari, historico, 
qui eum admodum pauperem decessisse tradit et 
liberalitate sua, quoad vixerit, sustentatum. Huius 
libertus fuit Iulius Modestus, in studiis atque doctrina 
vestigia patroni secutus. 

XXI. C. Melissus, Spoleti natus ingenuus, sed ob 
discordiam parentum expositus, cura et industria 
educatoris sui altiora studia percepit, ac Maecenati 
pro grammatico muneri datus est. Cui cum se 
gratum et acceptum in modum amici videret, quan- 
quam asserente matre, permansit tamen in statu 


1 Licino, Oudendorp, Bergk ; Licinio, mss. 


a Aug. lxii. 2. 5 Aug. xxix. 3. 
c See note on 7^ib. vii. 2. 


424 


— Á O) — a y — 


ON GRAMMARIANS 


he suddenly disbanded his school and became a 
disciple of the philosopher Quintus Sextius. 

XIX. Scribonius Aphrodisius, slave and pupil of 
Orbilius, afterwards bought and set free by Scribonia, 
daughter of Libo, who had formerly been the wife of 
Augustus," taught at the same time as Verrius. He 
wrote a critique of Verrius’s “ Orthography,” at the 
same time attacking the author's scholarship and 
character. 

XX. Gaius Julius Hyginus, a freedman of Augustus 
and a Spaniard by birth e think that he was a 
native of Alexandria and was brought to Rome 
when a boy by Caesar after his capture of the city), 
was a zealous pupil and imitator of the Greek 
grammarian Cornelius Alexander, whom many called 
* Polyhistor " because of his knowledge of the past, 
and some * History.” Hyginus was in charge of 
the Palatine Library,^ but nevertheless took many 
pupils. He was an intimate friend of the poet Ovid 
and of Clodius Licinus the ex-consul and historian, 
who tells us that Hyginus died very poor after 
being supported as long as he lived by the writer's 
generosity. He had a freedman Julius Modestus, 
who followed in his patron's footsteps as student and 
scholar. 

XXI. Gaius Melissus, a native of Spoletium, was 
freeborn, but was disowned^ owing to a disagree- 
ment between his parents. Nevertheless through 
the care and devotion of the man who reared him, 
he received a superior education, and was presented to 
Maecenas as a grammarian. Finding that Maecenas 
appreciated him and treated him as a friend, 
although his mother claimed his freedom, he yet 
remained in a condition of slavery, since he 


425 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


servitutis praesentemque condicionem verae origini 
anteposuit; quare cito manumissus, Augusto etiam! 
insinuatus est. Quodelegante,? curam ordinandarum 
bibliothecarum in Octaviae porticu suscepit. Atque, 
ut ipse tradit, sexagesimum aetatis annum agens, 
libellos * Ineptiarum," qui nunc ** Iocorum " inscri- 
buntur, componere instituit, absolvitque C et L, 
quibus et alios diversi operis postea addidit. Fecit 
et novum genus togatarum inscripsitque trabeatas. 
XXII. M. Pomponius Marcellus, sermonis Latini 
exactor molestissimus, in advocatione quadam (nam 
interdum et causas agebat) soloecismum ab adversario 
factum usque adeo arguere perseveravit, quoad 
Cassius Severus, interpellatis iudicibus, dilationem 
petiit, ut litigator suus alium grammaticum adhiberet ; 
quando non putat is cum adversario de iure sibi, sed 
de soloecismo controversiam futuram. Hic idem, 
cum ex oratione Tiberi verbum? reprehendisset, 
affirmante Ateio Capitone, et esse illud Latinum, et 
si non esset, futurum certe iam inde: * Mentitur," 
inquit, “ Capito; tu enim, Caesar, civitatem dare 
potes hominibus, verbo‘ non potes."  Pugilem olim 


1 Augusto etiam, NGOW ; Augusto et, VLI. 
? quo delegante, O : quod elegantem, VLNGIW. 
3 Tiberius verbum, W : Tyberium, V ; Tyberius, O. 
4 verbo, Roth ; verbis, G. Faernus (Reif.) ; verba, mss. 


a See Aug. xxix. 4. 
ò The fabulae togatae presented scenes from Roman life, in 


426 


ON GRAMMARIANS 


preferred his present lot to that of his actual 
origin. In consequence he was soon set free, and 
even won the favour of Augustus. At the emperor’s 
appointment he undertook the task of arranging 
the library in the Colonnade of Octavia.^ In his 
sixtieth year, as he himself writes, he began to 
compile his volumes of “ Trifles,” now entitled 
* Jests," of which he completed a hundred and 
fifty ; and he later added other volumes of a different 
character. He likewise originated a new kind of 
togalae to which he gave the name of trabeatae.* 
XXII. Marcus Pomponius Marcellus, a most 
pedantic critic of the Latin language, in one of 
his cases (for he sometimes acted as an advocate) 
was so persistent in criticizing an error in diction 
made by his opponent, that Cassius Severus appealed 
to the judges and asked for a postponement, to 
enable his client to employ a grammarian in his 
stead: * For," said he, “he thinks that the contest 
with his opponent will not be on points of law, 
but of diction.” When this same Marcellus had 
criticized a word in one of Tiberius's speeches, and 
Ateius Capito declared that it was good Latin, or if 
not, that it would surely be so from that time on, 
Marcellus answered : * Capito lies; for you, Caesar, 
can confer citizenship upon men, but not upon a 
word." That he had formerly been a boxer is 


contrast with the fabulae palliatae, or comedies adapted from 
the Greek. 

¢ See note on trabea, Dom. xiv. 3. In the trabeatae the 
characters were knights or other wearers of the trabea. 


427 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


fuisse, Asinius Gallus hoc in eum epigrammate 
ostendit : 


. * Qui ‘caput ad laevam ' didicit, glossemata nobis 
Praecipit; os nullum, vel potius pugilis ! " 


XXIII. Q. Remmius Palaemon, Vicetinus,! muli- 
eris verna, primo, ut ferunt, textrinum, deinde 
herilem filium dum comitatur in scholam, litteras 
didicit. Postea manumissys docuit Romae ac princi- 
pem locum inter grammaticos tenuit, quanquam 
infamis omnibus vitiis, palamque et Tiberio et mox 
Claudio praedicantibus, nemini minus institutionem 
puerorum vel iuvenum committendam. Sed capiebat 
homines cum memoria rerum, tum facilitate sermonis ; 
nec non etiam poemata faciebat ex tempore. 
Scripsit vero variis, nec vulgaribus metris. Arro- 
gantia fuit tanta, ut M. Varronem porcum appellaret ; 
secum et natas et morituras litteras iactaret ; nomen 
suum in “ Bucolicis " non temere positum, sed praesa- 
gante? Vergilio, fore quandoque omnium poetarum ac 
poematum Palaemonem iudicem. Gloriabatur etiam, 
latrones quondam sibi propter nominis celebritatem 
parsisse. Luxuriae ita indulsit, ut saepius in die 
lavaret, nec sufficeret sumptibus, quanquam ex schola 
quadringena annua caperet, ac non multo minus ex 


1 Vicetinus, W ; the other mss. have Vicentinus (Vicc-, G'). 
3 praesagante, mss., Roth; praesagiente, Resff. 
3 parsisse, VG; parcisse, NI; pepercisse, LO. 


* To dodge a blow delivered with the right hand ; cf. Verg. 
Aen. v. 428, abduxere retro longe capita ardua, ab ictu; part 
of the instruction to a boxer. : 

* Os is of course used in a double sense, figuratively as 
above, and literally, of a pugilist's battered visage. 

* As paedagogua, cf. Nero, xxxvi. 2, etc. 4 3. 50 ff. 


428 


ne —— —— VQ —EBÀ 


= gU LESS m— sei 2 n cim m CNET — ee 


ON GRAMMARIANS 


shown by this epigram which Asinius Pollio made 
upon him : 


« He who learned ‘Head to the left’ explains to us 
difficult language ; 
Talent? indeed he has none, merely a pugilist's 
skill. 


XXIII. Quintus Remmius Palaemon, of Vicetia, 
was the home-born slave of a woman. He first, 
they say, learned the weaver's trade, and then got 
an education by accompanying his master's son to 
school* He was afterwards set free, and became a 
teacher at Rome, where he held a leading rank 
among the grammarians, in spite of the fact that he 
. was notorious for every kind of vice, and that 
Tiberius and later Claudius openly declared that 
there was no one less fitted to be trusted with the 
education of boys or young men. But he caught 
men's fancy by his remarkable memory, as well as 
by his readiness of speech; for he even extempo- 
rized poems. He wrote too in various uncommon 
metres. He was so presumptuous that he called 
Marcus Varro * a hog" ; declared that letters were 
born with him and would die with him ; and that it 
was no accident that his name appeared in the 
** Bucolics," 4 but because Vergil divined that one day 
a Palaemon would be judge of all poets and poems. 
He boasted too that brigands once spared him 
because of the celebrity of his name. He was so 
given to luxurious living that he went to the bath 
several times a day, and could not live within his 
income, although he received four hundred thousand 
sesterces a year from his school and almost as much 
from his private property. To the latter he gave 


429 


THE LIVES OF.ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


re familiari ; cuius diligentissimus erat, cum et offici- 
nas promercalium vestium exerceret, et agros adeo 
coleret, ut vitem manu eius insitam! satis constet 
CCCLX uvas edidisse. Sed maxime flagrabat 
libidinibus in mulieres, usque ad infamiam oris; 
dicto quoque ? non infaceto notatum ferunt cuiusdam, 
qui cum? in turba osculum sibi ingerentem quan- 
quam refugiens devitare non posset, * Vis tu," inquit, 
* magister, quotiens festinantem aliquem vides, 
abligurire ? "' 

XXIV. M. Valerius Probus, Berytius, diu centu- 
riatum petiit, donec taedio ad studia se contulit. 
Legerat in provincia quosdam veteres libellos apud 
grammatistam, durante adhuc ibi antiquorum me- 
moria, necdum omnino abolita sicut Romae. Hos 
cum diligentius repeteret atque alios deinceps cogno- 
scere cuperet, quamvis omnes contemni magisque 
opprobrio legentibus quam gloriae et fructui esse 
animadverteret, nihilo minus in proposito mansit ; 
multaque exemplaria contracta emendare ac dis- 
tinguere et annotare curavit, soli huic nec ulli 
praeterea grammatices parti deditus. Hic non tam 
discipulos quam sectatores aliquot habuit. Nunquam 
enim ita docuit ut magistri personam sustineret ; 
unum et alterum, vel cum plurimos tres aut quattuor 
postmeridianis horis admittere solebat, cubansque 


1 insitam, S. Gelentus, Mommsen ; institutam, mas. 

2 dicto quoque, VLGO ; dictoque, NTI. 

3 qui cum, O; qui eum, VNGI; omitted by L; qui cum 
eum, Reif. —.— 


430 


ON GRAMMARIANS 
> 

great attention, keeping shops for the sale of ready 
made clothing and cultivating his fields with such 
care that it is common talk that a vine which he 
grafted himself yielded three hundred and sixty 
bunches of grapes. But he was especially notorious 
for acts of licentiousness with women, which he 
carried to the pitch of shameful indecency ; and they 
say that he was held up to scorn by the witty 
remark of a man who met him in a crowd and being 
unable to escape his kiss, although he tried to avoid 
it, cried : * Master, do you wish to mouth everyone 
whom you see in a hurry?” 

XXIV. Marcus Valerius Probus of Berytus for a 
long time sought an appointment as centurion, finally 
grew tired of waiting, and devoted himself to study. 
He had read some early writers with an elementary 
teacher in one of the provinces; for the memory of 
those writers still lingers there and is not wholly 
lost, as it is in Rome. When he took these up again 
with greater care, and sought to extend his acquaint- 
ance to others of the same period, although he 
perceived that they were all held in contempt and 
brought rather reproach to those who read them 
than honour and profit, he nevertheless persisted in 
his purpose. After getting together a large number 
of copies, he gave his attention to correcting and 
punctuating them, and furnishing them with critical 
notes, devoting himself to this branch of grammar to 
the exclusion of all others. He had a few followers, 
rather than pupils; for he never taught in such a 
way as to assume the róle of a master. He used to 
receive one or two, or at most three or four, in the 
afternoon hours, when he would lie upon a couch 


431 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


inter longos ac vulgares sermones legere quaedam, 
idque perraro. Nimis pauca et exigua de quibusdam 
minutis quaestiunculis edidit. Reliquit autem non 
mediocrem “ Silvam Observationum Sermonis Anti- 


qui." 


432 


ON GRAMMARIANS 


and in the course of long and general conversations ^ 
would read some few things, though very rarely. 
He published a few slight works on divers minute 
points, and also left a good sized “Grove ® of 
Observations on our Early Language." 


a Naturally, on literary and grammatical topics 
è See note on Hyle, chap. x. 


433 
VOL. II. F F 


DE RHETORIBUS 


I. RuEToRICA quoque apud nos perinde atque 
grammatica fere! recepta est, paululo? etiam difti- 
cilius, quippe quam constet nonnunquam etiam 
prohibitam exerceri. Quod ne cui dubium sit, vetus 
S. C.? item censorium edictum subiciam: * C.* Fannio 
Strabone M. Valerio Messala coss. M. Pomponius 
praetor senatum consuluit. Quod verba facta sunt 
de philosophis et rhetoribus, de ea re ita censuerunt, 
ut M. Pomponius praetor animadverteret curaretque, 
ut ei? e re p. fideque sua videretur, uti Romae ne 
essent." De eisdem interiecto tempore Cn. Domitius 
Aenobarbus, L. Licinius Crassus censores ita edi- 
xerunt: * Renuntiatum est nobis, esse homines qui 
novum genus disciplinae instituerunt, ad quos iuven- 
tus in ludum conveniat; eos sibi nomen imposuisse 
Latinos rhetoras; ibi homines adolescentulos dies 
totos desidere. Maiores nostri, quae liberos suos 


1 fere, VLNGI ; sero, O, Beroaldus. 

3 pue VLGO ; paullo, 7 ; paulo, N. 

3 S. C., omitted by the mss. ; snserted by Stephanus after, 
and by Lachmann before, item ; O omits item also, marking 
a lacuna. 

3 C. added by Stephanus from Gell. 15. 11. 1. 

9 ut ei, OW (see Ihm, Rh. Mus. 61. 552 and cf. Gell. 
15. 11. 1); ut si ei, edd. 


434 


| 


| 
! 


ON RHETORICIANS* 


I. Tue study of rhetoric was introduced into our 
country in about the same way as that of grammar, 
` but with somewhat greater difficulty, since, as is 
well known, its practice was at times actually 
prohibited. To remove any doubt on this point, 
I shall append an ancient decree of the senate, 
as well as an edict of the censors : 

« In the consulship of Gaius Fannius Strabo and 
Marcus Valerius Messala the praetor Marcus Pom- 
ponius laid a proposition before the senate. As the 
result of a discussion about philosophers and rhetori- 
cians, the senate decreed that Marcus Pomponius, 
the praetor, should take heed and provide, in what- 
ever way seemed in accord with the interests of the 
State and his oath of office, that they be not allowed 
to live in Rome." Some time afterward the censors 
Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus and Lucius Licinius 
Crassus issued the following edict about the same 
class of men: “It has been reported to us that 
there be men who have introduced a new kind of 
training, and that our young men frequent their 
schools; that these men have assumed the title of 
Latin rhetoricians, and that young men spend 
whole days with them in idleness. Our forefathers 

a This word, like grammaticus, had a different force from 


that of the corresponding English word ; it meant a teacher 
of declamation and oratory. 


435 
FF 


161 B.c 


92 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


discere et quos in ludos itare vellent, instituerunt. 
Haec nova, quae praeter consuetudinem ac morem 
maiorum fiunt, neque placent neque recta videntur. 
Quapropter et eis qui eos ludos habent, et eis qui 
eo venire consuerunt, videtur faciundum ut osten- 
deremus nostram sententiam, nobis non placere." 
Paulatim et ipsa utilis honestaque apparuit, multi- 
que eam et praesidii causa et gloriae appetiverunt. 
Cicero ad praeturam usque etiam Graece declamitavit, 
Latine vero senior quoque et quidem cum consulibus 
Hirtio et Pansa, quos discipulos et grandis praetex- 
tatos vocabat. Cn. Pempeium quidam historici tradi- 
derunt sub ipsum civile bellum, quo facilius C. Curioni 
promptissimo iuveni, causam Caesaris defendenti, 
contradiceret, repetisse declamandi consuetudinem ; 
M. Antonium, item Augustum ne Mutinensi quidem 
bello omisisse. Nero Caesar primo imperii anno, 
publice quoque bis antea, declamavit. Plerique 
autem oratorum etiam declamationes ediderunt. 
Quare magno studio hominibus iniecto, magna etiam 
professorum ac doctorum profluxit copia, adeoque 
floruit, ut nonnulli ex infima fortuna in ordinem 
senatorium atque ad summos honores processerint. 
Sed ratio docendi nec una omnibus, nec singulis 
eadem semper fuit, quando vario modo quisque 


a Cf. Seneca, Controv. 1. praef. 11 ff. 
> Cf. Aug. lxxxiv. 1. 


436 


ma ee ao "y —— 


ON RHETORICIANS 


determined what they wished their children to learn 
and what schools they desired them to attend. 
These innovations in the customs and principles 
of our forefathers do not please us nor seem proper. 
Therefore it appears necessary to make our opinion 
known, both to those who have such schools and to 
those who are in the habit of attending them, that 
they are displeasing to us.” 

By degrees rhetoric itself came to seem useful and 
honourable, and many devoted themselves to it as a 
defence and for glory. Cicero continued to declaim in 
Greek as well as Latin up to the time of his praetor- 
ship, and in Latin even when he was getting on in 
years ; and that too in company with the future con- 
suls Hirtius and Pansa, whom he calls “ his pupils and 
his big boys." ^ Some historians assert that Gnaeus 
Pompeius resumed the practice of declaiming just 
before the civil war, that he might be the better able 
to argue against Gaius Curio, a young man of very 
ready tongue, who was espousing Caesar's cause; 
and that Marcus Antonius, and Augustus as well, 
did not give it up even during the war at Mutina.’ 
The emperor Nero declaimed in the first year of 
his reign, and had also done so in public twice 
before. Furthermore, many even of the orators 
published declamations. In this way general enthu- 
siasm was aroused, and a great number of masters 
and teachers flocked to Rome, where they were so 
well received that some advanced from the lowest 
estate to senatorial dignity and to the highest 
magistracies. 

But they did not all follow the same method of 
teaching, and the individual teachers also varied in 
their practice, since each one trained his pupils 


e 437 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


discipulos exercuerunt. Nam et dicta praeclare per 
omnes figuras, per casus et apologos aliter atque 
aliter exponere, et narrationes cum breviter ac 
presse tum latius et uberius explicare consuerant; 
interdum | Graecorum scripta convertere, ac viros 
illustres laudare vel vituperare; quaedam etiam ad 
usum communis vitae instituta tum! utilia et ne- 
cessaria, tum! perniciosa et supervacanea ostendere; 
saepe fabulis fidem firmare aut demere, quod genus 
thesis et anasceuas et catasceuas Graeci vocant; 
donec sensim haec exoleverunt,? et ad controversiam 
ventum est. 

Veteres controversiae aut ex historiis trahebantur, 
sicut sane nonnullae usque adhuc, aut ex veritate 
ac re, si qua forte recens accidisset ; itaque locorum 
etiam appellationibus additis proponi solebant. Sic 
certe collectae editaeque se habent, ex quibus non 
alienum fuerit unam et alteram exempli causa ad 
verbum referre. 

* Aestivo tempore adulescentes urbani cum Ostiam 
venissent, litus ingressi, piscatores trahentes rete 
adierunt et pepigerunt, bolum quanti emerent; 
nummos solverunt; diu exspectaverunt, dum retia 
extraherentur; aliquando extractis, piscis nullus 
affuit, sed sporta auri obsuta. Tum emptores bolum 
suum aiunt, piscatores suum." 

1 tum... tum, Stephanus, Vinetus; dum... dum, mse. 


? exoleverunt, Beroaldus; exoluerunt, L (Pontanus); 
exoluerint, VOGI; exsoluerint, N. 


* That is, stories and fables (Gk. àxóAoyo:) introduced by 
way of illustration. Cf. Quint. 5. 11. 19 ff. 
> They corresponded in general with the Roman suasoriac, 


8 
43* e 


ON RHETORICIANS 


in various «ways. For they would explain fine 
speeches with regard to their figures, incidents and 
illustrations," now in one way and now in another, 
and compose narratives sometimes in a condensed 
and brief form, again with greater detail and flow 
of words. Sometimes they would translate Greek 
works, and praise or censure distinguished men. 
They would show that some practices in everyday 
life were expedient and essential, others harmful 
and  superfluous. Frequently they defeuded or 
assailed the credibility of myths, an exercise which 
the Greeks call “destructive” and “constructive ” 
criticism. But finally all these exercises ^ went out 
of vogue and were succeeded by the debate. 

The earlier debates were based either upon historical 
narrative, as indeed is sometimes the case at present, 
or upon some event of recent occurrence in real life. 
Accordingly they were usually presented with even 
the names of the localities included. At any rate 
that is the case with the published collections, from 
which it may be enlightening to give one or two 
specimens word for word. 

* Some young men from the city went to Ostia in 
the summer season, and arriving at the shore, found 
some fishermen drawing in their nets. They made a 
bargain to give a certain sum for the haul. The 
money was paid and they waited for some time until 
the nets were drawn ashore. When they were at 
last hauled out, no fish was found in them, but a 
closed basket of gold. Then the purchasers said 
that the catch belonged to them, the fishermen that 
it was theirs." 
which with the controversiae formed the stock exercires of 
the schools of rhetoric. 


439 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


* Venalici cum Brundisi gregem venalium e navi 
educerent, formoso et pretioso puero, quod portitores 
verebantur, bullam et praetextam togam imposue- 
runt; facile fallaciam celarunt. Romam venitur, res 
cognita est, petitur puer, quod domini voluntate 
fuerit liber, in libertatem.! " Olim autem eas appella- 
tione Graeca? synthesis? vocabant ; mox controver- 
sias quidem, sed aut fictas aut iudiciales. 

Illustres professores, et quorum memoria aliqua 
exstet, non temere alii reperientur quam de quibus 
tradam. 

II. L. Plotius Gallus. De hoc Cicero in epistula 
ad M. Titinnium sic refert: “Equidem memoria 
teneo, pueris nobis primum Latine docere coepisse 
Plotium quendam. Ad quem cum fieret concursus, 
quod studiosissimus quisque apud eum exerceretur, 
dolebam mihi idem non licere. Continebar autem 
doctissimorum hominum auctoritate, qui existimabant 
Graecis exercitationibus ali melius ingenia posse." 
Hunc eundem (nam diutissime vixit) M. Caelius in 
oratione, quam pro se de vi habuit, significat * dictasse 
Atratino, accusatori suo, actionem;  subtractoque 
nomine, hordearium eum rhetorem appellat, deridens 
ut inflatum ac levem et sordidum. 

1 libertatem, Vinetus ; libertate, mss. 

? appellatione Graeca, OI; appellationes Graece, VLW; 
appel ationes Graeci, NG. l 

synthesis, L (Pontanus); syntaxis, VNG ; sintaxis, I; 
syntasis, O. 4 significat, Muretus; significabat, mas. 


a The dress of a freeborn youth of good m: cf. Jul. . 


Ixxxiv. 4. The bulla was also a badge of free birt 

d Xyy0éceis, ** Compositions.” 

¢ The letter has not been preserved. 

4 That is, his speech in support of the charge against 
Caelius. 


440 


ON RHETORICIANS 


* When some dealers were landing a cargo of 
slaves from a ship at Brundisium, they dressed 
a handsome and high-priced young slave in the 
amulet and fringed toga^ for fear of the collectors 
of customs, and their fraud easily escaped detention. 
When they reached Rome, the case was taken to 
court and a claim was made for the slave's liberty, on 
the ground that his master had voluntarily freed 
him." 

Such discussions they formerly called by their 
Greek name of “syntheses,’® but afterwards 
* debates” ; but they might be either fictitious or 
legal. 

The eminent teachers of the subject, of whom 
any account is to be found, are limited pretty closely 
to those whom I shall mention. 

II. Of Lucius Plotius Gallus, Cicero gives the 
following account in a letter to Marcus Titinnius * : 
* [| well remember that when we were boys, a 
certain Plotius first began to teach in Latin. When 
crowds flocked to him, for all the most diligent 
students of the subject were trained under him, I 
regretted not having the same privilege. But 1 was 
deterred by the advice of certain men of wide 
experience, who believed that one's mind could 
better be trained by exercises in Greek." Marcus 
Caelius, in a speech in which he defended himself 
against a charge of violence, implies that this same 
Plotius, for he lived to a great age, supplied Caelius's 
accuser, Atratinus, with his plea?; and without 
mentioning him by name, Caelius calls him a * barley- 
bread rhetorician," mocking at him as * puffy, light, 
and coarse.” 


441 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


III. L. Voltacilius! Plotus? servisse dicitur atque 
etiam ostiarius vetere more in catena fuisse, donec 
ob ingenium ac studium litterarum manumissus, 
accusanti patrono subscripsit. Deinde rhetoricam 
professus, Cn. Pompeium Magnum docuit, patrisque 
eius res gestas, nec minus ipsius, compluribus libris 
exposuit; primus omnium libertinorum, ut Cornelius 
Nepos opinatur, scribere historiam orsus, nonnisi ab 
honestissimo quoque scribi solitam ad id tempus. 

IV. M.? Epidius, calumnia notatus, ludum dicendi 
aperuit docuitque inter ceteros M. Antonium et 
Augustum ; quibus quondam C. Cannutius, obicien- 
tibus sibi quod in re p. administranda potissimum 
consularis Isaurici sectam sequeretur, malle respondit 
Isaurici esse discipulum quam Epidi calumniatoris. 
Hic Epidius ortum se ab Epidio Nucerino* prae- 
dicabat, quem ferunt olim praecipitatum in fontem 
fluminis Sarni, paulo post cum cornibus taureis? 
exstitisse, ac statim non comparuisse in numeroque 
deorum habitum. 

V. Sextus Clodius, e Sicilia, Latinae simul Grae- 
caeque eloquentiae professor, male oculatus et dicax, 
par oculorum in amicitia M. Antonii triumviri 
extrisse? se aiebat; eiusdem uxorem Fulviam, cui 
altera bucca inflatior erat, acumen stili tentare dixit, 

1 Voltacilius, Roth, from the Indices and Hieronymus; 
Oltacilius, VO; Octacilius, NGI ; Otacilius, L. ' 

? Plotus, Reif. from Hieron. ; Pilutus, mas. 

3 M., added by Roth. 

* Nucerino, OW, Beroaldus ; Nuncino, VNG ; nuntino, J; 
mancino, Z. 


5 taureis, O. Jahn; aureis, NO; omitted by VLGI. 
$ extrisse, Statius ; extricte, mas. 


* Used in a double sense, implying that he had ruined his 
eyes by dissipation and late hours in Antony's company. 


442 


— a ae D 


ON RHETORICIANS 


III. Lucius Voltacilius Plotus is said to have been 
a slave and even to have served as a doorkeeper in 
chains, according to the ancient custom, until he 
was set free because of his talent and interest in 
letters, and helped his patron prepare his accusations. 
Then becoming a teacher of rhetoric, he had Gnaeus 
Pompeius the Great for a pupil, and wrote a history 
of the exploits of Pompey’s father, as well as those 
of the son, in several volumes. In the opinion of 
Cornelius Nepos, he was the first of all freedmen to 
take up the writing of history, which up to that time 
had been confined to men of the highest position. 

IV. Marcus Epidius, notorious as a blackmailer, 
opened a school of oratory and numbered among his 
pupils Mark Asitony and Augustus ; and when they 
once jeered at Gaius Cannutius because he preferred 
to side with the political party of Isauricus, the ex- 
consul, Cannutius rejoined: “I would rather be a 
disciple of Isauricus than of a false accuser like 
Epidius.” This Epidius claimed descent from 
Epidius of Nuceria, who, it is said, once threw 
himself into the source of the river Sarnus and came 
out shortly afterwards with bull's horns on his head ; 
then he at once disappeared and was reckoned among 
the number of the gods. 

V. Sextus Clodius of Sicily, a teacher of both 
Greek and Latin oratory and man with poor sight 
and a sharp tongue, used to say that he had worn 
out a pair of eyes* during his friendship with Mark 
Antony, the triumvir. He also said of the latter's 
wife, Fulvia, one of whose cheeks was somewhat 
swollen: * She tempts the point of my pen” ?; 


* Used in a double sense; she tempts me (1) to write a 
sharp epigram on her ; (2) to lance her cheek. 


443 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


nec eo minus, immo vel magis ob hoc Antonio gratus. 
A quo mox consule ingens etiam congiarium accepit, 
ut ei in “ Philippicis" Cicero obicit: * Adhibes! ioci 
causa magistrum, suffragio tuo et compotorum ? 
tuorum rhetorem, cui concessisti ut in te quae vellet 
diceret, salsum? omnino hominem, sed materia 
facilis in te* et in tuos dicta? dicere. At quanta 
merces rhetori est data! Audite, audite, P. C., et 
cognoscite rei p. vulnera. Duo milia iugerum campi 
Leontini Sex. Clodio rhetori assignasti et quidem 
immunia, ut tanta mercede nihil sapere disceres." 
VI. C. Albucius Silus, Novariensis, cum aedilitate 
in patria fungeretur, cum forte ius diceret, ab iis 
contra quos pronuntiabat pedibus e tribunali detrac- 
tus est. Quod indigne ferens, statim contendit ad 
portam et inde Romam, receptusque in Planci ora- 
toris contubernium, cui declamaturo mos erat prius 
aliquem qui ante diceret excitare, suscepit eas partes, 
atque ita implevit ut Planco silentium imponeret, 
non audenti in comparationem se demittere.” Sed 
ex eo clarus, propria auditoria instituit, solitus 
proposita controversia sedens incipere, et calore 


! adhibes, Beroaldus from Cic.; tibi et, mss. except O, 
which omits, marking a lacuna. 

2 compotorum, Stephanus from Cic. ; competitorum, maa. 
(compett-, J). 

3 salsum, L (Pontanus), Beroaldus from Cic. ; the other 
mss. have falsum. 

4 in te, omitted by VLNG. ° dicta, omitted by VLOGI. 

5 cum, mss. (quom, N; eum, V); cumque, Oudendorp, 
Ref. 204 
7 demittere, J. Gronov; dimittere, mss. 
* incipere, Faernus ; in opere, mss. 


444 


ON RHETORICIANS 


and by this witticism he rather gained than lost 
favour with Antony. When Antony presently be- 
caine consul, Clodius received from him an enormous 
gift, as Cicero charges against Antony in his 
* Philippies "^: “For the sake of his jokes you 
employ a schoolmaster, elected a rhetorician by 
your vote and those of your pot-companions, and 
you have allowed him to say anything he likes 
about you; a witty fellow, no doubt, but it is not 
a hard matter to say clever things of you and your 
mates. But what pay does this rhetorician receive ? 
Listen, senators, listen, and know the wounds which 
our country suffers. You made over to this rhetori- 
cian, Sextus Clodius, two thousand acres* of the 
Leontine territory, and free of taxes too, that at 
so great a price you might learn to know nothing." 
VI. Gaius Albucius Silus of Novara, while he was 
holding the office of aedile in his native town and 
chanced to be sitting in judgment, was dragged by 
the feet from the tribunal by those against whom 
he was rendering a decision. Indignant at this, 
he at once made for the gate and went off to Rome. 
There he was admitted to the house of the orator 
Plancus, who had the habit, when he was going 
to declaim, of calling upon someone to speak before 
him. Albucius undertook that róle, and filled it so 
effectively, that he reduced Plancus to silence, since 
he did not venture to enter into competition. But 
when Albucius had thus become famous, he opened 
a lecture room of his own, where it was his habit 
after proposing a subject for a debate, to begin 
to speak from his seat, and then as he warmed 


a See note on Aug. xli. 2. b 2. 17. 42-43. 
c The iugerum is literally about two-thirds of an acre. 


445 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


demum provectus consurgere ac perorare, declamare 
autem genere! vario: modo splendide atque ador- 
nate, tum, ne usque quaque scholasticus existimaretur, 
circumcise ac sordide et tantum non? trivialibus 
verbis. Egit et causas, verum rarius, dum amplissi- 
mam quamque sectatur, nec alium in ulla locum quam 
perorandi. Postea renuntiavit Foro partim pudore, 
partim metu ; nam cum in lite quadam centumvirali, 
adversario, quem ut impium erga parentes incessebat, 
ius iurandum quasi per figuram sic optulisset : ** Iura 
per patris matrisque cineres, qui inconditi iacent ! "' 
et alia in hunc modum, arripiente eo condicionem, 
nec iudicibus aspernantibus, non sine magna sui 
invidia negotium afflixit. Et rursus in cognitione 
caedis Mediolani apud L. Pisonem proconsulem 
defendens reum, cum cohiberent lictores nimias lau- 
dantium voces, et® ita excanduisset, ut deplorato 
Italiae statu, quasi iterum in formam provinciae 
redigeretur, M. insuper Brutum, cuius statua in 
conspectu erat, invocaret legum ac libertatis aucto- 


1 autem genere, Stephanus ; aut gemere, mss. 
2 tantum non, VO; tamen non, L; tantum modo, NGI. 
3 et, added by Roth. 


a See note on Aug. xxxvi. 

> The story is told in more detail in Seneca, Controv. 7, 
Praef. 7. The defendant wished to settle the case by taking 
oath to the truth of his contention, which was permitted, pro- 
vided the opposing counsel gave his consent. Albucius said, 


446 


{ww 


ON RHETORICIANS 


up, to rise and make his peroration on his feet. 
He declaimed, too, in various manners, now in a 
brilliant and ornate style, and at another time, not to 
be thought invariably academic, speaking briefly, in 
everyday language and all but that of the streets. 
He also pleaded causes, but rather seldom, taking 
part only in those of greatest importance, and even 
then confining himself to summing them up. Later 
he withdrew from the Forum, partly through shame 
and partly through fear. For in a case before the 
Hundred ® he had offered his opponent, whom he 
was inveighing against as undutiful towards his 
parents, the privilege of taking oath but merely 
as a figure of speech, using the following language: 
* Swear by the ashes of your father and mother, 
who lie unburied " ; and made other remarks in the 
same vein. His opponent accepted the challenge ; 
and since the judges made no objection, Albucius lost 
his case to his great humiliation. Again, when he 
was defending a client in a murder trial at Medio- 
lanum before the proconsul Lucius Piso, and the 
lictors tried to suppress the immoderate applause, 
he grew so angry, that lamenting the condition of 
Italy and saying that *it was being reduced once 
more to the form of a province," he called besides 
upon Marcus Brutus, whose statue was in sight, 
as **the founder and defender of our laws and 
liberties" ; and for that he narrowly escaped 


“I consent, provided I may dictate the oath.” But when 
he challenged his opponent to swear by the ashes of his father 
and mother who lay unburied, and the latter accepted the 
condition, Albucius declared that he was speaking figuratively, 
and had not intended to give his consent. 

¢ Pliny complains of this nuisance in Epist. 2. 14. 10 ff. 


447 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


rem et vindicem, paene poenas luit. Iam autem 
senior ob vitium vomicae Novariam rediit, con- 
vocataque plebe causis, propter quas mori destin- 
asset, diu ac more contionantis redditis, abstinuit 
cibo. 


448 


ON RHETORICIANS 


punishment. When already well on in years, he 
returned to Novara because he was suffering from a 
tumour, called the people together and explained 
in a long set speech the reasons which led him to 
take his life, and then starved himself to death. 


449 
VOL. II. G G 


DE POETIS 


The following Index has been compiled from 
Hieronymus: \L. Livius Andronicus, Cn. Naevius, 
T. Maccius Plautus, Q. Ennius, Statius Caecilius, 
P. Terentius Afer, M. Pacuvius, L. Accius, Sex. 
Turpilius, C. Lucilius, P. Quintius Atta, L. 
Afranius, L. Pomponius, T. Lucretius Carus, M. 
Furius Bibaculus, C. Valerius Catullus, P. Terentius 
Varro, D. Laberius, P. Publilius Lochius, Cornificius, 
M. Bavius, C. Cornelius Gallus, Aemilius Macer, 
Quintilius Varus, P. Vergilius Maro, Albius Tibullus, 
Sex. Propertius, Q. Horatius Flaccus, L. Varius 
Rufus, P. Ovidius Naso, Philistio, A. Persius Flaccus, 
M. Annaeus Lucanus. 


The following Sigla are used :— 


For Terence: A = cod. Parisinus, 7920, eleventh 
century; B = cod. Parisinus, 7921; C = cod. 
Leidensis Vossianus, 186; D = cod. Dresdensis 
Elect. 539b, Reg. D. 101; E = cod. Urbinas, 354; 
F = cod. Reginensis, 1496; G = cod. Neapolitanus, 
Mus. Borbon. 411 (all of the fifteenth century); 
Z = editio princeps of Donatus, Rome, 1472; 
Ald. = Aldine ed. of 1517; St. = ed. of Stephanus, 
Paris, 1529; Dz. = Dziatzko; Reiff. = Reifferscheid. 


For Vergil: B — cod. Bernensis, 172, ninth or 
tenth century; G = cod. Sangallensis, 862, tenth 


450 


SIGLA 


century; P = cod. Parisinus Lat. 11308 (formerly 
Suppl. Lat. 1011), ninth century; ¢ = Edition of 
Vergil by Heyne-Wagener, i. pp. Ixxxi. ff. 

For Horace: V = cod. Blandinianus Vetustissi- 
mus; œ = cod. Parisinus, 7974, tenth century; 
y = cod. Parisinus, 7971, tenth century; F = ¢ and 
y ; X = Parisinus, 7972, tenth century ; p = Parisinus 
Lat. 8214, twelfth century ; ¢ = mss. which contain 
the Life in a abridged form; see note 6, p. 484. 

For Tibulus: A = cod. Ambrosianus, R 26 sup., 
fourteenth century; V = cod. Vaticanus, 3270; 
g = cod. Guelferbytanus, Ms. Aug. 82, 6 fol., both of 
the fifteenth century ; y = other mss. or the Itali. 

For Aulus Persius Flaccus: A = cod. Montepessu- 
lanus, 212, tenth century ; B — cod. Vaticanus, tab. 
basil. Vat., H. 36, ninth century; P = cod. Monte- 
pessulanus, 125, formerly Pithoeanus. 

For Lucan: M = cod. Montepessulanus, H. 113; 
B = cod. Bernensis, 45; P = cod. Parisinus, 7502, 
formerly Colbertinus, all of the tenth century. 


45I 
G a 2 


DE POETIS 


VITA TERENTI 


I. Pustius Terentius Arer, Carthagine natus, 
serviit Romae Terentio Lucano senatori, a quo ob 
ingenium et formam non instipütus modo liberaliter 
sed et mature manumissus est. Quidam captum 
esse existimant, quod fieri nullo modo potuisse 
Fenestella docet, cum inter finem secundi Punici 
belli et initium tertii natus sit et! mortuus; nec 
si a Numidis et Gaetulis captus sit, ad ducem! 
Romanum pervenire potuisse, nullo commercio inter 
Italicos et Afros nisi post deletam Carthaginem 


coepto. Hic cum multis nobilibus familiariter vixit, 


sed maxime cum Scipione Africano et C.? Laelio. 
Quibus etiam corporis gratia conciliatus existimatur, 
quod et ipsum Fenestella arguit, contendens utroque 
maiorem natu fuisse, quamvis et Nepos aequales 
omnes fuisse tradat et Porcius suspicionem de 
consuetudine per haec faciat: 

1 natus sit et, Ald. ; et natus sit et, Ritschl ; natus est et, 
mss. 


2 ad ducem, mss. ; ad dominum, J. Gronov (Reif. ., Dz.). 
3 C., AF ; the other mss. have cum. 


452 


ON POETS 


"THE LIFE OF TERENCE 


I. PunLivs Terentius Arer, born at Carthage, was 
the slave at Rome of Terentius Lucanus, a senator, 
who because of the young man’s talent and good 
looks not only gave him a liberal education, but soon 
set him free. Some think that he was taken in war, 
but Fenestella shows that that could not possibly be, 
since Terence was born and died between the end of 
the second Punic war and the beginning of the third; 
and even if he had been taken by the Numidians and 
Gaetulians, he could not have come into the hands 
of a Roman general, since commerce between the 
Italic and the African races did not begin until 
after the destruction of Carthage. He lived on 
intimate terms with many men of high rank, in 
particular with Scipio Africanus and Gaius Laelius. 
It is even thought that he won the favour of these 
two men by his youthful beauty, but Fenestella 
denies this too, maintaining that he was older than 
either of them. Nepos, however, writes that they 
were all three of an age, and Porcius rouses a 


146 B.c. 


suspicion of too great intimacy in the following . 


words : 


453 


\ 
THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


* Dum lasciviam nobilium et laudes fucpéás petit, 
Dum Africani vocem divinam inhiat ! 'avidis auribus, 
Dum ad Philum ? se cenitare et Laelium pulchrum 
putat, 

Dum in Albanum crebro rapitur ? ob florem aetatis 
suae : 

Post sublatis rebus ad summam inopiam redactus 
est. 

Itaque e conspectu omnium abit Graeciam in terram 
ultimam, j 

Mortuust Stymphali Arcadiae in5 oppido. Nil 
Publius 6 

Scipio profuit, nil illi Laelius, nil Furius, 

Tres per id tempus qui agitabant nobiles facillime. 

Eorum ille opera ne domum quidem habuit con- 
ducticiam, 

Saltem ut esset quo referret obitum domini ser- 
vulus." 


II. Scripsit comoedias sex, ex quibus primam 
* Andriam " cum aedilibus daret, iussus ante Caecilio? 
recitare, ad cenantem cum venisset, dictus est 
initium quidem fabulae, quod erat contemptiore 
vestitu, subsellio iu lectulum residens legisse, 
post paucos vero versus invitatus ut accumberet 
cenasse una, dein cetera’ percucurrisse non sine 
magna Caecilii® admiratione. Et hanc autem et 

! vocem divinam inhiat, Muretus ; vocé dum et inhuius et, 
A ; the other mss. have voce divina inhiat. 

2 Philum, Roth; fixu, A ; the other mss. have furium. 


3 The reading of Ritschl ; A has dum se amari ab his credat 
crebro in Albanum rapitur ; the other mss., dum . . . credit 


... rapi. : 
4 Stymphali, Ritschl ; mortuus est in falo, A, with similar 
readings in the other mss. ; oír ar Roth. 
5 in, added by Roth. * Publio, Æ (Ritschl). 


454 


~~, Sn, —— a! plo 2) cc i sf a Á—— RI ~ “ii 


eR um; — 


ON POETS—TERENCE 


* Though he courted the wantonness*of great men 
and their counterfeit praise, though with greedy 
ears. he drankiin the divine voice of Africanus, though 
he thought it fine to frequent the tables of Philus 
and Laelius, though he was often taken to the Alban 
villa because of his youthful charms, he later found 
himself stripped of his all and reduced to utmost 
want. So he withdrew from the sight of men to a 
remote partTof Greece and died at Stymphalus, a 
town of Arcady. Naught availed him Publius Scipio, 
naught Laelius, naught Furius, the three wealthiest ^ 
nobles of that time. Their help did not give him 
even a rented house, to provide at least a place 
where his slave might announce his master's death." 


II. He wrote six comedies, and when he offered 
the first of these, the “ Andria," to the aediles, they 
bade him first read it to Caecilius. Having come to 
the poet's house when he was dining, and being 
meanly clad, Terence is said to have read the 
beginning of his play sitting on a bench near the 
great man's couch. But after a few lines he was 
invited to take his place at table, and after dining 
with Caecilius, he ran through the rest to his host's 


7 caerio, AB; cenam, G; the other, mss. have cerio. 
8 caerii, A; eorum, G ; the other mss. have cerii (cerrii, 
cerei). 


a Cf. Hor. Epist. 1. 10. 26 ff. : Non qui Sidonio contendere 
callidus ostro Nescit Aquinatem potantia vellera, fucum, Certins 
accipiet damnum propiusve medullis, Quam qui non poterit 
vero distinguere falsum. 

> facillime agitare means “to live most comfortably," or, 
** most free from care" ; cf. Ter. Adelph. 501, and the Greek 
peta (avres. In an opposite sense we have difficultate num- 
maria, Tib. xlviii. 1. 


455 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


quinque reliquas aequaliter populo propévit, quamvis 


Vulcatius dinumeratione omnium ita scribat : 
* Sumetur Hecyra sexta ex his fabula." 


* Eunuchus" quidem bis die acta est meruitque 
pretium quantum nulla antea cuiusquam comoedia, id 
est octo milia nummorum ; propterea summa quoque 
titulo ascribitur. Nam * Adelphorum " principium 
Varro etiam praefert principio Menandri. 

III. Non obscura fama est adiutum Terentium in 
scriptis a Laelio et Scipione, eamque ipse auxit 
numquam nisi leviter refutare ! conatus, ut in prologo 
* Adelphorum ”’ : 


* Nam quod isti dicunt malevoli, homines nobiles 
Hunc adiutare assidueque una scribere ; 
Quod illi maledictum vehemens esse existumant, 
Eam laudem hic ducit maxumam, quom illis placet 
Qui vobis univorsis et populo placent, 
Quorum opera in bello, in otio, in negotio 

. Suo quisque tempore usus est sine superbia." 


Videtur autem se levius defendisse, quia sciebat et 
Laelio et Scipioni non ingratam esse hanc opinionem ; 
quae tamen magis et usque ad posteriora tempora 
valuit. C. Memmius in oratione pro se ait: * P. 
Africanus, qui a Terentio personam mutuatus, quae 
domi luserat ipse, nomine illius in scenam detulit." 


1 refutare, A ; the other mss. have se tutare (tutari, F). 


^ Text and meaning are uncertain. Dziatzko suggested 
submaeret (poeta) Hecyra sexta exclusa fabula. 

> The didascalia. 

¢ That is, presumably, the beginning of the play of Men- 
ander on which the Adelphoe is based. 


456 


peu LL L e 


ON POETS—TERENCE 


great admiration. Moreover, this play and the five 
others were equally pleasing to the people, although 
Vulcatius in enumerating them all, writes thus : 


“The sixth play, the * Hecyra, wil not be 
included." @ 


The “ Eunuch " was even acted twice in the same 
day and earned more money than any previous 
comedy of any writer, namely eight thousand 
sesterces ; and for this reason the sum is included 
in the title-page.^ Indeed Varro rates the beginning 
of the * Adelphoe " above £hat of Menander.* 

III. It is common gossip that Scipio and Laelius 
aided Terence in his writings, and he himself lent 
colour to this by never attempting to refute it, 
except in a half-hearted way, as in the prologue to 
the “ Adelphoe " : 


s For as to what those malicious critics say, that 
men of rank aid your poet and constantly write 
in concert with him ; what they regard as a grievous 
slander, he considers the highest praise, to please 
those who please you all and all the people, whose 
timely help everyone has used without shame in war, 
in leisure, in business." 


Now he seems to have made but a lame defence, 
because he knew that the report did not displease 
Laelius and Scipio; and it gained ground in spite 
of all and came down even to later times. Gaius 
Memmius in a speech in his own defence says: 
* Publius Africanus, who borrowed a mask from 
Terence, and put upon the stage under his 
name what he had written himself for his own 
amusement at home." Nepos says that he learned 


457 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


Nepos auctore certo comperisse se ait, C. Laelium 
quondam in Puteolano Kal. Martiis admonitum ab 
uxore. temperius ut discumberet petisse ab ea ne 
interpellaret,! seroque tandem ingressum triclinium 
dixisse, non saepe in scribendo magis sibi successisse ; 
deinde rogatum ut scripta illa proferret pronuntiasse 
versus qui sunt in * Heautontimorumeno ”’ : 


* Satis pol proterve me Syri promissa huc indu- 
xerunt." 


IV. Santra Terentium existimat, si modo in scri- 
bendo adiutoribus indigüerit, non tam Scipione et 
Laelio uti potuisse, qui tunc adulescentuli fuerunt, 
quam C. Sulpicio Gallo, homine docto et cuius con- 
sularibus? ludis initium fabularum dandarum fecerit, 
vel Q. Fabio Labeone et M. Popillio, consulari utro- 
que ac poeta ; ideo ipsum non iuvenes designare qui 
se adiuvare dicantur, sed viros “ quorum operam et 
in bello et in otio et in negotio" populus sit 
expertus. 

Post editas comoedias nondum quintum atque 
vicesimum egressus annum,* causa vitandae opinionis 
qua videbatur aliena pro suis edere, seu percipiendi 
Graecorum instituta moresque, quos non peri 
exprimeret in scriptis, egressus ê est neque perde 
rediit. De morte eius Vulcatius sic tradit : 


1 interpellaret, A ; interpolleretur, F; the other mas. have 
interpellaretur. 

? et cuius consularibus, A ; et consularibus, D ; the other 
mss. have et qui consularibus; quo consule Megalensibus, 
Ritschl. 

3 dicantur, Roth; dicuntur, A; designarentur, D; the other 
mss. have dicerentur. 

* annum animi, A ; animi causa seu, Dz. (aut, Báhrena.). 


458 


i 


»—€—LAOC OOULLL ] LA U Eo Ó(— M a PX 


ON POETS—TERENCE 


from a trustworthy source that once at his villa 
at Puteoli Gaius Laelius was urged by his wife 
to come to dinner at an earlier hour than common 
on the Kalends of March,? but begged her not to 
interrupt him. When he at last entered the dining- 
room at a late hour, he said that he had seldom 
written more to his own satisfaction; and on being 
asked to read what he had written, he declaimed 
the lines of the * Heautontimorumenos," beginning : 


* Impudently enough, by Heaven, has Syrus lured 
, me here by promises." 


IV. Santrathinks that if Terence had really needed 
help in his writing, he would not have been so 
likely to resort to Scipio and Laelius, who were then 
mere youths, as to Gaius Sulpicius Gallus, a scholarly 
man, at whose consular games he brought out his 
first play, or to Quintus Fabius Labeo and Marcus 
Popillius, both of whom were ex-consuls and poets ; 
and that it was for that reason that he spoke, not of 
** young men” who were said to help him, but “ men 


whose mettle the people had tried in war, in leisure, 


in business." 

After publishing these comedies before he had 
passed his twenty-fifth year, either to escape from 
the gossip about publishing the work of others as 
his own, or else to become versed in Greek manners 
and customs, which he felt that he had not been 
wholly successful in depicting in his plays, he left 
Rome and never returned. Of his death Vulcatius 
writes in these words: 


5 egressus urbe, Muretus ; urbem, St. 


a See note c on Vesp. xix. 1. 


459 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


* Sed ut Afer populo sex dedit comoedias, 
Iter hinc in Ásiam fecit, et! navem ut semel 
Conscendit, visus numquam est ; sic vita vacat.” 


V. Q. Cosconius redeuntem e Graecia perisse in mari 
dicit cum C. et VIII.? fabulis conversis a Menandro. 
Ceteri mortuum esse in Arcadia Stymphali? sive 
Leucadiae * tradunt Cn. Cornelio Dolabella M. Fulvio 
Nobiliore consulibus, morbo implicitum * ex dolore 
ac taedio amissarum sarcinarum,® quas in nave 
praemiserat, ac simul fabularum, quas novas fecerat. 

Fuisse dicitur mediocri statura, gracili corpore, 
colore fusco. Reliquit filiam, quae post equiti 
Romano nupsit; item hortulos XX iugerum via 
Appia ad Martis villam. Quo magis miror Porcium 
scribere : 


* Scipio nihil profuit, nihil Laelius, nihil Furius, 
Tres per id tempus qui agitabant nobiles facillime ; 
Eorum ille opera ne domum quidem habuit con- 

ducticiam, 
Saltem ut esset quo referret obitum domini ser- 
vulus.” 7 


Hunc Afranius quidem omnibus comicis praefert 
scribens in * Compitalibus ” : 


* Terenti non similem dicens quempiam.” 


1 et, added by Roth; navem autem, Ritschl. 

2 C. et VIII., omitted by Ritschl, Dz. 

5 Omitted as interpolation ‘by Ritschl, Reif. 

4 give Leucadiae, A; the other mss. have sinu Leucadiae ; 
sinu Leucadiae after mari, Dz. ; Leucadia, Erasmus. 

5 implicita ac, A ; the other mss. have implicitum acri. 

€ sarcinarum, A ; the other mss. have fabularum. 


460 


ON POETS—TERENCE 


* But when Afer had presented six comedies to 
the people, he journeyed from here to Asia, but from 
the time he embarked was never seen again; thus 
he vanished from life." 


V. Quintus Cosconius writes that he was lost at sea 
as he was returning from Greece with one hundred 
and eight plays adapted from Menander; the rest of 
our authorities declare that he died at Stymphalus 
in Arcadia, or at Leucadia, in the consulship of 
Gnaeus Cornelius Dolabella and Marcus Fulvius 
Nobilior, having fallen ill from grief and annoyance 
at the loss of his baggage, which he had sent on 
to the ship, and with it of the new plays which he 
had written. 

He is said to have been ot moderate height, 
slender and of dark complexion. He left a daughter, 
who afterwards became the wife of a Roman knight ; 
also gardens twenty acres? in extent on the Appian 
Way, near the villa of Mars. This makes me feel 
the more surprised that Porcius should write : 


* Naught availed him Scipio, naught Laelius, 
naught Furius, the three wealthiest nobles of that 
time. Their aid did not even give him a rented 
house, to provide at least a place where his slave 
might announce his master's death." 


Afranius ranks Terence above all other writers of 
comedy, writing in his ** Compitalia ” : 


* Declaring that no one is the equal of Terence.” 


7 The last two lines are regarded as an interpolation 
Ritschl, Reif. a 


@ See note on Rh. v. 


461 


159 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


Vuleatius autem non solum Naevio et Plauto et 
Caecilio, sed Licinio quoque et Atilio postponit. 
Cicero in * Limone." hactenus laudat : 


* 'Tu quoque, qui solus lecto sermone, Terenti, 
Conversum expressumque Latina voce Menandrum 
In medium nobis sedatis vocibus ! effers, 

Quiddam come loquens atque omnia dulcia dicens." 


Item C. Caesar: 


“Tu quoque, tu in summis, o dimidiate Menander, 
Poneris, et merito, puri sermonis amator. 
Lenibus atque utinam scriptis adiuncta foret vis, 
Comica ut aequato virtus polleret honore 
Cum Graecis neve? hac despectus parte iaceres ! 
Unum hoc maceror ac doleo tibi desse,? Terenti." 
1 vocibus, m88.; motibus, Ritschl. 


2 neve, Roth ; neque, mas. 
3 desse, Ritschl ; deesse, mss. (derë, A). 


a [n his celebrated ** canon,” Gell. 15. 24. 

> ** Meadow," a fanciful title for a book of miscellaneous 
contents, like the ‘‘Sylvae” of Statius, the ‘‘Pratum” of 
Suetonius, and the like. 


462 


ON POETS—TERENCE 


But Vulcatius ^ puts him not only below Naevius, 
Plautus, and Caecilius, but even below Licinius and 
Atilius. Cicero in his * Limo” ® gives him this much 
praise : 

“Thou, Terence, who alone dost reclothe Menander 
in choice speech, and rendering him into the Latin 
tongue, dost present him with thy quiet utterance ° 
on our public stage, speaking with a certain gracious- 
ness and with sweetness in every word.” 


Also Gaius Caesar : 4 


“Thou too, even thou, art ranked among the 
highest, thou half-Menander, and justly, thou lover 
of language undefiled. But would that thy graceful 
verses had force as well, so that thy comic power 
might have equal honour with that of the Greeks, 
and thou mightest not be scorned in this regard and 
neglected. It hurts and pains me, my Terence, that 
thou lackest this one quality." 

* Perhaps, ‘‘amid a hush of silence" in the audience. 


. Because of the awkwardness of voce. . . vocibus Ritschl 
^ preferred motibus (animi). 
4 Referring to Julius Caesar. " 


463 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


VITA VERGILI 


P. VEnRaiLIUs ! Mano Mantuanus parentibus modicis 
fuit ac praecipue patre, quem quidam opificem 
figulum, plures Magi cuiusdam  viatoris initio 
mercennarium, mox ob industriam generum tradi- 
derunt, egregieque substantiae silvis coemendis et 
apibus curandis auxisse reculam.? Natus est Gn. 
Pompeio Magno M. Licinio Crasso primum conss. 
Iduum Octobrium die in pago qui-Andes dicitur et 
abest a Mantua non procul  Praegnas eo? mater 
somniavit enixam se laureum ramum, quem contactu 
terrae coaluisse et excrevisse ilico in speciem 
maturae arboris refertaeque variis pomis et floribus, 
ac sequenti luce cum marito rus propinquum petens 
ex itinere devertit atque in subiecta fossa partu 
levata est. Ferunt infantem ut sit editus neque 
vagisse et adeo miti vultu fuisse, ut haud dubiam 
spem prosperioris geniturae iam tum daret. Et 
accessit aliud praesagium, siquidem virga populea 
more regionis in puerperiis eodem statim loco 
depacta ita brevi evaluit tempore, ut multo ante 
satas populos adaequavisset, quae arbor Vergilii ex 
eo dicta atque etiam consecrata est summa gravi- 

1 The mss. all. have the spelling Vergilius throughout. 

? regulam, mss. 3 eo, c; eum, G ; cum, BP 


464 


CRM. mu o ~ ama 


ON POETS—VERGIL 


THE LIFE OF VERGIL 


PunLivus Vergilius Mano, a native of Mantua, had 
parents of humble origin, especially his father, who 
according to some was a potter, although the 
general opinion is that he was at first the hired 
man of a certain Magus, an attendant on the magis- 
trates, later became his son-in-law because of his 
diligence, and greatly increased his little property 
by buying up woodlands and raising bees. He was 
born in the first consulship of Gnaeus Pompeius the 
Great and Marcus Licinius Crassus, on the Ides 
of October, in a district called Andes, not far 
distant from Mantua. While he was in his mother’s 
womb, she dreamt that she gave birth to a laurel- 
branch, which on touching the earth took root and 
grew at once to the size of a full-grown tree, covered 
with fruits and flowers of various kinds ; and on the 
following day, when she was on the way to a 
neighbouring part of the country with her husband, 
she turned aside and gave birth to her child in a 
ditch beside the road. They say that the infant 


did not cry at its birth, and had such a gentle ex-. 


pression as even then to give assurance of an un- 
usually happy destiny. There was added another 
omen ; for a poplar branch, which, as was usual in 
that region on such occasions, was at once planted 
where the birth occurred, grew so fast in a short 


time that it equalled in size poplars planted long 


before. It was called from him “ Vergil’s tree” and 
was besides worshipped with great veneration by 
465 


VOL. II. H H 


Oct. 15, 
70 B.c. 


10 


11 


12 
13 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


darum ac fetarum religione suscipientium ibi et 
solventium vota. 

Initia aetatis Cremonae egit usque ad virilem 
togam, quam XV! anno natali suo accepit iisdem 
illis consulibus iterum duobus,? quibus erat natus, 
evenitque ut eo ipso die Lucretius poeta dece- 
deret. Sed Vergilius a Cremona Mediolanum et 
inde paulo post transiit in urbem. Corpore et 
statura fuit grandi, aquilo colore, facie rusticana, 
valetudine varia; nam plerumque a stomacho et 
a faucibus ac dolore capitis laborabat, sanguinem 
etiam saepe reiecit. Cibi vinique minimi ; libidinis 
in pueros pronioris? quorum maxime dilexit Cebe- 
tem et Alexandrum, quem secunda “ Bucolicorum " 
egloga Alexim appellat, donatum sibi ab Asinio 
Pollione, utrumque non ineruditum, Cebetem vero 
et poetam. "Vulgatum est consuesse eum et cum 
Plotia Hieria. Sed Asconius Pedianus adfirmat, 
ipsam postea maiorem natu narrare solitam, invita- 
tum quidem a Vario ad communionem sui, verum 
pertinacissime recusasse. Cetera sane vitae et ore 
et animo tam probum constat, ut Neapoli Parthenias 
vulgo appellatus sit, ac si quando Romae, quo 
rarissime commeabat, viseretur in publico, sectantis 
demonstrantisque se subterfugeret* in proximum 
tectum. Bona autem cuiusdam exsulantis offerente 
Augusto non sustinuit accipere. Possedit prope 


1 XVII, BP; VII, G. 2 duobus, omitted by G. - 

? promoris, G; pronior his, BP. 

4 subter fugere, G ; subterfugere solitum, ç ; suffugere, 
BP; suffugeret, Reif. 


466 


| 


bo mm a 7 UU. ames ERI — D, a, a 


euin, Jim- > A mr 


ON POETS—VERGIL 


pregnant and newly delivered women, who made and 
paid vows beneath it. 

Vergil spent his early life at Cremona until he 
assumed the gown of manhood, upon his fifteenth 
birthday, in the consulship of the same two men 
who had been consuls the year he was born; and 
it chanced that the poet Lucretius died that very 
same day. Vergil, however, moved from Cremona 
to Mediolanum, and shortly afterwards from there 
to Rome. He was tall and of full habit, with 
a dark complexion and a rustic appearance. His 
health was variable; for he very often suffered from 
stomach and throat troubles, as well as with head- 
ache ; and he also had frequent haemorrhages. He 
ate and drank. but little. He was especially given 
to passions for boys, and his special favourites were 
Cebes and Alexander, whom he calls Alexis in the 
second poem of his “ Bucolics." This boy was given 
him by Asinius Pollio, and both his favourites had 
some education, while Cebes was even a poet. lt is 
common report that he also had an intrigue with 
Plotia Hieria. But Asconius Pedianus declares that 
she herself used to say afterwards, when she was 
getting old, that Vergil was invited by Varius to 
associate with her, but obstinately refused. Certain 
it is that for the rest of his life he was so modest in 
speech and thought, that at Naples he was commonly 
called “ Parthenias,’* and that whenever he ap- 
peared in public in Rome, where he very rarely went, 
he would take refuge in the nearest house, to avoid 
those who followed and pointed him out. Moreover, 
when Augustus offered him the property of a man 
who had been exiled, he could not make up his mind 


a « The Maiden.” 


467 
HH 2 


55 B.C 


14 


15 


16 


17 


18 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


centiens sestertium ex  liberalitatibus amicorum 
habuitque domum Romae Esquiliis iuxta hortos 
Maecenatianos, quamquam secessu Campaniae 
Siciliaeque plurimum uteretur. Parentes iam 
grandis amisit, ex quibus patrem captum oculis, 
et duos fratres germanos, Silonem inpuberem, 
Flaccum iam adultum, cuius exitum sub nomine 
Daphnidis deflet. Inter cetera studia medicinae 
quoque ac maxime mathematicae operam dedit. 
Egit et causam apud iudices unam omnino nec 
amplius quam semel; nam et in sermone tardis- 


simum eum ac paene indocto similem fuisse Melissus , 


tradidit. 

Poeticam puer adhuc auspicatus in Ballistam ludi 
magistrum ob infamiam latrociniorum coopertum 
lapidibus distichon fecit : 


* Monte sub hoc lapidum tegitur Ballista sepultus ; 
Nocte die tutum carpe, viator, iter." - 

Deinde * Catalepton"'! et * Priapea " et * Epigram- 
mata " et “ Diras," item “ Cirim " et “ Culicem," cum 
esset annorum XVI. Cuius materia talis est. Pastor 
fatigatus aestu cum sub arbore condormisset et 
serpens ad eum proreperet,? e palude culex provolavit 
atque inter duo tempora aculeum fixit pastori. At 
ille continuo culicem contrivit? et serpentem in- 


1 The mss. have catalecton. 
2 proriperet, B!P ; praereperet, G. 
3 attrivit (adt-), BP. 


468 


— 


LO —. oom O a 


ON POETS—VERGIL 


to accept it. He possessed nearly ten million ses- 
terces from the generous gifts of friends, and he had 
a house at Rome on the Esquiline, near the gardens 
of Maecenas, although he usually lived in retirement 
in Campania and in Sicily. 

He was already grown up when he lost his parents, 
of whom his father previously went blind, and two 
own brothers: Silo, who died in childhood, and 
Flaccus, who lived to grow up, and whose death he 
laments under the name of Daphnis.* 

Among other studies he gave attention also to 
medicine and in particular to mathematics. He 
pleaded one single case in court too, but no more ; 
for, as Melissus has told us, he spoke very slowly and 
almost like an uneducated man. 

He made his first attempt at poetry when he was 
still a boy, composing the following couplet on a 
schoolmaster called Ballista, who was stoned to death 
because of his evil reputation for brigandage : 


* Under this mountain of stones Ballista is covered 
and buried ; 
Wayfarer, now night and day follow your course 
without fear." 


Then he wrote the “Catalepton,” **Priapea," 
* Epigrams" and the *Dirae," as well as the 
*(Ciris" and the *Culex" when he was sixteen 
years old. The story of the * Culex " is this. When ` 
a shepherd, exhausted by the heat, had fallen asleep 
under a tree, and a snake was creeping upon him, a 
gnat flew from a marsh and stung the shepherd 
between his two temples; he at once crushed the 


a Ecl. 5. 20. 
469 


19 


21 


22 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


teremit ac sepulchrum culici statuit et distichon 
fecit : 


* Parve culex, pecudum custos tibi tale merenti 
Funeris officium vitae pro munere reddit.” 


Scripsit etiam de qua ambigitur “ Aetnam." Mox 
cum res Romanas inchoasset, offensus materia ad 
* Bucolica " transiit, maxime ut Asinium Pollionem, 
Alfenum Varum et €ornelium Gallum celebraret, 
quia in distributione agrorum, qui post Philippensem 
victoriam veteranis triumvirorum iussu trans Padum 
dividebantur, indemnem se praestitissent. Deinde 


, 


scripsit ‘“ Georgica” in honore Maecenatis, qui sibi 
mediocriter adhuc noto opem tulisset adversus 


veterani cuiusdam violentiam, a quo in altercatione 


litis agrariae paulum afuit quin occideretur. Novis- 


sime “ Aeneidem”’ inchoavit, argumentum varium ac 
multiplex et quasi amborum Homeri carminum 
instar, praeterea nominibus ac rebus Graecis Latin- 
isque commune, et in quo, quod maxime studebat, 
Romanae simul urbis et Augusti origo contineretyr. 
Cum * Georgica " scriberet, traditur cotidie meditatos 
mane plurimos versus dictare solitus ac per totum 
diem retractando ad paucissimos redigere, non 


@ Culex, 413 f. 
47° 


-mia 


— oou 5 


ON POETS—VERGIL 


gnat and killed the snake; then he made a tomb for 
the insect, inscribed with this couplet : 


«c Thee, tiny gnat, well deserving, the flock's grateful 
keeper now offers 
For the gift of his life due funeral rites in 
requital.” * 


He also wrote the * Aetna," though its authorship 
is disputed. Presently he began to write of Roman 
story, but thinking himself unequal to the subject, 
turned to the “ Bucolics," especially in order to sing 
the praises of Asinius Pollio, Alfenus Varus, and 
Cornelius Gallus, because at the time of the assignment 
of the lands beyond the Po, which were divided 
among the veterans by order of the triumvirs after 
the victory at Philippi, these men had saved him 
from ruin. Then he wrote the “Georgics” in 
honour of Maecenas, because he had rendered him 
aid, when the poet was still but little known, against 
the violence of one of the veterans, from whom 
Vergil narrowly escaped death in a quarrel about 
his farm. Last of all he began the * Aeneid," 
a varied and complicated theme, and as it were 
a mirror of both the poems of Homer; moreover 
it treated Greek and Latin personages and affairs 
in common, and contained at the same time an 
account of the origin of the city of Rome and 
of Augustus, which was the poet’s special aim. 
When he was writing the “ Georgics,” it is said to 
have been his custom to dictate each day a large 
number of verses which he had composed in the 
morning, and then to spend the rest of the day in 
reducing them to a very small number, wittily 


471 


42 B.C. 


23 


24 


26 
27 


28 
29 


30 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


absurde carmen se more ursae parere dicens et 
lambendo demum effingere. ‘ Aeneida ” prosa prius 
oratione formatam digestamque in XII libros particu- 
latim componere instituit, prout liberet quidque, et 
nihil in ordinem arripiens. Ac! ne quid impetum 
moraretur, quaedam  inperfecta transmisit, alia 
levissimis verbis veluti fulsit, quae per iocum pro tibi- 
cinibus interponi aiebat ad sustinendum opus, donec 
solidae columnae advenirent.  * Bucolica " triennio, 
* Georgica” VII, * Aeneida" XI perfecit annis. 
* Bucolica" eo successu edidit, ut in scena? quoque per 
cantores crebro pronuntiarentur. “Georgica” reverso 
post Actiacam victoriam Augusto atque Atellae 
reficiendarum faucium causa commoranti per con- 
tinuum quadriduum legit, suscipiente Maecenate 
legendi vicem, quotiens interpellaretur ipse vocis 
offensione. Pronuntiabat autem cum suavitate et? 
lenociniis miris. Ac‘* Seneca tradidit, Iulium 
Montanum poetam solitum dicere, involaturum se 
Vergilio quaedam, si et vocem posset et os et 
hypocrisin; eosdem enim versus ipso pronuntiante 
bene sonare, sine illo inanes esse mutosque. ** Aenei- 
dos" vixdum coeptae tanta exstitit fama, ut Sextus 
Propertius non dubitaverit sic praedicare : 


“ Cedite, Romani scriptores, cedite Grai : 
Nescio quid maius nascitur Iliade." 


lac, G; ut, BP. 2 scenam, BP ; sena, GŒ. 
3 suavitate et, ç; suavitate cum, BP; suavitatem, G. 
4 ac, Hagen; et, Reiff. ; ut, mas. 


m a 9. 34. 65 f. 


472 


ON POETS—VERGIL 


remarking that he fashioned his poem after the 
manner of a she-bear, and gradually licked it into 
shape. In the case of the “ Aeneid,” after writing 
a first draft in prose and dividing it into twelve 
books, he proceeded to turn into verse one part after 
another, taking them up just as he fancied, in no 
particular order. And that he might not check the 
flow of his thought, he left some things unfinished, 
and, so to speak, bolstered others up with very slight 
words, which, as he jocosely used to say, were put 
in like props, to support the structure until the solid 
columns should arrive. 

The “Bucolics” he finished in three years, the 
* Georgics" in seven, the “Aeneid” in twelve. 
The success of the “ Bucolics" on their first appear- 
ance was such, that they were even frequently 
rendered by singers on the stage. When Augustus 
was returning after his victory at Actium and 
lingered at Atella to treat his throat, Vergil read 
the * Georgics " to him for four days in succession, 
Maecenas taking his turn at the reading whenever 
the poet was interrupted by the failure of his voice. 
His own delivery, however, was sweet and wonder- 
fully effective. In fact, Seneca has said that the 
poet Julius Montanus used to declare that he would 
have purloined some of Vergils work, if he could 
also have stolen his voice, expression, and dramatic 
power; for the same verses sounded well when 
Vergil read them, which on another's lips were flat 
and toneless. Hardly was the * Aeneid" begun, 
when its repute became so great that Sextus 
Propertius ^ did not hesitate to declare: 


* Yield, ye Roman writers; yield, ye Greeks; 
A greater than the Iliad is born.” 


413 


31 


32 


33 


34 


35 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


Augustus vero—nam forte expeditione Cantabrica 
aberat—supplicibus atque etiam minacibus per iocum 
litteris efflagitaret, ut “ sibi de * Aeneide,' " ut ipsius 
verba sunt, “vel prima carminis éroypady vel quod- 
libet x@Aov mitteretur." Cui tamen multo post per- 
fectaque demum materia tres omnino libros recitavit, 
secundum, quartum et sextum, sed hunc notabili 
Octaviae adfectione, quae cum recitationi interesset, 
ad illos de filio suo versus, *tu Marcellus eris," 
defecisse fertur atque aegre focilata est. Recitavit 
et pluribus, sed neque frequenter et ea fere de quibus 
ambigebat, quo magis iudicium hominum experiretur. 
Erotem librarium et libertum eius exactae iam 
senectutis tradunt referre solitum, quondam eum in 
recitando duos dimidiatos versus complesse ex tem- 
pore. Nam cum hactenus haberet: “ Misenum 
Aeoliden”’ adiecisse: “quo non praestantior alter," 
item huic : *aere ciere viros," simili calore iactatum 
subiunxisse : * Martemque accendere cantu," statim- 
que sibi imperasse ut utrumque volumini ascriberet. 

Anno aetatis quinquagesimo secundo inpositurus 
* Aeneidi" summam manum statuit in Graeciam et 
in Asiam secedere triennioque continuo nihil amplius 
quam emendare, ut reliqua vita tantum philosophiae 
vacaret. Sed cum ingressus iter Athenis occurrisset 
Augusto ab Oriente Romam revertenti destinaretque ! 

1 destinaretque, G ; destinareque, B!P. 
? Aen. 6. 884 f. ^ Aen. 6. 164 
c Aen. 6. 165. 


474 


ON POETS—VERGIL 


Augustus indeed (for it chanced that he was away 
on his Cantabrian campaign) demanded in entreating 
and even jocosely threatening letters that Vergil 
send him * something from the * Aeneid’”’; to use 
his own words, “ either the first draft of the poem or 
any section of it that he pleased.” But it was not 
until long afterwards, when the material was at last 
in shape, that Vergil read to him three books in all, 
the second, fourth, and sixth. The last of these 
produced a remarkable effect on Octavia, who was 
present at the reading ; for it is said that when he 
reached the verses about her son, * Thou shalt be 
Marcellus," she fainted and was with difficulty 
revived. He gave readings also to various others, 
but never before a large company, selecting for the 
most part passages about which he was in doubt, in 
order to get the benefit of criticism. They say that 
Eros, his amanuensis and freedman, used to report, 
when he was an old man, that Vergil once completed 
two half-verses off-hand in the course of a reading. 
For having before him merely the words * Misenum 
Aeoliden," he added “ quo non praestantior alter,” ^ 
and again to * aere ciere viros" he joined ** Martem- 
que accendere cantu," * thrown off with like inspira- 
tion, and he immediately ordered Eros to add both 
half-lines to his manuscript. 

]n the fifty-second.year of his age, wishing to give 
the final touch to the * Aeneid," he determined to 
go away to Greece and Asia, and after devoting 
three entire years to the sole work of improving his 
poem, to give up the rest of his life wholly to 
philosophy. But having begun his journey, and 
at Athens meeting Augustus, who was on his way 
back to Rome from the Orient, he resolved not to part 


415 


37 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


non absistere atque etiam una redire, dum Megara 
vicinum oppidum ferventissimo sole cognoscit, lan- 
guorem nactus est eumque non intermissa naviga- 
tione auxit ita ut gravior! aliquanto Brundisium 
appelleret, ubi diebus paucis obiit XI Kal. Octobr. 
Cn. Sentio Q. Lucretio conss. Ossa eius Neapolim 
translata sunt tumuloque condita qui est via Puteo- 
lana intra lapidem secundum, in quo distichon fecit 
tale: 
* Mantua me genuit, Calabri rapuere, tenet nunc 
Parthenope ; cecini pascua rura duces." 


Heredes fecit ex dimidia parte Valerium Proculum 
fratrem alio patre, ex quarta Augustum, ex duo- 
decima Maecenatem, ex reliqua L. Varium et Plotium 


, 


Tuccam, qui eius * Aeneida" post obitum iussu 
Caesaris emendaverunt. De qua re Sulpicii Cartba- 


giniensis exstant huiusmodi versus : 


* Tusserat haec rapidis aboleri carmina flammis 
Vergilius, Phrygium quae cecinere ducem. 
Tucca vetat Variusque ; simul tu, maxime Caesar, 
Non sinis et Latiae consulis historiae. 
Infelix gemino cecidit prope Pergamon igni, 
Et paene est alio Troia cremata ? rogo." 
1 gravior, mss.; aegrior, Hagen. 
? cremata sepulta, G ; sepulta, Hagen. 
476 


ON POETS—VERGIL 


from the emperor and even to return with him; but 
in the course of a visit to the neighbouring town of 
Megara in avery hot sun, he was taken with a fever, 
and added to his disorder by continuing his journey ; 
hence on his arrival at Brundisium he was con- 
siderably worse, and died there on the eleventh day 
before the Kalends of October, in the consulship of 
Gnaeus Sentius and Quintus Lucretius. His ashes 
were taken to Naples and laid to rest on the via 
Puteolana less than two miles from the city, in a 
tomb for which he himself composed this couplet : 


<< Mantua gave me the light, Calabria slew me; now 
holds me 
Parthenope. 1 have sung shepherds, the 
country, and wars." 


He named as his heirs Valerius Proculus, his half- 
brother, to one-half of his estate, Augustus to one- 
fourth, Maecenas to one-twelfth ; the rest he left to 
Lucius Varius and Plotius Tucca, who revised the 
* Aeneid" after his death by order of Augustus. 


Sept. 21, 
19 B.c. 


With regard to this matter we have the following 


verses of Sulpicius of Carthage : 


* Vergil had bidden these songs by swift flame be 
turned into ashes, 
Songs which sang of thy fates, Phrygia's leader 
renowned. 
Varius and Tucca forbade, and thou, too, greatest 
of Caesars, 
Adding your veto to theirs, Latium's story 
preserved. 
All but twice in the flames unhappy Pergamum 
perished 
Troy on a second pyre narrowly failed of her 
doom." 


477 


39 


40 


41 


42 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


Egerat cum Vario, priusquam Italia decederet, ut 
siquid sibi accidisset, * Aeneida’’ combureret ; at is! 
ita facturum se pernegarat; igitur in extrema vale- 
tudine assidue scrinia desideravit, crematurus ipse; 
verum nemine offerente nihil quidem nominatim de 
ea cavit. Ceterum eidem Vario ac simul Tuccae 
scripta sua sub ea condicione legavit, ne quid 
ederent, quod non a se editum esset. Edidit autem 
auctore Augusto Varius, sed summatim emendata, ut 
qui versus etiam inperfectos sicut? erant reliquerit ; 
quos multi mox supplere conati non perinde valuerunt 
ob difficultatem, quod omnia fere apud eum hemi- 
stichia absoluto perfectoque sunt sensu, praeter illud: 
* quem tibi iam Troia." Nisus grammaticus audisse 
se a senioribus aiebat, Varium duorum librorum 
ordinem commutasse, et qui tunc secundus esset? in 
tertium locum transtulisse, etiam primi libri correxisse 
principium, his versibus demptis: 


* [Ille ego qui quondam gracili modulatus avena 
Carmina et egressus silvis vicina coegi, 
Ut quamvis avido parerent arva colono, 
Gratum opus agricolis, at nunc horrentia Martis— 
Arma virumque cano." 


1 at is, Hagen; sed is, Reif.; et is, BP; omitted (Italia 
. . at is) by G. 

? sicut, Gronov.; si qui, mss. 

3 tunc... esset, Hagen; nunc... sit, mss. 


^ Cf. Aug. ci. 3. 

> Aen. 3. 340. This is no real exception, for we probably 
have the line as Vergil intended to leave it. Andromache 
purposely avoids naming the amissae parentis (341). 


478 


\ 
\ 
i 


- ON POETS—VERGIL 


He had arranged with Varius, before leaving Italy, 
that if anything befell him ^ his friend should burn 
the * Aeneid " ; but Varius had emphatically declared 
that he would do no such thing. Therefore in his 
mortal illness Vergil constantly called for his book- 
boxes, intending to burn the poem himself; but 
when no one brought them to him, he made no 
specific request about the matter, but left his writ- 
ings jointly to the above mentioned Varius and to 
Tucca, with the stipulation that they should publish 
nothing which he himself would not have given to 
the world. However, Varius published the * Aeneid" 
at Augustus’ request, making only a few slight cor- 
rections, and even leaving the incomplete lines just 
as they were. These last many afterwards tried to 
finish, but failed owing to the difficulty that nearly 
all the half-lines in Vergil are complete in sense and 
meaning, the sole exception being * Quem tibi iam 
Troia." ^ The grammarian Nisus used to say that he 
had heard from older men that Varius changed the 
order of two of the books and made what was then the 
second book the third; also that he emended the 
beginning of the first book by striking out the 
lines: 


* [ who on slender reed once rustic numbers did 

render, 

Parting then from the groves, commanded the 
neighbouring fallows 

Tribute to pay to their lords, however much they 
exacted, 

Task hailed with joy by the hind ; but now dread 
deeds of the war-god, 

Arms and the hero I sing." 


479 


43 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


Obtrectatores Vergilio numquam defuerunt, nec 
mirum ; nam nec Homero quidem. Prolatis “ Buco- 
licis" Numitorius quidam rescripsit * Antibucolica,” 


duas modo eglogas, sed  insulsissime aapwdyjcas 
quarum prioris initium est: 


45 


* Tityre, si toga calda tibi est, quo tegmine fagi ? ” 
sequentis : 


“Dic mihi Damoeta:  *cuium pecus’? anne 
Latinum ? 
Non. Verum Aegonis nostri, sic rure locuntur.” 


? 


Alius recitante eo ex “ Georgicis " : * nudus ara, sere 
nudus " subiecit: * habebis frigore febrem.” Est et 
adversus * Aeneida’’ liber Carvili Pictoris, titulo 
* Aeneomastix." M. Vipsanius a Maecenate eum 
suppositum appellabat novae cacozeliae repertore, 
non tumidae nec exilis, sed ex communibus verbis, 
atque ideo latentis. Herennius .tantum vitia eius, 
Perellius Faustus furta contraxit. Sed et Q. Octavi 
Aviti '"Opotor:jrov octo volumina quos et unde versus 
transtulerit continent. ^ Asconius Pedianus libro, 
quem “Contra obtrectatores Vergilii " scripsit, pauca 
admodum obiecta ei proponit eaque circa historiam 
fere et quod pleraque ab Homero sumpsisset ; sed 


a ** Plough naked, naked sow.” 

> ** A chill will give you the fever.” 
¢ The scourge of Aeneas. 

4 See Aug. Ixxxvi. 2. 


480 


ON POETS—VERGIL 


Vergil never lacked detractors, which is not strange; 
for neither did Homer. When the * Bucolics " ap- 
peared, a certain Numitorius wrote “ Anti-bucolics,”’ 
consisting of but two poems, which were a very 
insipid parody. The first began as follows: 


s Tityrus, if a warm toga you have, why then a 
beech mantle?" - 


The second :— 


* Tell me, Damoetas, I pray, is * cuium pecus’ really 
, good Latin? 
Nay, but our Aegon’s way, and thus men talk in 
the country." 


Another man, when Vergil recited from his 
* Georgics," * nudus ara, sere nudus,"^ added 
* habebis frigore febrem." ^ "There is also a book in 
criticism of the * Aeneid " by Carvilius Pictor, called 
* Aeneomastix." ^ Marcus Vipsanius called Vergil a 
supposititious child of Maecenas, that inventor of a 
new kind of affected language, neither bombastic 
nor of studied simplicity, but in ordinary words and 
hence less obvious. Herennius made selections 
confined to his defects, and Perellius Fausta to his 
pilferings. More than that, the eight volumes of » 
Quintus Octavius Avitus, entitled * Resemblances,”’ 
contain the verses which he borrowed, with their 
sources. Asconius Pedianus, in a book which he 
wrote “ Against the Detractors of Vergil," sets forth 
. a very few of the charges against him, and those for 
the most part dealing with history and with the 
accusation that he borrowed a great deal from 
Homer; but he says that Vergil used to meet this 


481 
VOL. II. ^ LI 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


hoc ipsum crimen sic defendere adsuetum ait: cur 
non ili quoque eadem furta temptarent? "Verum 
intellecturos facilius esse Herculi clavam quam 
Homero versum subripere. Et tamen destinasse 
secedere ut omnia ad satietatem malevolorum 
decideret. 


482 


ON POETS—VERGIL 


latter accusation with these word: * Why don’t my 
critics also attempt the same thefts? If they do, 
they will realize that it is easier to filch his club 
from Hercules than a line from Homer." Yet 
Asconius says that Vergil had intended to go into 
retirement, in order to prune down everything to the 
satisfaction of carping critics. 


483 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


VITA HORATI 


Q. Horatius FrAccus, Venusinus, patre ut ipse 
tradit libertino et exactionum coactore (ut vero! 
creditum est salsamentario, cum illi quidam in alter- 
catione exprobrasset?: * Quotiens ego vidi patrem 
tuum brachio se emungentem ! ") bello Philippensi 
excitus a Marco Bruto imperatore, tribunus militum 
meruit; victisque partibus venia impetrata scriptum 
quaestorium comparavit. Ac primo Maecenati, mox 
Augusto insinuatus non mediocrem in amborum 
amicitia locum tenuit. Maecenas quantopere eum 
dilexerit ? satis testatur * illo epigrammate : 


* Ni te visceribus meis, Horati, 
Plus iam diligo, tu tuum sodalem 


Ninnio ô videas strigosiorem " ; 


sed multo magis extremis iudiciis tali ad Augustum 

elogio : * Horati Flacci ut mei esto memor ” ! 
Augustus? epistolarum quoque ei officium optulit, 

ut? hoc ad Maecenatem scripto significat: ** Ante 


1 vero, Muretus ; vere, mss. ; fere, Casaubon. 

2 exprobasset, FA. 

3 dilexerit, - ; the other mss. have dilexit. 

4 testatur, FAp; monstratur, V. 

5 nimio, mss. (ninio, $); Ninnio, P. Pithoeus ; hinnulo, 
Oudendorp ; hinno me, Lambinus ; simio, Sudhaus. 

5 Augustus... Caesar (p. 488, l. 8) omitted in ç. 

7 ut, added by Lambinus. 


484 


ON POETS—HORACE 


LIFE OF HORACE 


Quintus Horatius FLAccus of Venusia had for a 
father, as he himself writes, a freedman who was a 
collector of money at auctions; but it is believed 
that he was a dealer in salted provisions, for a 
certain man in a quarrel thus taunted Horace: 
* How often have I seen your father wiping his nose 
with his arm!" Horace served as tribune of the 
soldiers in the war of Philippi, at the instance of 
Marcus Brutus, one of the leaders in that war. 
When his party was vanquished, he was pardoned 
and purchased the position of a quaestor's clerk. 
_ Then contriving to win the favour, first of Maecenas 
and later of Augustus, he held a prominent place 
among the friends of both. How fond Maecenas 
was of him is evident enough from the well known 


epigram: 
* [f that I do not love you, my own Horace, more 


than life itself, behold your comrade leaner than 
Ninnius." * 


But he expressed himself much more strongly in 
his last will and testament in this brief remark 
to Augustus: “Be as mindful of Horatius Flaccus - 
as of myself" Augustus offered him the post 
of secretary, as appears in this letter of his to 
Maecenas: “Before this I was able to write my 


^ Ninnius is unknown, but if the reading be correct, he 
was notorious for his leanness ; cf. Telegenius, Claud. xl. 3. 


485 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


ipse sufficiebam scribendis epistulis amicorum, nunc 
occupatissimus et infirmus Horatium nostrum a! te 
cupio abducere. Veniet ergo ab ista parasitica 
mensa ad hanc regiam, et nos in epistulis scribendis 
iuvabit." Ac ne recusanti quidem aut suscensuit 
quicquam aut amicitiam suam ingerere desiit. Exstant 
epistulae, e quibus argumenti gratia pauca subieci: 
* Sume tibi aliquid iuris apud me, tamquam si con- 
victor mihi fueris; recte enim et non temere feceris, 
quoniam id usus mihi tecum esse volui, si per vali- 
tudinem tuam fieri possit." Et rursus: * Tui qualem 
habeam memoriam, poteris ex Septimio quoque 
nostro audire ; nam incidit ut illo coram fieret a me 
tui mentio. Neque enim si tu superbus amicitiam 
nostram sprevisti, ideo nos quoque davOvrepyndavoi- 
pev. ? Praeterea saepe eum inter alios iocos “ puris- 
simum penem"? et * homuncionem lepidissimum " 
appellat, unaque et altera liberalitate locupletavit. 
Scripta quidem eius usque adeo probavit mansuraque 
perpetuo * opinatus est, ut non modo Saeculare car- 
men componendum iniunxerit sed et Vindelicam 
victoriam Tiberii Drusique, privignorum suorum, 
eumque coegerit propter hoc tribus Carminum libris 
ex longo intervallo quartum addere ; post Sermones 
vero quosdam lectos nullam sui mentionem habitam 
ita sit questus: *Irasci me tibi scito, quod non in 
1 Q9 added by Nannius. 2 Casaubon. 


, penem, Muretus ; pene, mss. 
4 perpetuo, V ; the other mas. have perpetua. 


a It seems probable that there is a word-play on the 
double sense of rex, ‘‘king” and ‘‘ wealthy patron," since 
Augustus would hardly use regiam literally of his table. 
The meaning would then be ‘‘let the parasite change tables 
(and patrons)." 

> See Th. Birt, Müller's Handbuch, 1*. 3. 166. 


486 


| 


ON POETS—HORACE 


letters to my friends with my own hand; now over- 
whelmed with work and in poor health, I desire to 
take our friend Horace from you. He will come 
then from that parasitic table of yours to my 
imperial board, and help me write my letters." * 
Even when Horace declined, Augustus showed no 
resentment at all, and did not cease his efforts to 
gain his friendship. We have letters from which I 
. append a few extracts by way of proof: “Enjoy any 
privilege at my house, as if you were making your 
home there; for it will be quite right and proper 
for you to do so, inasmuch as that was the relation 
which I wished to have with you, if your health had 
permitted." And again, * How mindful I am of you 
our friend Septimius can also tell you; for it chanced 
that I spoke of you in his presence. Even if you 
were so proud as to scorn my friendship, I do not 
therefore return your disdain." Besides this, among 
other pleasantries, he often calls him “a most. im- 
maculate libertine " è and “his charming little man," 
and he made him well to do by more than one act of 


generosity. As to his writings, Augustus rated them | 


so high, and was so convinced that they would be : 
immortal, that he not only appointed him to write ; 


the Secular Hymn, but also bade him celebrate . 
the victory of his stepsons Tiberius and Drusus over . 
the Vindelici, and so compelled him to add a fourth . 
to his three books of lyrics after a long silence... 


Furthermore, after reading several of his “ Talks,” c 
the Emperor thus expressed his pique that no men- 
tion was made of him: * You must know that I am 


© Sermones was apparently the title which Horace gave his 
€‘ Satires” ; the term saturae is broader and covers the 
Epistles as well; see p. 488 and note b. 


487 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


plerisque eius modi scriptis mecum potissimum 
loquaris; an vereris ne apud posteros infame tibi sit, 
quod videaris familiaris nobis esse?” Expressitque 
eclogam ad se, cuius initium est: 


* Cum tot sustineas et tanta negotia solus, 
Res Italas armis tuteris, moribus ornes, 
Legibus emendes : in publica commoda peccem, 
Si longo sermone morer tua tempora, Caesar." 


Habitu corporis fuit brevis atque obesus, qualis et 
a semet ipso in saturis describitur et ab Augusto hac 
epistula : ** Pertulit ad me Onysius libellum tuum, 
quem ego ut excusantem,! quantuluscumque est, boni 
consulo. Vereri autem mibi videris ne maiores libelli 
tui sint, quam ipse es; sed tibi statura deest, cor- 
pusculum non deest. Itaque licebit in sextariolo 
scribas, ut circuitus voluminis tui sit óyxwÓéoraros, 
sicut est ventriculi tui.” — 

Ad res Venerias intemperantior traditur ; nam 
speculato cubiculo scorta dicitur habuisse disposita, 
ut quocumque respexisset ibi ei imago coitus re- 
ferretur. Vixit plurimum in secessu ruris sui Sabini 
aut Tiburtini, domusque eius? ostenditur circa 
Tiburni luculum. * « « «? Venerunt in manus meas 
et elegi sub titulo eius et epistula prosa oratione quasi 
commendantis se Maecenati, sed utraque falsa puto; 
nam elegi vulgares, epistula etiam obscura, quo vitio 
minime tenebatur. 

1 accusantem, mss.; excusantem, Rezff.; ut accusem te, 
Bentley. 

2 eius, V ; the other qnss. omit. 


3 O. Jahn indicated a lacuna; there ts no mention of 
Horace’s genuine works. 


a Epist. 2. 1. 1 ff. 
> Epist. 1. 4. 15; 1. 20. 24; see note on p. 487. 


488 


» duum MER , CSS 


| 
| 
| 


M 


ON POETS—HORACE 


not pleased with you, that in your numerous writings 
of this kind you do not talk with me, rather than 
with others. Are you afraid that your reputation 
with posterity will suffer because it appears that you, 
were my friend?" In this way he forced from 
Horace the selection which begins with these words : 


* Seeing that single-handed thou dost bear the bur- 
den of tasks so many and so great, protecting Italy's 
realm with arms, providing it with morals, reforming 
it by laws, I should sin against the public weal, 
Caesar, if I wasted thy time with long discourse.” 4 


In person he was short and fat, as he is described . 
with his own pen in his satires® and by Augustus 
in the following letter: “ Onysius has brought me 
your little volume, and I accept it, small as it is, in 
good part, as an apology. But you seem to me to be 
afraid that your books may be bigger than you are 
yourself; but it is only stature that you lack, not 
girth. So you may write on a pint pot, that the 
circumference of your volume may be well rounded 
out, like that of your own belly.” | 

It is said that he was immoderately lustful; for it 
is reported that in a room lined with mirrors he had 
harlots so arranged that whichever way he looked, 
he saw a reflection of venery. He lived for the most 
part in the country on his Sabine or Tiburtine estate, 
and his house is pointed out near the little grove of 
Tiburnus. I possess some elegies attributed to his 
pen and aletter in prose, supposed to be a recom- 
mendation of himself to Maecenas, but I think that 
both are spurious; for the elegies are commonplace 
and the letter is besides obscure, which was by no 
means one of his faults. 


489 


. x 


y 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


Natus est VI Idus Decembris L. Cotta et ‘L. 
Torquato consulibus, decessit V Kl. Decembris C. 
, Marcio! Censorino et C. Asinio Gallo consulibus post 
nenum et quinquagesimum diem quam Maecenas 


” obierat, aetatis agens septimum et quinquagesimum 2 


annum, herede Augusto palam nuncupato, cum 
urgente vi valitudinis non sufficeret ad obsignandas 
testamenti tabulas. Humatus et conditus est ex- 
tremis Esquiliis iuxta Maecenatis tumulum. 


1 Marcio, Bongars; mario, mas. 


2 diem . . . quinquagesimum, supplied by Vahlen; see 
Hermes, 33. 245. 


490 


- abe T 


w 


A— € y m [ 20 


a—— LM 


—e ~ — a - 


ON POETS — HORACE 


He was born on the sixth day before the Ides of 
December in the consulate of Lucius Cotta and 


Lucius Torquatus, and died on the fifth day before © =° 


the Kalends of the same month in the consulship of 
Gaius Marcius Censorinus and Gaius Asinius Gallus, 
fifty-nine days after the death of Maecenas, in his 
fifty-seventh year. He named Augustus as his heir 
by word of mouth, since he could not make and sign 
a will because of the sudden violence of his ailment. 
He was buried and laid to rest near the tomb of 


Maecenas on the farther part of the Esquiline 


Hill. 


491 


Nov. 27, 
8 B.C. 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


VITA TIBULLI 


* Te quoque Vergilio comitem non aequa, Tibulle, 
Mors iuvenem campos misit ad Elysios, 
Ne foret, aut elegis molles qui fleret amores 
Aut caneret forti regia bella pede." 


Albius Tibullus eques Romanus, insignis forma 
cultuque corporis observabilis, ante alios Corvinum 
Messalam oratorem ? dilexit, cuius etiam contuber- 
nalis Aquitanico bello militaribus donis donatus est. 
Hic multorum iudicio principem inter elegiographos 
obtinet locum. Epistolae quoque eius amatoriae, 
quamquam breves, omnino utiles sunt. Obiit adu- 
lescens, ut indicat epigramma supra scriptum. 


1 eques Romanus, y ; eques Regalis, A ; eques R(omanus) 
e Gabiis Bahrens. 
2 oratorem, y ; originem, A. 


492 


| ‘ ON POETS—TIBULLUS 
| 


THE LIFE OF TIBULLUS 


* Tuere too, Tibullus, companion of Vergil, envious 
death sent in youth to the Elysian fields, that there 
might be no one to mourn tender loves in elegy, or 
sing the wars of kings in heroic verse.” ^ 


L] 


| Albius Tibullus, a Roman knight, remarkable for 
his good looks and conspicuous for his personal 
( elegance, was devoted above all others to Messala 
{ Corvinus. He was his tent companion ? in the war 
| in Aquitania ^ and was given military prizes. In the 
į judgment of many men he holds the first place 
l among writers of elegy. His amatory letters, too, 
-| though short are very useful* He died in youth, as 


. is indicated by the epigram written above. 


a Written by Domitius Marsus. > Cf. Jul. ii. 

* Messala was sent to Aquitania soon after the battle of 
Actium (App. B.C. 4. 38) ; he celebrated his triumph in 27. 

4 See Aug. xxv. 3. 

* This is quite meaningless, so far as anything we know 
of Tibullus is concerned. | 


— SS. |) oe 


493 


80-27 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


e 


VITA AULI PERSI FLACCI 


AuLus Persius FLAccus natus est pridie Nonas 
Decembris Fabio Persico L. Vitellio coss., decessit 
VII] Kalendas Decembris P.! Mario Afinio? Gallo 
COSS. 

Natus in Etruria Volaterris, eques Romanus, 
sanguine et affinitate primi ordinis viris coniunctus. 
Decessit ad octavum miliarium via Appia in praediis 
suis. | 

Pater eum Flaccus pupillum reliquit moriens 
annorum fere sex. Fulvia Sisennia mater eius? 
nupsit postea Fusio* equiti Romano et eum quoque 
extulit intra paucos annos. 

Studuit Flaccus usque ad annum XII aetatis suae 
Volaterris, inde Romae apud grammaticum Remmium 
Palaemonem et apud rhetorem Verginium Flavum. 

Cum esset annorum XVI, amicitia coepit uti 
Annaei Cornuti ita ut nusquam ab eo discederet; a 
quo inductus aliquatenus in philosophiam est. 

Amicos habuit a prima adulescentia Caesium 
Bassum poetam et Calpurnium Staturam, qui vivo eo 
iuvenis decessit. Coluit ut^ patrem Servilium 
Nonianum. Cognovit per Cornutum etiam Ánnaeum 

1 Publio, Lipsius ; rubio or rubrio, mas. 

2 Asinio, mss.; cf. Tac. Ann. 14. 48. 


* mater eius, omitted by some mas. 
* Fuscio or Ruscio, mas. 5 ut, omitted by the mss. 


494 


+ 


c-r teres — -— — M —— ———— Sae S, Carm 


ON POETS—PERSIUS 


THE LIFE OF AULUS PERSIUS 
FLACCUS 


AuLus Persius FLAccus was born the day before 
the Nones of December in the consulship of Fabius 
Persicus and Lucius Vitellius, and died on the 
eighth day before the Kalends of December, when 


> Publius Marius and Afinius Gallus were consuls. He 


was born at Volaterrae in Etruria, was à Roman 
knight, but was connected by blood and by marriage 
with men of the senatorial order. He died on his 
estate near the eighth milestone of the Appian Way. 

His father Flaccus died when his son was about 
six years old, leaving him to the care of a guardian. 
His mother, Fulvia Sisennia, afterwards married a 
Roman knight named Fusius, but buried him also 
within a few years. 

Flaccus studied until the twelfth year of his age 
at Volaterrae, and then at Rome with the gram- 
marian Remmius Palaemon® and the rhetorician 
Verginius Flavus. When he was sixteen years old 
he became so intimate a friend of Annaeus Cornutus 
that he never left his side ; and from him he obtained 
some knowledge of philosophy. 

From early youth he enjoyed the friendship of 
Caesius Bassus, the poet, and of Calpurnius Statura, 
who died in youth, while Persius still lived. Servi- 


lius Nonianus he revered as a father. Through. 


Cornutus he came to know Annaeus Lucanus also, a 


4 See Gr. xxiii. 


495 


4 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


Lucanum aequaevum auditorem Cornuti! Lucanus 
mirabatur adeo scripta Flacci, ut vix se retineret 
recitante eo de more quin illa esse vera poemata, 
sua ludos diceret. Sero cognovit et Senecam, sed 
non ut caperetur eius ingenio. Usus est apud 
Cornutum duorum convictu doctissimorum et 
sanctissimorum virorum acriter tunc philosophan- 
tium, Claudi Agathurni medici Lacedaemonii et 
Petroni Aristocratis Magnetis, quos unice miratus 
est et aemulatus, cum aequales essent Cornuti, minor 
esset ipse.? 

Idem decem fere annis summe dilectus a Paeto 
Thrasea est ita ut peregrinaretur quoque cum eo 
aliquando, cognatam eius Árriam uxorem habente. 

Fuit morum lenissimorum, verecundiae virginalis, 
formae pulchrae, pietatis erga matrem et sororem et 
amitam exemplo sufficientis. 

Fuit frugi, pudicus. 

Reliquit circa HS viciens matri et sorori scriptis 
tantum ad matrem codicillis. Cornuto rogavit ut 
daret sestertia, ut quidam dicunt, C, ut alii, L et 
argenti facti pondo viginti et libros circa septingentos 
Chrysippi sive bibliothecam suam omnem. Verum 
a Cornuto sublatis libris pecunia sororibus, quas 
heredes frater fecerat, relicta est.* 


1 After Cornuti the mss. have Nam Cornutus illo tempore 
pu icus (grammaticus, Martinius) sectae Por ae (stoicae, 
thoeus), qui libros philosophiae reliquit. Sed. 
Pa suo ludo faceret, mss. 
3 . minores pes, mss. ; minor esset ipse, Owen. 
* pecuniam . . . reliquit et, mss. 


496 


ON POETS—PERSIUS 


pupil of Cornutus and of the same age as himself. 
Lucan so admired the writings of Flaccus, that when 
the author read them in the usual way,* he could 
hardly wait until he finished before saying that they 
were true poems, and his own mere child's play. 
Towards the end of his life he made the acquaintance 
also of Seneca, but was not impressed by his talents. 

At the house of Cornutus he enjoyed the society 
of two learned and venerable men, who were then 
eagerly pursuing philosophical studies: Claudius 
Agathernus, a physician of Lacedaemon, and Petro- 
nius Aristocrates of Magnesia, whom he admired 
exceedingly and emulated, although they were of 
the same age as Cornutus, while he was a younger 
man. He was also for nearly ten years so great a 
favourite of Paetus Thrasea that he sometimes even 
travelled abroad with him ; and Paetus's wife, Arria, 
was a relative of his. 

He was very gentle in manner, of virginal modesty 
and very handsome; and he showed an exemplary 
devotion to his mother, sister, and aunt. 

He was good and pure. 

He left about two million sesterces to his mother 
and sister, and a letter addressed only to his mother. 
He requested her to give Cornutus a hundred 
thousand, as some say, or according to others, fifty 


. thousand sesterces, and twenty pounds of silver plate, 


besides about seven hundred volumes of Chrysippus, 
or his entire library. But Cornutus, while accepting 
the books, turned over the money to the sisters? 
whom their brother had made his heirs. 

.* That is, gave a public reading. 


è There is clearly something wrong here; elsewhere but 
one sister is mentioned. 


497 
VOL. U. K K 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


Scriptitavit et raro et tarde. Hunc ipsum librum 
imperfectum reliquit. Versus aliqui dempti! sunt 
ultimo libro, ut quasi finitus esset. Leviter correxit ? 
Cornutus et Caesio Basso petenti, ut ipse ederet, 
tradidit edendum. 

Scripserat in pueritia Flaccus etiam praetextam et 
hodoeporicon librum unum et paucos in socrum? 
Thraseae* versus, quae se ante virum occiderat. 
Omnia ea auctor fuit Cornutus matri eius ut 
aboleret. 

Editum librum continuo mirari homines et diripere 
coeperunt. 

Decessit autem vitio stomachi anno aetatis XXX. 

Sed mox ut a schola magistrisque devertit, lecto 
Lucili libro decimo vehementer saturas componere 
studuit. Cuius libri principium imitatus est sibi 
primo, mox omnibus detrectaturus cum tanta recen- 
tium poetarum et oratorum insectatione, ut etiam 
Neronem principem illius temporis inculpaverit. 
Cuius versus in Neronem cum ita se haberet “auri- 
culas asini Mida rex habet," in eum modum a 
Cornuto ipso tantum nomine mutato est emendatus 
* auriculas asini quis non habet ? " ne hoc in se Nero 
dictum arbitraretur. 


1 Owen suggests additi. 

2 correxit, Laurentianus; contraxit or recitavit, mss. 
3 in socrum, Casaubon ; sororum, mas. 

4 After Thraseae the mss. have in Arriam matrem. 


498 


ON POETS—PERSIUS 


He wrote rarely and slowly. This very volume 4 
he left unfinished, and some verses were taken from 
the last book, that it might have the appearance of 
completion. Cornutus made some slight corrections, 
and on the request of Caesius Bassus that he might 
publish it, turned it over to him for that purpose. 

In his boyhood Flaccus had written a praetexta," 
one book describing his travels, and a few verses on 
the mother-in-law of Thrasea,’ who had killed herself 
before her husband. All these Cornutus advised the 
poet's mother to destroy. 

As soon as his book appeared, men began to 
admire it and to buy it up rapidly. 

He died of a stomach trouble in the thirtieth year 
of his age. As soon as he left school and his 
teachers, he conceived a strong desire to write 
satires from reading the tenth book of Lucilius. 
The beginning of this he imitated with the intention 
at first of criticizing himself; but presently turning 
to general criticism, he so assailed the poets and 
orators of his day, that he even attacked Nero, who 
was at that time emperor. His verse on Nero read 
as follows: “King Midas has ass's ears," but 
Cornutus by merely changing the name, and writing 
* Who has not an ass's ears? ” so altered it that Nero 
might not think that it was said of him. 

a Thecollection of six satires, for which this Life was used 
as an introduction. > A Roman tragedy. 

* The elder Arria. 


4 Text and meaning are uncertain; see Marx, Yarn 
2, p. 145. 


499 


t 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


VITA LUCANI 


M. Annaeus Lucanus Corpusensis! prima ingenii 
experimenta in * Neronis laudibus " dedit quinquen- 
nali certamine, dein? “Civile Bellum," quod a3 
Pompeio et Caesare gestum est, recitavit, ut praefa- 
tione quadam aetatem et initia sua cum Vergilio 
comparans ausus sit dicere : 


* et quantum mihi restat 
Ad Culicem ? " | 


Hic initio adolescentiae, cum ob infestum matrimo- 
nium patrem suum ruri agere longissime cognovisset 
* æ # Revocatus Athenis a Nerone cohortique ami- 
corum additus atque etiam quaestura honoratüs, non 
tamen permansit in gratia. Siquidem aegre ferens, 
recitante? se subito ac nulla nisi refrigerandi sui 
causa indicto senatu recessisse,? neque verbis adver- 
sus principem neque factis exstantibus? post haec 
temperavit, adeo ut quondam in latrinis publicis 


1 M.... Cordubensis, MB ; omitted by P. 

2 Hosius indicates a lacuna after dein. 

3 a, Baumgarten-Crusius; cum, mss. - 

* Hosius indicates a lacuna after recitavit ; the codex 
Berolinensis, 35 has sub tantae levitatis et immoderatae 
linguae fuit. 

5 Reif. and Hosius insert quod Nero se before recitante. 

6 recessisset, M P (Reiff., Hosius). 

7 exstantibus, M ; excitantibus, Jahn, Hosius. 


500 


US. aD QA eee ———À— Ate € (D a eee ee 


ON POETS—LUCAN 


"THE LIFE OF LUCAN 


Marcus Annaeus Lucanus of Corduba made his 
first appearance as a poet with a * Eulogy of Nero" 
at the emperor's Quinquennial Contests," and then 
gave a public reading of his poem on the * Civil 
War" waged between Pompey and Caesar. In a 
kind of introduction to the latter, comparing his 
time of life and his first essays with those of Vergil, 
he had the audacity to ask : 


* How far, pray, do I fall short of the Culex?” ? 


In his early youth, learning that his father was 
living in the remote country districts because of an 
unhappy marriage. . . . He was recalled from 
Athens by Nero and made one of his intimaté 
friends, besides being honoured with the quaestor- 
ship; but he could not keep the emperor's favour. 
For piqued because Nero had suddenly called a 
meeting of the senate and gone out when he was 
giving a reading, with no other motive than to throw 
cold water on the performance, he afterwards did 
not refrain from words and acts of hostility to the 
prince, which are still notorious. Once for example 
in a public privy, when he relieved his bowels with 


a See Nero, xii. 3. 

è Or perhaps, ** How much younger am I than the author 
of the Culex?” Lucan compares his great epic, written at 
an earlier age, with Vergil's early work. Cf. Stat. Silv. 
2. 7. 73, haec (=Pharsaliam) primo iuvenis canes sub aevo, 
Ante annos culicis Maroman. * Cf. Claud. xli. 1. 


50I 


THE LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN 


clariore cum strepitu! ventris emissi? hemistichium 
Neronis magna consessorum fuga pronuntiarit : 


* Sub terris tonuisse putes." 


Sed et famoso carmine cum ipsum tum potentissimos 
amicorum gravissime proscidit. Ad extremum paene 
signifer Pisonianae coniurationis exstitit, multus? in 
gloria tyrannicidarum palam praedicanda * ac plenus 
minarum, usque eo intemperans ut Caesaris caput 5 
proximo cuique iactaret. Verum detecta coniura- 
tione nequaquam parem animi constantiam praestitit; 
facile enim confessus et? ad humillimas devolutus 
preces matrem quoque innoxiam inter socios nomina- 
vit, sperans impietatem sibi apud parricidam princi- 
pem profuturam. Impetrato autem mortis arbitrio 
libero codicillos ad patrem corrigendis quibusdam 
versibus suis exaravit, epulatusque largiter brachia ad 
*secandas venas praebuit medico. Poemata eius 
etiam praelegi memini, confici vero ac proponi 
venalia non tantum operose et diligenter sed inepte 
quoque. 


! strepitu, B ; crepitu, P ; trepitu, M. 

2 Regarded by Reif. as due to dittography. 

3 multus, Omnibonus ; multis, mas. 

4 praedicanda, some late mss. ; praedicenda, M BP. 
5 Genthe marks a lacuna; so Francken. 

6 ut, MP; omitted by B. 


502 


we 


u a enc P c NE ee c 


ON POETS—LUCAN 


an uncommonly loud noise, he shouted out this half 
line of the emperor's, while those who were there 
for the same purpose took to their heels : 


* You might suppose it thundered 'neath the earth." 


He also tongue-lashed not only the emperor but 
also his most powerful friends in a scurrilous poem. 
Finally he came out almost as the ringleader ^ in the 
conspiracy of Piso, publicly making great talk about 
the glory of tyrannicides, and full of threats, even 
going to the length of offering Caesar's head to all 
his friends. But when the conspiracy was detected, 
he showed by no means equal firmness of purpose ; 
for he was easily forced to a confession, descended to 
the most abject entreaties, and even named his own 
mother among the guilty parties, although she was 
innocent, in hopes that this lack of filial devotion 
would win him favour with a parricidal prince. But 
when he was allowed free choice of the manner of: 
his death, he wrote a letter to his father, containing 
corrections for some of his verses, and after eating 
heartily, offered his arms to a physician, to cut his 
veins. I recall that his poems were even read in 
public, while they were published and offered for 
sale by editors lacking in taste, as well as by some 
who were painstaking and careful. 


* Literglly, standard- bearer. 
> That 1s, lectured on by grammarians; see Gr. i 


503 


VITA PLINII SECUNDI! 


Punius SEecuNpus — Novocomensis equestribus 
militiis industrie functus procurationes quoque 
splendidissimas et continuas summa integritate 
administravit, et tamen liberalibus studiis tantam 
operam dedit, ut non temere quis plura in otio 
scripserit. Itaque bella omnia, quae unquam ? cum 
Germanis gesta sunt, XX? voluminibus compre- 
hendit, itemque “Naturalis Historiae" XXXVII 
libros absolvit. Periit clade * Campaniae ; cum enim 
Misenensi classi praeesset et flagrante Vesubio ad 
explorandas propius causas liburnica č pertendisset,® 
nec adversantibus ventis remeare posset, vi pulveris 
ac favillae oppressus est, vel ut quidam existimant 
a servo suo occisus, quem aestu deficiens ut necem 
sibi maturaret oraverat." 

! Mss.: various manuscripts of Pliny, dating from the 
eleventh to the fifteenth century. V = cod. Vaticanus, 1951, 
fifteenth century ; T = cod. Toletanus, thirteenth century. 

2 umquam] undique, V. 3 XX], the mss. have XXXVII. 


* clade, Hermolaus Barbarus; gades (gadis, V) or grades, 
mss, 


504 


THE LIFE OF PLINY THE 
ELDER 


Puiinius Secunpus of Novum Comum, after per- 
forming with energy the military service required of 
members of the equestrian order, administered 
several important stewardships in succession with 
the utmost justice. Yet he gave so much attention 
to liberal studies, that hardly anyone who .had com- 


plete leisure wrote more than he. For instance, he . 


gave an account in twenty volumes of all the wars 
which were ever carried on with Germany, besides 
completing the thirty-seven books of his “ Natural 
History. He lost his life in the disaster in Cam- 
pania. He was commanding the fleet at Misenum, 
and setting out in a Liburnian galley ^ during the 
eruption of Vesuvius to investigate the causes of the 
phenomenon from nearer at hand, he was unable to 
return because of head winds. He was suffocated 
by the shower of dust and ashes, although some think 
that he was killed by a slave, whom he begged to 
hasten his end when he was overcome by the intense 
heat. 

5 laburnica, 7'; the other mss. have liburnicas (V) or 


liburnicam. © pertendisset, Burmann ; praetendisset, mas. 
7 oraverat, mss. ; oraverit, Vinetua. 


a See Calig. xxxvii. 2. 


505 


T9 A.D. 


VITA PASSIENI CRISPI? 


PassiENUs? Crispus, municeps Viselliensis,? tiro- 
cinio suo in senatu ita coepit: * Patres conscripti et 
tu Caesar!" propter quod simulata oratione f 
plenissime a Tiberio conlaudatus est Plurimas 
sponte causas apud centumviros egit, pro qua re in 
basilica Iulia eius statua posita est. Consulatus duos 
gessit. Uxores habuit duas, primam  Domitiam, 
deinde Agrippinam, illam amitam, hanc matrem 
Neronis Caesaris. Possedit bis milies sestertium. 
Omnium principum gratiam adpetivit, sed praecipue 
C.6 Caesaris, quem iter facientem secutus est pedibus. 
Hic nullo audiente ab Nerone" interrogatus, haberetne 
sicut ipse cum sorore germana consuetudinem, 
* Nondum” inquit, quantumvis decenter et caute, 
ne aut negando? eum argueret aut adsentiendo ? 
semet mendacio dehonestaret. Periit per fraudem 
Agrippinae, quam heredem reliquerat, et funere 
publico elatus est. 


1 Sigla: P = cod. Montepessulanus, 125, formerly Pith- 
oeanus, ninth century ; S — cod. Sangallensis, 870, ninth 
century. 

? Passienus, added by Reiff. 

* municeps Viselliensis, omitted by Reif. 

* simulata oratione, Jahn; simuloratione, PS; simulatione, 
Pithoeus. 5 est, added by Jahn. © C., added by Lipsius. 

7 Caesare, Reif. ; the reference is to Gaius Caligula. 

* negando, Lipsius ; negantem, PS : negans, Pithoeus. 


506 


| 


THE LIFE OF PASSIENUS 
CRISPUS 


” Passienus Crispus, a native of Visellium, began his 
first speech in the senate with these words: “Con- 
script fathers and you, Caesar," and was in con- 
sequence highly commended by Tiberius, though not 
sincerely. He voluntarily pleaded a number of cases 
in the court of the Hundred,^ and therefore his 
statue was set up in the Basilica Julia.’ He was 
twice consul. He married twice : first Domitia and 
then Agrippina, respectively the aunt and the mother 
of the.emperor Nero. He possessed an estate of two 
hundred million sesterces. He tried to gain favour 
with all the emperors, but especially with Gaius 
Caesar, whom he attended on foot when the emperor 
made a journey. When he was asked by Nero* in a 
private conversation whether he had commerce with 
his own sister, as the emperor had with his, he replied 
“Not yet"; a very fitting and cautious answer, 
neither accusing the emperor by denying the 
allegation, nor dishonouring himself with a lie by 
admitting it. He was slain by the treachery of 
Agrippina, whom he had made his heir, and was 
honoured with a public funeral. 


? adsentiendo, Lipsius; adsentientem, PS; adsentiens, 
Pithoeus. 


a See note on Aug. xxxvi. > In the Roman Forum. 
* Gaius is obviously intended, instead of Nero. 


507 


INDEX 


I e silii MN a a a eem 


— se —— 


el 


INDEX 


Besides proper names, the Index includes the Latin words which are 
taken over into the translation, and a few others which seem to require 


explanation. 


The references are to chapter and section. 


The following 


abbreviations are used: A., Augustus; Cal, Caligula; Cl., Claudius; 


D., Domitian; G., Galba; J., Julius (Caesar) ; N., 


Nero; O., Otho; T., 


Tiberius ; Tit., Titus; V., Vespasian ; Vit., Vitellius ; Gr., De Grammaticis ; 
Rh., De Rhetoribus; Ter., LAfe of Terence; Verg., Life of Vergil; Hor., 
Life of Hcrace; Tibull. Life of Tibullus; Luc., Lifeof Lucan; Pers., L4fe 
of Persius; Plin., Life of Pliny; Pass., Life of Passienus Crispus. 


ABORIGINES, Vit. I. 2. A name 
applied to the primitive inhabi- 
tants of Latium. 

Accius, Cal. xxx. 1 (quoted); cf. 
T.LIX.2. Anearly Roman poet 
(170-86 B.C.), especially famous 
for his tragedies. 

Acerronius Proculus, Cn., Tib. 
LXXIII. 1. Consul in 37 A.D. 

Achaia, Tib. Iv. 3, VI. 2; Cal. Xx1.; 
Cl. xxv. 3, XLU. 1; N. XIX. 2, 
XXII. 3; V. v. 5, vin. 4. The 
Roman province, comprising all 
of Greece south of Macedonia. 

Achaica, see Mummia. 

Achaicus, -8, -um, adj. from 
Achaia: peregrinatio, N. XIX. 1, 
LI.; V. IV. 4. 

Achilles, T. LXX. 3. 

Acilius, see Atilius. 

Acilius (C.), J. LXVIII. 4 (bis). 

Acilius Aviola (M'), Cl. 
Consul in 54 A.D. 

Acilius Glabrio, D. x. 2. Consul 
in 91 A.D. 

Acte, N. XXVII. 1, L. A freed- 
woman beloved by Nero. 

Actiacus, -a, -um, adj. 
Actium: bellum, i : 
umphus, A. XXIL; T. VI. 4; 
victoria, A. XVII. 2; Cal. XXII. 
1 (plural); Verg. 27. 

Actium, A. xvi. 2, 8, XVII. 2, 


XLV. 


XCVI. 2. A promontory in 
north-western Acarnania at the 
entrance to the Ambracian Gulf, 
off which Augustus defeated 
Antony, Sept. 2, 31 B.c. 

Actius, T. XLVII. 

Actorius Naso, M., J. IX. 3, LII. 1 
(Naso). A writer of a “ Life of 
Julius Caesar," or a ‘ History 
of the Civil War,” not elsewhere 
cited. Probably a contemporary 
of Julius Caesar. 

Adelphi (Adelphoe), Ter. IL, III. 
“The Brothers,” a comedy of 
Terence. 

Adminius, Cal. xLIv. 2. 

Aegisthus, J. L.1. Son of Thyestes. 
He seduced Clytemnestra during 
Agamemnon's absence at Troy. 
Cited as a typical adulterer. 

Aegon, Verg. 43. A sheep-owner 
mentioned in the Bucolics ; applied 
in a parody to Vergil himself. 

Aegyptii, Cal. LVII. 4. Egyptians. 

Aegyptius, -a, -um, adj. from 
Aegyptus: classis, J. XXXIX. 4; 
fius, T. XXXVI.; generis, N. 
XXXVII. 9. 

Aegyptus, J. XI., XXXV. 1, LIL 1; 
A. XVII. 3, XVIII. 2, LXVI. 1, 
Xcnr.; Cl. xx. 3; N. xxxv. 5, 
XLVI. 25 V. VI. 9, VII. 1; D. Iv. 2. 
Egy pt. 


SII 


INDEX 


Aelia Paetina, Cl. xxvi. 2 (bis) 3, 
xxvi.1. Wife of Claudius. 

Aelianus, see Aemilius, 

Aelius Lamia, D. I. 3, x. 2. 

Aelius Prag opine Stilo, L., Gr. 
TI. (ter), 

Aelius S anus (L), T. XLVIII. 2 
(bis), LV., LXI. 1 (quinquies), LXII. 
1, LXV. b 2; Cal. XII. 1, XXX. 2; 
Cl. vi. , XXVII. 1 (bis); "Vit. II. 3. 

Aemilia Liia Cl. XXVI. 1. Great 

granddaughter of Augustus, 

Kemitana. Cl. XVIII. 1 (see note). 

Aemilius Aelianus, A. LI. 2 (bis). 

(Aemilius) Lepidus, M., J. mn. 
(bis), V. Father of the triumvir 
Lepidus. 

Aemilius Lepidus, M., J. LXXXII. 
4, LXXXVII.; A. VIII. 3, XII., 
XII. 1, XVI. 4, XXVII. 2, XXXI. 1, 
LIV.; T. v. Triumvir with 
Augustus and Antony. 

(Aemilius) Lepidus, A. XIX. 1. 
Son of the triumvir Lepidus. 

Aemilius Lepidus, M., Cal. XXIV. 3, 
XXXVI. 1; Cl. Ix. "1. Husband 
of Drusilla, the sister of Caligula. 

Aemilius Mamercus, J.I. 2. 

Aemilius Papus (L. ) A. m. 2. 
Praetor in Sicily in 205 B.O.; 
see Livy, 28. 38. 

Aemilius Paulus (L.), J. xxix. 1. 
Cons. in 50 B.C. 

Aemilius Paulus, L., A. XVI. 3; 
Cl. xvi. 1. Brother of the 
triumvir Lepidus. 


Aemilius Paulus, L., A. XVI. 3, 
XIX. 1, LXIV. 1. Son of the 
preceding. 


Aenaria, A. XCH. 2. An island off 
the coast of Campania, modern 
Ischia. 

Aeneas, N. XXXIX. 2. 

Aeneis, Verg. 21, 23, 25, 30, 31, 35, 
37, 39, 43, 44. The Aeneid. 

Aeneomastix, Verg. 44 (see note). 

Aeolides, Verg. 34. 

Aequiculi, Vit. I. 3. A warlike 

cople of ancient Latium, dwell- 
ing east of Rome on both banks 
of the Anio. 

Aesculapius, A. LIX. (signum); Cl. 
xxv. 2 (insula). Latin form of 
Asclepios, the Greek yod of 


512 


healing and medicine. His 
temple was on the Island in the 
Tiber, which was therefore some- 
times called the Island of Aescu- 
lapius. 

Aeserninus, A. XLII. 2. Grandson 
of Asinius Pollio. 

Aesius Proculus, Cal. xxxv. 2. 

Aethiopes, Cal. LVII. 4. The people 
of Aethiopia. 

Aethiopia, J. LII. 1. A country in 
the interior of Africa. 

Aetna, Verg. 19. The name of a 
poem. 

Aetnaeus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Aetna, the voleano in western 
Sicily : vertex, Cal. LI. 1. 

Aetolia, A. XVII. 3. A district in 
the western part of central Greece. 

Afer, see Tedius and Terentius. 

Afer, -Ta, -rum, adj. meaning 
African : generis, A. 21 

8, Cal. XVIII. 1. See A Afri, | 

Afinius HE Pers. 

Afranius (L.), N. xi. 2; Ter. v. A 
Roman writer of fabulae togatae, 
or plays based upon Italic life. 
He lived in the latter part of 
the second century B.C. 

Afranius, L., J. XXXIV. 2, LXXV. 
2,3. One "of Pompey’s generals. 

Afri. Ter. I. 

Africa, J. A 2, XXXVI., LIX., 
LXX. (bis); A XVI. 4, XLVII.; 
T. XXXI. 2; N. XXXI. 4; 'G. vir. 1, 
vil. 1, XI.: O. I. 2; Vit. v.: 
V. m., Iv. 3. Usually applied 
to the Roman province. 

Africanus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Africa : triumphus, "J. XXXVII. 1, 
A. VIII. 1; as subst., Africanae 
(sc. bestiae), Cal. XVII. 3; Cl. 
XXI. 8. Panthers or leopar 

Africanus, see l'ablus and Scipio. 

Africus, -a, -um, adj. to Africa: 
bellum, J. LVI. 1. 

Agamemnon, T. LXI. 3. 

Agathernus, see Claudius. 

Agermus, L., N. XXXIV. 3. 

Agrippa, M., A. XVI. 2, XXV. 3, 
XXIX. 5, XXXV. 1, XLII. 1, LXII. 1 
(bis), LXIV. 1 (bis, LXVI. 3 
XCIV. 12, XCVII. 1; T. VII. 2, x. 1 
Cal. VII., XXIII. 1; Gr. XVI. 


INDEX 


Agrippa Postumus, M., A. XIX. 
LI. 1, LXIV. 1, LXV. 1, 4; To 


(bis), XXIL, XXV. 1. Son of 
the preceding and grandson of 
Augustus, 

Agrippina, T. vi. 2, 3 (bis). 


Granddaughter of Atticus. 
rios A. "s 1 (bis), LXXXVI. 
LUI. 1; Cal. viL, vil. 1, 
3, 4 Du "Granddaughter of 
Augustus and wife of Germani- 
cus, known as "the elder 
Agrippina." 
Agrippina, Cal. viI.; Cl. XXVI. 3 
, XXIX. 2, XXXIX. 2, XLIII., 
XLIV. 1, 2; N. Vv. 2, VI. 1, 2. 
Qu SM G., v. 1; 
V., Iv. 2, IX Pass. (bis). 
- Mother of "Nero, ows as “the 
younger Agrippina.” 
Agrippinensis, -e, adj. from Agrip- 
pina : Colonia , Vit. X. 3. Modern 
Cologne. 
Ahenobarbi, N., 1. 1, 2. 
Ahenobarbus, see Domitius and 
Nero (the emperor). 
Aiax, A. LXXXV. 2. ‘The name of 
& Poen sue? begun by Augustus. 
II. 2. A warlike people 
of Per Bestia: 
Alauda, J. xxiv. 2. 
a legion; see note. 
Albanum, N. xxv. 1; D. Iv. 4; 
Ter. tL, V. A name applied to 
various villas inthe Alban region; 
later a town, modern Albano. 
Albanus, -a, -um, adj. from Alba: 
columnae, A. LXXII. 1 (see note); 
mons, Cl. Iv. 3 (modern Monte 
Cavo); secessus, D. XIX., the 
villa of Domitian at Albanum. 
Albia Terentia, O. I. 3. Mother 
of the emperor Otho. 
Albis, A. XXI. l. A river of Ger- 
many, the modern Elbe. 
Albucius Silus, C., Rh. VI. 
Albudignus, Cl. XX. 1; see note on 
text. A spring in the Sabine 
country, one of the sources of 
the Aqua Claudia and Aqua 
Marcia. 
Albulae (aquae), A. LXXXII. 2 (see 
note); N. XXXI. 2. 
Alemaeon, N. xxxIX. 2. Son of 


LL 


The name of 


Amphiaraus. Heslew his mother 

and was pursued by the Furies. 
Alexander, Verg. 9. See also 

Cornelius and Tiberius.  - 

Alexander, Magnus, J. VII. 1 (bis); 
A. XVIII. 1, L., XOIV. 5; Cal. 
LII.; N. XIX. 2. 

Alexandria (also -ea), J. XXXV. 1, 2, 
LXIV., LXXVI. 3, LXXIX. E "A. 
XV II. 3 LXXI. 1 ; T. LII. 2; Cal, 
XLIX. Cl. XVI 2, XLII. a N. 
XX. 3; En 1; Tit. v. 3; D. 
XX.; Gr. VII., xx. The city in 
Egypt, at the mouth of the 

ile. 

Alexandria, N. L. Nurse of Nero. 

Alexandrini, J. XI.; N. xx. 3; V. 
XIX. 2. 

Alexandrinus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Alexandria : Gr. XX.; bellum, J. 
LVI. 1; T. IV. 1; merces, A. XCVIII. 
28 navis, A. XCVIII. 2; N. XLV. 1; 
G. x. 4; peregrinatio, N. XIX. 1 
(bis); pharus, Cl. xx. 3. The 
lighthouse ; triumphus, J. XXXVII. 
1; A. XXII., XLI. 1. 

Alexis, Verg. 9. 

Alfenus Varus, Verg. 19. 

Alliensis, -e, adj. from Allia, a 
small river eleven miles north 
of Rome, the scene of the defeat 
by e Gauls in 390 B.C.: dies, 
Vit. the anniversary of 
the okat  orarded as a day of 
ill-omen. 

Allobroges, N. m. 1. A people of 
Gallia Narbonensis, whose terri- 
tories extended from Lake Geneva 
southwest to the Rhone. 

Alpes, J. XXV. 1, LVI. 5; A. LXXIX. 
l; Cal XXL, LI. 3; N. XVIIL.; 


. IX. 2. 

Alpinus, -a, -um, adj. from Alpes: 
gentes, T. Ix. 

Amazones, J. XXII. 3. A mythical 
race of female warriors, whose 
home was near the river Ther- 
modon in Pontus. 

Amazonicus, -a, -u. adj. from 
Amazones: secures  pellaeque, 
N. XLIV. 1. 

Ambitarvius, Cal. VIII. 1. A vil- 
lage near Confluentes (modern 
Coblenz). 

513 


INDEX 


Ambrani (?), J. IX. 3. See note 
oif text. 

Ampius, T., J. LXXVII. 

Ancharia, A. Iv. 1. birst wife of 
C. Octavius, father of Augustus, 

Ancus Marcius, J. VI. 1. Fourth 
king of Rome. 

Andes, Verg. 2. A small place near 


ua 

; Ter. II. The “Maid of 
Andros "; the naine of Terence’s 
first comedy. 

Andronicus, see Pompilius. 

Anicetus, N. XXXV. 2 ue no 

Anio (gen. Anienis), ` . L 
river flowing into the Tiber just 
north of Kome. 

Anio novus, Cl. XX. 1l. An aque- 
duct built by Claudius, which 
brought water from the upper 
course of the Anio to Rome. 

Annaeus, see Cornutus, Lucanus 
and Seneca. 

Anuales, Gr. II., VIH. The epic of 
Ennius. 

Annius Cimber, A. LXXXVI. 3. 

Antiatinus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Antium : fortunae, Cal. LVI. 3; 
see Antium. 

Antibucolica, Verg. 43. A parody 
on Vergil's Bucolics. 

Anticatones, J. LVI. 5. Speeches 
of Julius Caesar against Cato 
Uticensis. 

Anticyra, Cal. XXIX. 2. A town 
of Phocis on the Corinthian Gulf, 
or an island in the Aegean Sea, 
both celebrated for their helle- 
bore, which was pouarded as a 
specific for madness. 

Antiochia, T. XLIX. 2 : Cal. I. 2. 
The chief city of Seria, on the 
Orontes. 

Antiochus, Cal. XVI. 3. King of 
Commagene in northern Syria. 

Antiochus, Vit. II. 1. A baker. 

Antistius, L., J. Xxm. 1. 
tribune of the commons. 

Antistius, J. LXXXII. 3. A physi- 


cian, 

Antistius Labeo, A. LIV. 

Antium, A. LVIII. 1; T. xxxvii; 
Cal. VIII. 2, 5, XLIX. 2; N. VL 1, 
IX, XXV. l. A town on the 


514 


coast of Latium, the modern 
Porto d'Anzio, celebrated for its 
temple of Fortune and its 
oracles, the Fortunae Antiatinae. 

Antonia (maior) N. v. 1. Elder 
daughter of Mark Antony and 
grandmother of Nero. 

Antonia (minor), Cal. r. 1, x. 1, 
XV. 2, XXIII. 2, XXIV. 1, XXIX. 1; 
CL T. 6, ur. 2, IV. 4, XI. 2 
(Augusta); V. WW. Younger 
daughter of Mark Antony, 
mother of Germanicus and 
Claudius. 

Antonia, Cl. xxvi. 1, 2; N, 
XXXV. 4. Daughter of the 
emperor Claudius, 

Antonii, A. XVII. 2. 

Antonius, C. A. v. Consul with 
Cicero in 63 B.C. 

Antonius, C., J. XXXVI. Brother 
of Mark Antony and one of 
Caesar's officers, 

Antonius, L., A. IX, XIV. XV., 
LXVIII.; T. IV. 2, v. Brother of 
Mark Antony. 

Antonius, M., J. LII. 2, LXXIX. 2, 
LXXXII. 4, LXXXII. 1, LXXXIV. 2; 
A. I. 8, IV. 2, VII. 1, "VIII. 3 (bia), 
IX., X. 2, 4, XL, XII., XII. 1, 2, 3, 
XVI. 2, XVII. "1, 3, 4, 5, XX., 
XXI. 3, XXVIII. 1, XLIX. 1, LXII. 1, 
LXII. 2, LXVII., LXIX. 1, LXX. 1, 
LXXXVI. 2; T. IV. 3, LIX. 2; 
Cal. XXVI. 1; Cl. x1. 3; N. nI. 1, 
2(bis); Rh. L, IV., V. (bis). Mark 
Antony, triumvir with Augustus 
(Octavian) and Lepidus. 

Antonius, A. XVII. 5, LXIII. 2. 
Elder son of Mark Antony. 

Antonius, Iullus, Cl. rr. 1 ; Gr. XVIII. 
Son of Mark Antony and Fulvia ; 
cons. in 10 B.o. 

Antonius Gnipho, M., Gr. VIL, 
VIII., X. 

Antonius Musa, A. LIX., LXXXI. 1. 
A ph sician of the time of 

u 
Antonina wor (Becco), Vit. 


Antonis Tea V L., D. VI. 
2 (ter), V 


Apellaris H D V . XIX. 1; sæ note 
n text. 


s ío apt ee 


INDEX 


Apelles, Cal. xxxrm.; V. XTX. 1; 
8ee note on text. 

Aphrodisius, see Scribonius. 

Apis, A. xcrI.; Tit. v. 3. An 
Egyptian god, worshipped in the 
form of a sacred bull. 

Apollo, A. LXXI., XCIV. 4 (bis); 
N. xxv. 2, LimI.; Delphis, N. XL. 
3; Palatinus, A. XXXI. 1, LIIL; 
cf. N. xxv. 2; Sandalarius, A. 
LVI. 1; Tortor, A. LXX. 2; 
templum Actii, A. XVIII. 2; 
templum in Palatio, A. XXIX. 1, 
3; cf. N. XXV. 2. . 

Apollodorus, A. LXXXIX. 1. An 
orator of Pergamum, teacher of 
Augustus. 

Apollonia, A. VIII. 2, X. 1, LXXXIX. 
1, xctv. 12, xcv. A city of 
Illyricum opposite Brundisium. 

Apolionius Molo, J. Iv. 1. An 
orator of Rhodes, with whom 
Julius Caesar studied. 

Apollophanes, A. XVI. 3. 

Aponi fons, T. xiv. 3. A warm 
medicinal spring near Patavium, 
modern Bagno d'Albano. 

Aponius Saturninus, Cal. XXXVIII. 4. 

Appenninus, -a, -um, J. xLiv. 3 
(dorsum); Vit. x. 3 (iugis). 

Appi Forum, T. m. 2. A small 
town of Latium on the Appian 
Way, at the beginning of the 
Pomptine Marshes. 

Appia via, T. LXXII. 1; Cal. XIX. 1; 
Cl.1.3; N. V.1; Ter. V; Pers. The 
most famous of Roman roads, 
leading south-east to Capua, and 
later to Beneventum and Brund- 
isium. 

Appius, see Claudius and Iunius. 

Appuleius, L., Gr. III. 

Appuleius, Sex., A. C. 1. 
in 14 A.D. 

Apragopolis, A. XOVIII. 4; see note. 

Aprilis, N. Lv. 

Apulia, Vit. 1. 3. A district in the 
south-eastern part of Italy. 

Aquila, see Pontius. 

Aquileia, A. XX.; T. vit. 3; V. VI. 
p A town of northern Italy at 
the head of the Adriatic. 

Aquilius Niger, A. XI. 

Aquitania, A. XXI. 1; G. VI. 1, IX. 2. 


Consul 


A district and province of south- 
eastern Gaul, 

Aquitanicus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Aquitania ; bello, Tibull. 

Arcadia, V. VII. 3; Ter. I, V. A 
district in the central part of 
the Peloponnesus. 

Archelaus, T. VII., XXXVII. 4. A 
king of Cappadocia. 

Archelaus, see Laelius. 

Arelate, T. Iv. 1. A town of 
southern Gaul on the Rhone, 
modern Arles. 


Areus, A. LXXXIX. 1. A philo- 
sopher. 

Argivus, G. Xx. 2. 

Aricia, A. IV. 2 (bis). An ancient 


town of Latium on the Appian 
Way, Sixteen miles south-east of 
Rome. 

Aricinus, -a, -um, adj. from Aricia : 
A. IV. 1. 

Ariminum, A. XXX. 1. A town of 
Umbria on the Adriatic, modern 
Rimini. 

Aristarchus, Gr. IL, xiv. The 
famous Alexandrian grammarian 
and critic (c. 217-c. 145 B.C.). 

Aristocrates, Petronius, Pers. A 
philosopher of Magnesia. . 

Armenia, J. XLIV. 3 (minor); A. 
XXI. 3; T. rx. 1, XI. 1, XLI.; 
Cal. I. 2; N. xm. 1, XXXIX. 1, 
XL.2. A large country east of 
Asla Minor and Cappadocia, 
divided into Armenia Major and 
Armenia Minor. 

Armenii, Cl. xxv. 4. The people 
of Armenia. 

Arrecina Tertulla, Tit. 1v. 2. Wife, 
of Titus. 

Arrecinus Clemens, M., D. XI. 1. 

Arria, Pers. Wife of Caecina 
Paetus. When her husband was 
ordered by Claudius to take his 
own life in 42 A.D. and hesitated 
to do so, she stabbed herself and 
handed the dagger to her hus- 
band, saying: “ Paetus, it does 
not pain me.” 

Arria, Pers. Daughter of the pre- 
ceding and wife of Thrasea. 

Arruntius, see Furius. 

Artabanus, T. LXvI.; Cal. XIV. 8; 


915 


INDEX 


: Vit. II. 4. A king of the Par- 
thians. 

Arverni, N. II. l. A tribe of south- 
eastern Gaul, 

Sepe A. xoIv. 4. A philo- 

opher of Mendes, a town of Egypt. 

Ae etario, D. xv. 3. An astrologer. 

Asconius bla is "Verg. 10, 46. 

Asellius Sabinus, T. XLII. 2. 

Asia, J. IL., IV. 2, XXII. 2, XXVIII. 1, 
XXXIX. i, LXIII. ; A. III. 2 , XVH. 3, 
XXVI. 2 T. XLVII. 2; Cal. LVII. 3, 
LVIII. 1; V. 1.2; D. X.2; Gr. VI.: 
Ter. m ; Verg. 35. 

Asiaticus, -a, -um, adj. from Asia: 
oratores, A. LXXXVI. 3. 

Asiaticus, Vit. Xn. 

Asillius, Cal. VIII. 4. 

Asinius. Epicadius, Cl. xix. L, a 

Asinius Gallus, C., Cl. XLI. 

XXII., Hor. "Son of Asinius Bolio 
and consul in 9 B.C. 

Asinius Gallus, C., Cl. xur. 2. 
Grandson of Asinius Pollio. 

Asinius Marcellus, Cl. Xv. Consul 


in 54 A.D. 
Asinius Pollio, J. x 4, LV. 4, 
LVI. 4; A. XXIX. XLIII. De cL 


XIII. 2: Gr. X. (ter) ; E 9, 19. A 
celebrated orator, 'soldier, states- 
man and patron of literature. 
Author of a history of the war 
between Pompey and Caesar, 
and of ar dom mentioned by 
Hor. Odes, 2, 1. 

Asprenas, see Nonius. 

Astici ludi, T. vi. 4 (see note); 
Cal. xx. 

Astura, A. XCVI. 3; T. LXXII. 2; 
A small island off the coast of 
Latium near Antium, where 
many distinguished Romans had 
villas; later joined to the main- 
land by & causeway; modern 
Astura (Torre d' Astura). 

asturco, N. XLVI. l. A horse from 


Asturia in Hispania Tarra- 
conensis, 
Atalanta, T. XLIV. 2. Daughter of 


Iasius of "arcadia, beloved by 
. Meleager. 
Ateius Capito, Gr. x., XXII. (bis). 
Ateius Praetextatus Philologus, L., 
Gr. VIL, x. (bis). 


516 


Atella, T. LXXV. Verg. 27. An 
Oscan town in Ms north 
of Naples; see Steen: 

Atellana (fabula), XXVII. 4; 

. XXXIX. 3. A AF of Oscan 
n named from Atella, and 
representing scenes from every- 
day life by stock characters. 
In later times such farces were 
sometimes given after a tragedy 
and called Atellanica exodia. 


Atellanicus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Atella : ex hcdio, T. XLV. 
Atellanus, -a, -um, adj. from 


Atella : actor, G. XII. 

Athenae, A. LX., Xeon; Gr. x. 
XV.; Verg. 35; Lue. 

Athenodorus, Cl. Iv. 5. 

Atilius (C), J. LXXXIV. 2 (see note 
on text) ; Ter. V. Anearly Roman 
writer of comedies and tragedies. 

Atia, A. IV. 1 (bis), XCIV. 4 (ter). 
Mother of Augustus. 

Atius Balbus, M., A. IV. 1 (bis). 
Husba:ud .of Julia, sister of 
Julius Caesar. 

Atratinus (Sempronius), Rh. rr. 

Atta, see Claudius. 

Attalus, Gr. II. Attalus II, king of 
Pergamum from 159—138 B.C. 

Attica, Cl. xxv. 5. 

Atticus, -a, -um, adj. to Attica; 
Ceres, A. XCIII. 

Atticus, see Caecilius. 

Atticus. Vestinus (M.), N. XXXV. 1. 
Consul in 65 A.D. 

Attius, another form of Accius. 

Audasius, L., Aug. XIX. 1, 2. 

Aufidius Lurco, Cal. XXII. 2. 
Maternal grandfather of Livia 
Augusta. 

Augur, see Lentulus, 

Augusta, applied to Antonia minor, 

laudia, Domitia, Julia, Livia 
Drusilla, q.v. Augustae, N. XXVIII. 


Augustales (sodales), Cl. vi. 2 
(see note); G. VIL. 1. 


Augustiani, 'N. XXV. 1. Cf. Tac. 
Ann. 14. 15. 
Augustinus, -a, um, adj. from 


Augustus : currus, Cl. XI. 2. 
Augustus the Emperor : Augustus, 
. LV. 3, 4, LVI. 7, LXXXVIII; A. 


—BHa Lo. 0 ——MA 0.0 A | 


INDEX 


I. 2 (bis), 3 (bis), IV. 1 
2, LIX., XCIV. 2, 4, 8, 2, 


Vill. (bis), X , XL. 1, 4, XII. 
XIII. 2, XV. 2, po 1, XVII. 2 (bis), 
XXI. 1, 2, XXII. (ter), XXIII., XLII. 
2, XLVII., XLVIII. 2, L. 1, 2, LI. 1, 
LV. 2, LVII., LXI. 3, LXVIII. 3, 
LXX. 3; Cal. I. 1, IV., VI., VIII. 
8, 4, IX., XVI. 1, XXII. 1, xxv. 1, 
XXXI, XXXIV. 1, XLVIII. 1; Cl. 
I. 1, 4, 5, III. 2, Iv. 7, VI. 1, XJ. 2, 
XX. 1, XXI. 2, xxv. 5, XXVI. 1; 
N. ur 2, IV., X, 1, xxv. 1; G. I., 
IV. 1; Vit. n. 2; V. m. 1, IX. 1, 
XXIII. 4; Dn Gr. XVI., XVII., 
XIX., XX., XXL ; Rh. L, IV.: Verg. 
12, 51, 37, 31, 35, 37, 38, 41; 
Hor. (quinquies). Augusti forum, 
Cl. XXXIII. 1; Augusti templum, 
T. XL. (at Nola), XLVII. ; Cal. XXL, 
XXII. 4. Augusti statua, T. LIH. 
2, LVIII. ; N. XII. 3; G.I. Augusti 
simulacrum, T. Lym. Divus 
Augustus, A. V.; Cal. XXII. 4, 
XXXVIII. 1; Vit. I. 2. Caesar 
ANH; AÀ.LvII.2. C.Caesar, 
A. VII. 2. Caestr, A. LI. 2, 
LXX. 1, 2, XCVII. 2; Verg. 37, 
'38; Hor. C. Octavius, J. LXXXIII. 

2 (bis). Romulus, A. VII. 2. Cf. 
Thurnus and see Nero, Vitellius, 
Tiberius, 

Augustus mensis, A. 0. 3. 

Augustus mons, T. XLVIII. 1. 

Augustum saeculum, A. C. 3. 

Aurea domus, N. XXXI. 1, XXXVIII. 
1; O. vir. 

Aurelia, J. ee 2. Mother of 
Julius Caesar. 

Aurelia via, G. xx. 2. A road 
leading from the Aemilian bridge 
thro the Aurelian gate (Porta 

. di 8. Pancrazio) west and north 

to the coast towns of Etruria; 
liter extended g Arelate ( Arles). 

Aurelius Cotta, J. 

(Aurelius) Cotta, L. F LXXIX. = 

(Aurelius) Cotta (Messalinus), L 


Gr. 1. 
Aurelius Opilius, Gr. VI. 
Aurunculeius, Cotta, L., J. XXV. 2; 
Hor. Consul in 65 B.C. 
Autronius, L. (?), J. 1x. 1 (bis), 


Aventinus, Vit. xvi. The most 
southern of the hills M Rome. 
Avernus lacus, A. XVI. N. XXXI. 

3 (bis). A lake near Cun and 
Baiae, and not far from Naples, 
fabled to be an entrance to the . 
Lower World. 
Aviola, see Acilius. 
Avitus, see Octavius. 
Axius, J. Ix. 2. 


BAIAR, A. XVI. 1, LXIV. 2; T. VI. 3; 
Cal. XIX. 1; N. "XXXI. 3; XXXIV. 2. 
A town at the northern end of 
the Bay of Naples, a favourite 
watering-place of the Romans. 

Baianus sinus, Cal. xix. 3; N. 
XXVII. 3. 

Balbillus, N. XXXVI. 1. 

Balbus, see Atius and Cornelius, 

Baliaris insula, G. X. 1. One of 
two islands in the Mediterranean 
near the eastern coast of Spain; 
modern Majorca and Minorca. 

Ballista, Verg. 17 (bis). A school- 
master. 

Barbatus, see Valerius. 

Basilides, V. VII. 1 (see note). 

Bassus, see Caesius. 

Batavi, Cal. XLII. 

Bato, T. xx. A leader of the 
Pannonians, 

Bauli, N. xxxiv. 2; cf. Cal. XIX. 1. 
A small town obs 'ampania be- 
tween Misenum and Baiae, 

Beccus (-0), Vit. XVIII. 

Beneventanus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Beneventum: Gr. IX. 

Beneventum, A. XCVII. 3; N. XXXVI. 
1, Gr. Ix. A town in Samnium, 
modern Benevento. 

Berenice, Tit. vil. 1, 2. Daughter 
of Agrippa I, king of Jucaea. 

Berytius, -a, -um, adj. from Bery- 
tus, a city of Phoenicia : Gr. XXIV. 

Bessi, A. 11. 2. A mountain tribe 
of the Thracians. 

Betriacensis, -e, adj. from Betria- 
cum; victoria, Vit. X. 1; copias, 
Vit. XV. 2; acie, V. V. 7. 

Betriacum mn Bedriacum and 
Bebriacum), O. IX. 2. A village 
of northern Italy between Verona 
and Cremona, 

517 


INDEX 


Bibaculus, see Furius. 

Biberius Caldius Mero, T. XLII. 1. 
A name coined in jest after 
Tiberius Claudius Nero, from 
bibo, drink, cal(t)dus, hot, and 
merum, unmixed wine. 

Bibulus, 'M., J. IX. 2, X. 1, XIX. 1 
(bis), 2, Xx. 2 (ter), "XXI., XLIX. 2. 

Bithynia, J. IL. (bis), XXXIX. 1 
XLIX. 1, 3. A district of 
northern Asia Minor on the 
Propontis (Sea of Marmora) and 
the Euxine (Black Sea). 

Bithynicus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Bithynia : fornicem, J. XLIX. 1; 
reginam, J. XLIX. 2. 

Bogudes ( ?), gen. Bogudis, J. LII. 1. 

Bononia, A. xcvi. 1. Modern 
Bologna. 

Bononienses, A. XVII. 2; N. VU. 2. 
The people of Bononia. 

Boter, Cl. XXVII. 2. A freedman of 
Claud Wt 

Bovillae, A. C. 2 (bis). An ancient 
town of Latium on the Appian 
Way, about twelve miles from 
Rome. 

Breuci, T. ix. 2. 

Pannonia. 

Britanni, J. xxv. 2; Cal. XLIV. 2. 

Britannia, J. xxv. 2, XLVII., LVIII. 
1; Cal. xix. 3; Cl. XVII. 1, XXI. 6; 
N. XVIU., XL. 2; V. IV. 1 (bis): 
Tit. 1v. 1: D. x. 3. 

Britannicus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Britannia: clades, N. XXXIX. 1; 
expeditio, G. VII. 1; Vit. II. 4; 
triumphus, Cl. XXVIII. 

Britannicus, Cl. XXVII. 1 (Ger- 
manicus), XXVII. 2, XLIII.; N. s 
VI. 4, VII. 1, XXXIII 2 (bis), 3 


A people of 


Tit. n. 1 (ter) Son of the 
emperor Claudius. 
Brixellum, O. Ix. 1. A town of 


northern Italy on the Po between 
Parma and Mantua; modern 
Brescello. 

Bructerus, T. XIX. One of the 
Breucteri, a Germanic people, 
occupying the territory of 
modern Westphalia. 

Brundisium, J. XXXIV. 1, LVIII. 2; 
A. XVII. 3 (bis); Rh. I.; Verg. 35. 
A seaport of south-eastern Italy, 


518 


the regular point of de 
for Greece and the 
modern Brindisi. 

Brutus, D., J. LXXX. 4, LXXXI. 4, 
LXXXIII. 2; A. Xx. 2, 3. One of 
us conspirators against Caesar's 
ife. 

Brutus, L., J. LXXX. 3 (bis). The 
first Roman consul. 

Brutus, M., J. XLIX. 2, L. 2, Lv. 1, 
LVI. 1, LXXX. 4, LXXXII. 2, LXXXV.: ; 
2n) X. xin. 1, LXXXV. L; T. 
LXI. 3; N. TI. : G. III. 2; O. X. 
l; Gr. XIII. ; Meh. VI.; Hor. 
Leader with Cassius of the con- 
spiracy against Caesar’s life. 

Bubula, ad capita, A. v. Probably 
the name of a street or quarter 
at the north-east corner of the 
Palatine Hill. 

Bucolica, Gr. XxiI1.; Verg. 9, 19, 
25, 26, 43. The Bucolics of 
Vergil. 

Burrus (Afranius), N. XXXV. 5. 
Prefect of the praetorian guard 
under Claudius and Nero. 

Bursenus, Gr. XI. 

Byzantium, V. vul. 4. A city of 
Thrace on the Bosphorus, modern 
Constantinople. 


CAECILIUS ATTICUS, Q., T. vi. 2; 
Gr. XIV., XVI. T. 'Pom nius 
Atticus, ‘the friend of icero, 
after his adoption by Q. Caecilius, 
called Q. Caecilius Pomponianus 
Atticus. 

Caecilius Epirota, Q., Gr. XVI. (bis). 

Caecilius Metellus, Q., J. XVI. 1, 
LV. 3. A tribune of the com- 


mons. 
(Caecilius) Metellus, Q., A. LXXXIX. 
2. Cons.in 143 B.C., and famous 
as an orator. 
(Caecilius) Metellus Numidicus, Q., 


Caecilius (Statius), Ter. I. di 
The famous comic poet (2 ig- 
166 B.C.). 

Caecina, A., J. LXXV. 5. 

Caecina, A., Tit. vI. 2. 
69 A.D. 

Caecus, see Claudius, 

Caelius mons, T. XLVIII. 1 (bis); V. 


rie ent: 


Consul in 


INDEX 


IX. 1l. One of the hills of Rome, 
between the Aventine and the 
Esquiline. 

Caclius, M., Rh. II. 

Caenis, Vv. Ur. XXI.; D. xm. 3 


Caepio, see Fannius, Rustius, 
Servilius. 
Caeruleus fons, Cl. XX. 1. A spring 


in the Sabine territory, one 
of the sources of the aqua 


Claudia. 
Caesar, see Augustus, Claudius, 
Domitianus, Gaius, Iulius, Nero, 


Sulpicius Een Tiberius, Ves- 

Gal. ux Vitellius. Caesares, 
l. LX.; Cl. 1. 5, x. 4; G. 1, 

. Tit. vii. 1; Caesarum 

fades G. is domus, : 
imagines, Cal. XIV. 3, XXIII. 1; 
memoria ac templa, Cal. LX.; 
nemus, À. XLIII. LU potesia, T. 
XIV. 2; progenies, G 

Caesar Strabo (C. Iulius), J. LV. 2. 
Aedile in 90 B.O., an orator and 
writer of tragedies. 

Caesar, rf A. XXVI. 2, XXIX. 4, 
LXIV. 1 (bis) Lxv. 1 ares) 2, 


LXVII. 2, XCIII.; T. XI. 5, XII. 2, 
xil. idu 2 XXIII. ; AN v. 1. 
dn and adopted son of 
Augustus. 

Caesar, s A. XXVI. 2, XXIX. 4, 
LXIV. 1 (bis), LXV. 1 (bis), 2; 
T. XI. 5, xv. 2, XXIII., Lxx. 2 


Grandson and &dopted son of 
Augustus. 
Caesar, L., J. LXxv. 3 (bis). 
Caesarea, 'A. LX. The name of 
geveral cities called after Caesar 


Caesario, A. XVII. 5; ef. J. LII. 1, 2. 

Caesetius Flavus, J. LXXIX. 1, 
LXXX. 3. A tribune of the 
commons 


Caesius Bassus, Pers. (bis). 

Caesonia, Cal. xxv. 3, XXXIII., 
XXXVIII. 3, L. 2, LIX. Wife of 
Caligula. 

Cacsonius Priscus, T., T. XLII. 2. 

Calabri, Verg. 36. The people of 
Calabria, a district of south- 


irs Italy, used for Calabria 

i 

Calagurritani, A. XLIx. 1. The 
inhabitants of Calagurris, a 
town of north-western Spain, on 
the Iberus (Ebro). 

Caldius, see Biberius. 

Caligula, see onde the emperor. 

Callippides, T. XXXVIII (see note). 

Calpenus, ras J. XXXIX. 1. 

Calpurnia, J. XXL, LXXXI. 3. 
Daughter of L. Piso and third 
wife of Julius Caesar. 

Calpurnius Piso (C.), Cal. xxv. 1 
(bis). nand of Livia Orestilla 
and leader of a conspiracy against 
Nero in 62; see Pisonianus. 

(Calpurnius) Piso, Cn., J. "s 3 (bis). 

(Calpurnius) Piso (Cn. ), T. Lit. 3; 

l. II, U1.3; Vit. 11. 3. Governor 
of Sy ria. 

(Calpurnius) Piso, L., J. XXI, 
LXXXII. 1. Father of Caesar's 
wife Calpurnia. 

(Ce purnius) Piso, L., T. XLII. 1; 


(Calpurnius) Piso Frugi Licinianus, 
G. XVII.; O. v. 1, VI. 3. 

Calpurnius Statura, Pers. 

Calvina, see lunia. 

Calvini, N. I. 1. 

Calvinus, see Domitius and Eficius. 

Calvus, see Licinius. 

Camerinus, see Sulpicius. 

Camilla, see Livia Medullina. 

Camillus, see Furius. 

Campania, A. LXXIL 2, XOVIII. 1; 
T. XI. 1, XXXIX., XL., LXXII. 2: 
Cal. XIV. 2, XXIV. 2, "XXXVII. 2: 
Cl. v.; Vit. XVI.; V. xxIV.; Tit. 
VIII. 3, 4; Verg. 13; Plin. 

Campanus, "a, -um, adj. 1o Cam- 
pania : ager, J. XX. . IV. 2; 
pugiles, Cal. XVIL. ere via, A. 
XCIV. 7 (see note). 

Campus, see Martius, Esquilinus, 
Leontinus, Stellas. 

Canace, N. xxI. 3. Daughter of 
Aeolus. She had several chil- 
dren by Poseidon and was killed 
by her father because of her 
guilty passion for her brother. 
She was the subject of a tragedy 
sung by Nero. 

519 


INDEX ~ 


Caninius Rebilus, N. xv. 2; cf. 


J. LXXVI. 2. Appointed consul 
for a single day by Julius 
Caesar. 


Cannutius, C., Rh. Iv. 

Cantabria, A. XXI. 1, LXXXI. 1; 
G. VII. 2. A district in the 
northern part of Spain. 

Cantabricus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Cantabria : bellum, A. XX., LXXXV. 
1; expeditio, A. XXIX. 3; T. IX. 
1; Verg. 31. 

Canus, G. XII. 8. 

Capella, see Statilius. 

Capita Bubula, see Bubula. 

Capito, see Ateius and Fonteius. 

Capitolinus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Capitolium : area, Cal. XXII. 4, 
XXXIV. 1; certamen, D. XIII. 1. 
See also Catulus, Iuppiter, Venus. 

Capitolium, J. X. 1, XV., XXXVII. 2, 
LIV. 3, LXXIX. 2; A. XXIX. 1, 
LVII. 1, LIX., XCI. 2, XCIV. 8, 9 
(bis); T. I. 2, II. 4, MM. 2, XX.; 
Cal. VI. 1, XVI. 4, XXII. 4, XLVI., 
LX.; Cl. r1. 2, x. 3, XXII., XXIV. 3; 
N. XII. 4, XIII. 2, XLVI. 2; Vit. 
XV. 3; V. VIII. 5, xvi. ; D. I. 2, 
V. (bis), XIII. 2, Xv. 2, XXIII. 2. 
The temple of Jupiter Optimus 
Maximus, with Juno and 
Minerva, on the Capitoline hill. 
Also applied to the whole of 
that summit of the hill and to 
temples to the same triad of gods 
in other cities of Italy: Bene- 
venti, Gr. IX.; Capuae, T. XL.; 
Cal. LVII. 2. 

Cappadocia, Cal. I. 2; V. vil. 4. 
A country in the eastern pa 
of Asia Minor. 

Cappadox, adj. to Cappadocia : T. 
XXXVII. 4. 

Capreae, A. LXXII. 3, XxCI. 2, 
XCVIII. 1, 3, 4; T. XL., LX., LXII. 
2, LXXII. 1, LXXIV; Cal. x. 1; 
Vit. ri. 2; cf. T. XLV. An islan 
near Naples, modern Capri. 

Caprensis, -e, adj. from Capreae : 
secessus, T. XLIII. 1. 

Capricornus, A. xcIv. 12. One of 
the signs of the Zodiao. 

Caprineus, T. XLIII 2. 

Capua, J. LXXXI. 1 (bis); T. XL.: 


520 


Cal. LVII. 2. An ancient city of 
Campania. 

Capys, J. LXXXI. 1 (bis). 
and king of Capua. 
Carchedoniaca, Cl. XLII. 2 (bis). A 
History E uM. by the 
emperor Claudius, from Kapxwnóov, 

the Greek name of the city. 

Carinae, T. Xv. 1 (see note); Gr. Xv. 

Carmelus, V. v. 6. The god of 
Mount Carmel in Phoenicia. 

Carnulus, T. LXI. 5 (bis). 

Carthago, Ter. I. (bis). 

Carthago Nova, G. IX. 2. A sea- 
port of south-eastern Spain; 
modern Carthagena. 

Carthaginiensis, -e, adj. from Car- 
thago : see Sulpicius. 

Carvilius Pictor, Verg. 44. . 

Cascae, J. LXXXII. 1, 2. Two 
brothers, members of the con- 
spiracy against Julius Caesar. 

Caspiae Portae, N. XIX. 2. A pass 
through the range of ,moun- 
soins south-east of the Caspian 

a. 

Cassiope, N. XXII. 8. A town of 
Corcyra (modern Corfu). 

Cassius, N. XXII. 3. An epithet 
applied to Jupiter as the tutelary 
divinity of Cassiope. 

Cassius, Cal. LvII. 1. 

Cassius, C., J. LXXX. 4, LXXXV.; 
A. IX. X. 1; T. LXI. 3; N. m. 1, 
XXXVII. 1; G. rir. 2; O. x. 1; 
Gr. xm. Leader with M. Brutus 
of the conspiracy against Julius 
Caesar. 

Cassius, L., J. LXIII.; Gr. XIII. 

Cassius Chaerea, Cal. LVI. 2, LVII. 3, 
LVIII. 2 (bis). 

Cassius Longinus, L., Cal. XXIV. 1, 
LVII. 3. Consul in 30 A.D. 

Cassius Longinus, N. XXXVII. 1. 

Cassius Parmensis, A. IV. 2. A poet, 
who was one of the murderers of 
7 ba Caesar; cf. Hor. Epist. 1. 

Cassius Patavinus, A. LI. 1. 

Cassius Scaeva, J. LXVIII. 4 (bis). 
One of Caesar's centurions. 

Cassius Severus, A. LVI. 3; Cal. XVI. 
1; Vit. n. 1; Gr. XXII. A dis- 
tinguished orator, noted for the 


Founder 


MEER. — ——— OŘ 


INDEX 


pitternee of his style; ef. Plin. 

Castor, J. X. 1; T. XX; Cal. XXII. 2; 
O. rx. 2 (ad Castoris). 

Castricius, A. LVI. 4. 

Catalepton, Verg. 17. 

Catilina (L. Sergius), J. XIV. 1, 
XVII. 1 (ter); A. OI. 1, XCIv. 5. 
Cato (M. Porcius Censorinus), A. 
LXXXVI. 3; Gr. xv. The cele- 
brated orator, historian and 

statesman (234—149 B.O.). 

Cato, M. (Porcius Uticensis), J. 
XIV. 2, XIX. 1, XX. 4, XXX. 3, 
LIH. 1; A. XII. 2, LXXXV. 1 
LXXXVII. 1. The grandson of 
Cato the Censor (95-46 B.O.). 
A type of austere virtue. : 

Cato, see Valerius. 

Catulinus, -a, -um, adj. 
Catulus, referring to Q. (Lutatius) 
Catulus Capitolinus : Gr. XVII. 

Catullus, see Valerius. 

Catulus Capitolinus, Q., J. XV.; A. 
XCIV. 8 (bis); G. I1., III. 45 Gr. III. 
A prominent leader of the aris- 
tocratic party, who restored 
the Capitol after its destruction 
in 83 B.C. 

Cauchi (also Chauci), Cl. xxiv. 8. 
A people of north-eastern Ger- 
many near the mouth of the 
Visurgis ( weet): 

Cauchius, see Gabinius Secundus. 

Caudex, see Claudius. 

Cebenna mons, J. XXV. 1. A 
mountain range in southern 
Gaul, the modern Cervennes, 

Cebes, erg. 9 (dis). 

Celadus, A. LXVII. 1. 

Censorinus, see Marcius. 

gentumviralis, -e, adj. from centume 


viri : hasta, A. XXXVI. (see note); 
lis, Rh. VI. 

centumviri, D. vir. 1. Members 
of the Court of the Hundred 


Judges; see note on A. XXXVI. 
Ceraunii iuontes, A. XVII. 3. A 
mountain range in north-eastern 
Epirus, also called Acroceraunia, 
ending in à promontory of the 
same name, the ‘* Thunder 


Cape. 
Cercei, A. XVI. 4; T. LXXII. 2. A 


from 


promontory and town on the 
coast of Latium. 

Cerealis, see Civica. 

Ceres, A. xcm.; N. xu. 4. The 
Jtalian goddess identified with 
the Greek Demeter, goddess of 
agriculture; in the two cases 
cited used of Demeter herself. 

Cerrinius Gallus, A. LIII. 3. 

Cerylus, V. XXIII. 1. 

Cestius Gallus, T. XLII. 2. 

Chaerea, see Cassius. 

Chaldaei, V. XIV. 4; D. XIV, 1. An 
Assyrian people, noted for their 
knowledge of astronomy and 
astrology; hence a designation 
of astrologers in general. 

Chares, see Oppius. 

Charicles, T. LXXO. 3. A physi- 


cian. 

Chatti, D. vI. 1 (bis). A people of 
western Germany, near the 
Rhine. 

Chattus, -a, -um, adj. to Chatti: 
mulier, Vit. XIV. 5. 

Chii, T. vim. The people of Chios, 
an island in the Aegean Sea, on 
the coast of Ionia. 

Chrestus, Cl. xxv. 4; see note. 

Christiani, N. XVI. 2. 

Ohrysippus, Pers. A celebrated 
Stoic philosopher, born at Soli 
in Cilicia in 280 B.C. 

Cicero, see Tullius. 

Cilicia, J. IIL, vIII.; V. vim. 4. 
(See Trachia. A district of 
south-eastern Asia Minor. 

Cimber, see Annius and Tillius. 

Cimbri, J. xr; Cal. LI. 3. A 
people of the Cimbric peninsular 
(Jutland) in northern Germany. 

Cimbricus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Cimbri : bellum, A. XXIII. 2. 

Cinaria, T. LVI. An island in the 
Aegean Sea (also called Cinara), 
modern Zinara. 

Cincinnatus, Cal. XXxv. 1. 

Cinna, see Cornelius and Helvius. 

Cinna, Gr. XI. 

Cinnanus, -a, -um, adj. from Cinna : 
temporibus, Cal. Lx. 

Circus Maximus, J. XXXIX. 2; A. 
XLIII. 2, LXXIV.; Cal. XVIII. 3; 
Cl. XXI. 3; N. XXII. 2, xxv. 2, 


521 


INDEX 


XVI. 2; D. Iv. 1; v. The 
reat Circus at Rome, in the 

valley between the Palatine and 
Aventine hills, often called 
merely ''the Circus," altho 
there were others at Rome. 

Ciris, Verg. 17. 

Cisalpina, see Gallia. 

Civica Cerealis, D. x. 2. 

Claudia, T. rir. 3. Daughter of 
App. Claudius Caecus. 

Claudia (Quinta), T. r1. 3. Grand- 
daughter of App. Claudius Caecus. 

Claudia, T. u. 4. A Vestal virgin. 

Claudia, A. LXII. 1. Daughter of 
Fulvia and P. Clodius. 

Claudia, Cl. XXVII. 1 (bis). Daughter 
of the emperor Claudius. 

Claudia Augusta, N. xxxv. 3. 
Daughter of the emperor Nero. 

Claudii, T. II. 1, 4; vi. 2. L. 
Claudii duo, T. I. 2. 

Claudilla, see Iunia. 

Claudius, the Emperor : T. Claudius 


XXXIII. 1, XXXV. 4, ot 
G. VII. 1, XIV. 3; O. I. 2, 3; Vit. 
nl. 4, 5, IV.; V. IV. 1, Xxv.; Tit. 
IL ; D. Iv. 35 Gr. XXIII. ; Claudius 
Caesar, Cl. I. 1; Divus Claudius, 
V. IX. 1; Germanicus, Cl. 11. 1. 

Claudius, -a, -um, adj. to Claudius, 
Claudii: gens, T. I. 1; aquae, Cl. 
XX. 1; familiae, Cl. XXXIX. 2. 

Claudius Agathurnus, Pers. 

Claudius, Appius, Gr. X. Brother 
of P. Clodius Pulcher. 

Claudius, Atta, T. I. 1. 

Claudius Caecus, App. T. mn. 1, 

. 1; Cl. xxiv. 1 ( bis). Consul 

in 312 B.c. 

Claudius Caudex, App. T. rm. 1. 
Consul in 264 B.C. 

(Claudius) Nero, Tib. (?), T. rr. 1. 

(Claudius) Nero, (Tib.), T. Im. 1. 
Son of Caecus. 

(Claudius) Nero, Tib., A. LXII. 2; 
T. Iv. 1. Husband of Livia. 
Claudius Nero, see Tiberius, the 

Emperor. 


522 


Claudius Pulcher, App., T. II. 2, 3, 
III. 1. Son of Caecus. 

Claudius Pulcher, P, Gr. x; 
more commonly known as P. 
Clodius Pulcher, q.v. 

Claudius Regilianus, T. rm. 2. 
The Decemvir, consul in 451 B.C.. 
(traditional chronology). 

Claudius Russus, T. II. 2; see note 
on text. 

Clemens, T. xxv. 1, 8. See also 
Arrecinus and Flavius, 

Cleopatra, J. XXXV. 1, LII. 1, 2; 
A. XVII. (quater); N. II. 2. 

Clitumnus, Cal. XLII. A river of 
southern Umbria, celebrated for 

. the clearness of its water, and 
described by Pliny, Epist. 8. 8. 
Also & grove at its source, sacred 
to Juppiter Clitumnus. 

Clodianus, D. xvil. 2. 

Clodius (Pulcher), P., J. vi. 2, xx. 
4, XXVI. 1, LXXIV. 2; A. LXII. 1; 
T. 1. 4. The notorious tribune 
&nd opponent of Cicero. 

Clodius, Sex., Rh. v. (bis). 

Clodius Licinus, Gr. xx. 

Clodius Macer, G. XI. 

Clodius Pollio, D. 1. 1. 

Clodius, Servius, Gr. III. Din 

Clodius, -a, -um, adj. to Clodius : 

9 D. IX. 3. Y 

Clunia, G. IX. 2. A city of northern 
Spain, in the country of the 
Arevaci. 

Cluvius Rufus, N. XXI. 2. 

Cocceianus, see Salvius. 

Codeta minor, J. XXXIX. 4. A 
manly place on the right bank 
of the Tiber, opposite the Campus 
Martius. 

Colosseros (from  KoAoceós and. 

*Epos), Cal. XXXV. 2. 

Colossus, N. XXXI. 1; a colossal 
Statue of Nero in the vestibule of 
the Golden House. Of. V. xvi. 

Columbinus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Columbus, a gladiator : venenum, 
Cal. Lv. 2. 

Columbus, Cal. Lv. 2. 

Comata, see Gallia. 

Commagene, V. vill. 4. A district 
in the northern part of Syria, 
bordering on the Euphrates. 


INDEX 


Commagenus, -8, -um, adj. from 
Commagene : Cal. xvi. 3. 

Compitales Lares, Aug. XXXI. 4. 
Tutelary gods, having shrines at 
the cross-roads (compita). 

Compitalia, Ter. V. A play of 


Compitalicii ludi, Aug. XXXI. 4. 
Games celebrated at the Compi- 
talia, the festival of the Compi- 
tales Lares, in the early part of 
January. 

Comum, see Novum Comum. 

Concordia, T. Xx.; Vit. xv. 4. A 
Roman goddess with a temple at 
the western end of the Forum, 
at the foot of the Capitoline hill. 
A title given to Vitellius, Vit. xv. 


4 pa. 

Confluentes, Cal. vi. 1. A town 
at the confluence of the Moselle 
and the Rhine, modern Coblentz. 

Cordubensis, -e, adj. from Corduba, 
a city of southern Spain, modern 
Cordova: A. LI. 2; Luc. 

Cordus, see Cremutius. 

Corfinium, J. XXXIV. 1; N. Iil 2. 
A city of the Paeligni in central 
Italy, modern Pelino. 

Corinthiarius, A. LXX. 2; see note. 

Corinthius, -a, -um, adj. from 
Corinthus : vasa, A. LXX. 2 (bis); 
T. XXXIV. 1. Vessels made o 
Corinthian bronze and highly 


prized. 

Cori thus, G., III. 4. 

Cornelia, J. I. 1, vi. 1, 2. First 
wife of Julius Caesar. 

Cornelia, D. vil. 4. A chief Vestal. 

Cornelii, J. LIX. 

Cornelius, A. XXVI. 1; see also 
Scipio and Sulla. ‘ 

Cornelius, -a, -um, adj. to Corne- 
lius: legibus, J. XI.; lege, A. 
XXXIII. 2. 

Cornelius Alexander, surnamed 
Polyhistor and Historia, Gr. xx. 

Cornelius Balbus, J. LXXviil. 1, 
LXXXI. 2; A. XXIX. 5. 

(Cornelius) Cinna (L.), J. 1. 1. 
Consul with Marius. 

(Cornelius) Cinna, L., J. V. Son 
of the p 

Cornelius Cinna, J. LXXXV. 


(Cornelius) Dolabella, J. rv. 1, 
XLIX. 1 (bis), Lv. 1. 

Cornelius Dolabella, Cn., Ter. v. 

adig Dolabella, Cn., G. XII. 2. 

Cornelius) Dolabella, P., J. XXXVI. 

(Cornelius) Dolabellg (P.), Gr. XIV 
Son-in-law of Cicero. 

Cornelius Epicadius, Gr. XII. 

Cornelius Fuscus, D. VI. 1. Pre- 
fect of the practorian guard. 

Cornelius Gallus, A. LXVI. 1, 2; 
Gr. xvi. (fer); Verg. 19. The 
elegiac poet. 

Cornelius Laco, G. XIv. 2. Prefect 
of the praetorian guard. 

Cornelius Nepos, J. Lv. 1; A. 
LXXVII.; Gr. Iv.; Rh. m1.; Ter. 
X, HI. The well-known Roman 
writer (00—24 B.C.). 

Cornelius Phagita, J. LXXIV. 1. 

Cornelius Sabinus, Cal. LVII. 2 (bis). 

Cornificius, L., A. XXIX. 5. 

Cornutus, L. Annaeus, 
(deciens). 

Corvinus, see Statilius and Valerius. 

Cosanus, -a, -um, adj. from Cosa, a 
city of Etruria, modern Anse- 
donia; praedia, V. II. 1. 

Cosconius, Q., Ter. V. 

Cosmus, A. LXVII. 1l. 

Cossutia, J. I. 1. 

Cotiso, A. LXII. 2. A king of the 
Getae. 

Cotta, see Aurunculeius and Aure- 

ius. 

Cottius, T. XXXVI. 3; N. xvii. The 
name of two kings, father and son, 
whose realm was in the Cottian 
Alps, between Italy and Gaul. 

Crassicius Pasicles, L., Gr. xvi. 
( Later surnamed Pansa. 

Crassus, see Licinius. 

Crates, Gr. IL, XI. A celebrated 
grammarian of Mallos in Cicilia. 

Cremona, V. VII. 1; Verg. 6, 7. A 
city of northern Italy, on the Po. 

Cremutius Cordus, A. xxxv. 2; 

al. XVI. 1; cf. T. LXI. 3. A 
Roman historian of the time of 
Augustus and Tiberius, 

Creta, V. Il. 3. 

Crispinus, see Rufrius. 

Crispus, see Passienus, Sallustius, 
and Vibius. 

523 


Pers. 


INDEX 


Culex, Verg. 17; Luc. 
poem of Vergil. 

Cumae, Gr. vill. . An ancient 
town of Campania. 

Cupido, Cal. VII.; G. xx. 2 

Curio, C.: pater, J. 1X. 2 (bis), 8, 
XLIX. 1 (bis), Lu. 3; filius, J. 


An early 


the site of which was afterwards 
enclosed by a wall and has 
recently been unearthed. Various 
stories are told of its origin; see 
Varro, Ling. Lat. 6. 148 f.; Livy, 
1. 12; 7. 6; Dionysius Hal., 2. 42. 

Curtius fons, Cl. xx. 1. A spring 
in the Sabine country, one of 
the sources of the Claudian 
aqueduct. i ; 

Curtius Nicias, Gr. XIV. (quinquies). 

Custos, see Juppiter. 

Cutiliae (also Cutilia), V. XXIV. A 
town in the Sabine country, near 
Reate. 

Cybiosactes, V. XIX. 2; see note. 

Cynegirus, J. LXVIII. 4. A brother 
of the poet Aeschylus, who dis- 
tinguished himself by his valour 
at the battle of Salamis. . 

Cynicus, see Demetrius and Isidorus. 

Cynobellinus, Cal. XLIV. 2. A king 
of the Britons. 

Cyrenae, V. 11. 3. A Greek city on 
the northern coast of Africa, 
between Carthage and  Alex- 
andria. 

Cyrus, J. LXXXVII. Cyrus the 
Great, founder of the Persian 
Empire; the subject of Xeno- 
phon's Cyropaedeia. 

Cyziceni, Tib. xxxvm. 3. The 
people of Cyzicus, a city of 
north-western Asia Minor. 


DACI, J. XLIV. 3; A. VIII. 2, XXI. 1; 
T. xri; D. vi. 1 (bis) The 
people of Dacia, on the northern 
bank of the Danube. 

Dalmatae (also Delmatae), T. Ix. 2. 
The people of Dalmatia. . 

Dalmatia (also Delmatia), A. XXL 


524 


1; Cl. xm. 2; O. x. 8. A 
country on the eastern shore of 
the Adriatic. 

Damoetas, Verg. 43. 

Danuvius, T. xvi. 2. The Danube, 

Daphnis, Verg. 14; seealso Lutatius. 

Dareus, Cal. XIx.2. A Parthian boy. 

Datus, N. XXXIX. 3. An actor. 

December mensis, J. XL. 2; A. 

XXII. 3, LXXI. 1; Cal. v1. 2; Hor. 
bis); Pers. (bis). 

Delmatia, see Dalmatia, 

Delmaticus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Delmatia ( Dalmatia) : bellum, A. 
XX.; triumphus, A. XXII. 

Delphi, N. XL. 3. The chief city 
of Phocis in Greece, famous for 
its oracle. 

Demetrius Cynicus, V. XIII. 

Demochares, A. XVI. 3. 

denarius, A. LVII. 2, LXI. 4, LXVII. 

. 2; T. XLVIII. 2; Cal XLVI. A 
Roman coin containing ten, and 
afterwards eighteen, asses; equal 
to about 8d. or 16 cents. 

Dertosa, G. X. 4. A town of 
Spain, near the mouth of the 
Iberus (Ebro). 

Dialis, -e, adj. to Juppiter (cf. 
Diespiter) : flamen, J. 1. 1, the 
special priest of Jupiter; famon- 
um A. XXXI. 4; sacerdote, D. 
IV. . 

Diana, A. xxix. 5. The Roman 
goddess identifled with the Greek 
Artemis. 

Diana, Gr. xr. (bis). 
Valerius Cato. 

Dictynna, Gr. XI.; see note. 

Dido, N. XxxI. he well-known 

ueen of Carthage. 

Didymeum, Cal. XXI. A sanctu- 
ary of Apollo Didymaeus at 
Didyma, a city of Ionia near 
Miletus. 


A poem of 


Diodorus, V. XIX. 1. A lyre- 
player. : 

Diogenes, T. XXXI. 2. A gram- 
marian. 

Diomedes, A. LXVII. 1. <A steward 


of Augustus. 
Dionysius, A. LXXXIX. 1. 

Areus, a philosopher. 
Dionysius Scytobrachion, Gr. vij. 


Son of 


INDEX 


* Dionysius of the leathern arm," 
an historian of Mytilene. 

Dioscurides, A. L. 

Dirae, Verg. 17. 

Diribitorium, Cl. XVI. 1 (see note). 

Dis, O. vir. 3. God of the Under 
World, another naine for Pluto. 

Dius Fidius, T. xxr. 6. God of 
Faith, at first identifled with 
Juppiter and later with the Sabine 
deity Semo Sancus. 

Dolabella, see Cornelius. 

Domitia Lepida: Lepida, N. v. 2, 
VI. 3, VII. 1; Domitia, Pass. 
Aunt of the emperor Nero. 

Domitia Longina, T. x. 2; D. I. 3, 
Iu. 1 (Augusta); XXI. Wife of 
the emperor Domitian. : 

Domitianus, the emperor: Domi- 
tianus, V. 1.1, 1.; D. I. 1 (bis), 
XVII. 2, XXII. 2; Caesar, D. 1. 3, 
IH. 1, XU. 2; Germanicus, D. 
XIII. 3; Divus, D. XXIII. 1. 

Domitianus, D. xv. 1. Son of 
Flavius Clemens. 

Domitianus mensis, D. XII. 3. 

Domitii, N. 1. 2, L. 

Domitilla, see Flavia. 

Domitius (Cn.), N. 1. 1. Grand- 
father of Nero’s grandfather. 
Domitius (Cn., mss. T.), A. XVI. 2; 
cf. N. III. Great-grandfather of 

the emperor Nero. 

Domitius js , J. XXIII. 1, XXIV. 1 
Gu c . IH. 2. Father of 

ero's great-grandfather. 

Domitius, N. IV. Grandfather of 
the emperor Nero. 

Domitius Ahenobarbus, L., N. I. 1. 
The first to bear the surname, 
Domitius Ahenobarbus (Cn), N. 
VI. 1, IX., XXxvIII.; G. v. 1, VI. 1 
(mss. L.); O. u. 1; Vit. n. 2; 
cf. N. v. Father of the emperor 

_ Nero. 

Domitius Ahenobarbus, Cn., Rh. I.; 
cf. N. H. 1. 

Domitius Marsus, Gr. IX., XVI; cf. 
Tibull. A poet of the Augustan 
Age. à 

Domitius -a, -um, adj. to Domitius: 
gens, N. I. 1. 

Domus publica, J. XLVI. The 
official residence of the pontifex 


maximus, near the temple of 
Vesta in the Forum. 

Dorice, adv. from Doricus, “ Doric,” 
T. LVI. 

Doris, -idis, adj. sc. dialectus, T. LVI. 
The Doric dialect. 

Doryphoros, N. XXIX. A freed- 
man. 

Drausus, T. 11. 2. 

Druidae, Cl. xxv. 5. The Druids 
a Gallic priesthood, with cruel 
and barbarous rites, abolished by 
Claudius. 

Drusi, see Livii. 

Drusilla, see Julia, Livia. 

Drusinus, -a, -um, adj. from Drusus 
fossae, Cl. I. 2 (see note). 

Drusus, see Claudius. 

Drusus, T. n1. 2. The first of the 
name. 

Drusus, T. vri. 1. Grandfather of 
Tiberius. 

Drusus, T. Liv. 1, 2, Lxv. 2; Cal. 
VII., XII. 1; Cl. IX. 1; O. I. 3. 
Son of Germanicus Caesar. 

Drusus, Cl. xxvii. 1 (bis). Son of 
the emperor Claudius. 

Drusus (Decimus and Nero; see 
Cl. I. 1): Drusus, A. XCIX. 1; 
T. VII. 3, L. 1, LXXVI.; Cal. 1. 1; 
Cl. r. 1, 2, XI. 3, XLVI.; Hor.; 
Nero, T. 1v. 3; Germanicus, Cl. 
I. 3. Brother of Tiberius, 

Drusus, C., A. XCIV. 6. 

Drusus Caesar, A. C. 3, CI. 2; T. 
vH. 2, XV. 1, XXIII., xxv. 3, 
XXXIX., LII. 1 (bis), LIV. 1, LV., 
LXII. 1; Vit. III. 2. Son of the 
emperor Tiberius. 

Dyrrachium, J. XXXVI., LVIII. 2, 
LXVII. $. A town in the 
southern part of Illyricum, 
nearly opposite Brundisium. 

Dyrrhacinus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Dyrrachium: munitione, J. 
LXVIII. 2. 


EFICIUS CALVINUS, Gr. II. 

Ecloge, N. L. A nurse of Nero. 

Eglogus, Q. (?), Vit. I. 2. 

Egnatius, M., A. XIX. 1. 

Electra, J. LXXXIV. 2 (see note on 
text). A tragedy of Sophocles, 
rendered into Latin by Atilius. 


525 


INDEX 


Elenchi, Gr. VIII.: see note. 

Elephantis T. XLii. 2. A Greek 
writer on amatory subjects, of 
uncertain date ; cf. Mart. 12. 43.4. 

Eleusinius, -8, -um, adj. from 
Eleusis, the city. of Attica, 
famous for the Eleusinian mys- 
teries : sacra, Cl. xxv. 5; N. XXXIV. 
4; cf. A. XCIII. 

Elogus, Q., see Eglogus. 

Elysius, -a, -um, adj. from Elysium: 
campos, Tibull. 

Ennia Naevia, Cal. XII. 2, XXVI. 1. 

Ennius, Q., A. VII. 2; cf. T. XXI. 5; 
Gr. I. (bis), n. (bis), vim. The 
* Father of Roman poetry," who 
lived from 239 to 169 B.c. 

Ennius, Gr. I. The *‘ younger 
Ennius,” a grammarian who 
flourished from 140 to 100 B.C. 

Epaphroditus, N. XLIX. 3; D. xIv.4. 

Epicadtus, see Asinius and Corne- 
lus, 


Epicureus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Epicurus, the famous philo- 
sopher: cuiusdam, Gr. VI; 


sectae, Gr. VIII. 

Epidius, M., Rh. IV. (ter). 

Epidius Marullus, J. LXXIX. 1, 
LXXX. 3. A tribune of the 
commons. 

Epidius, of Nuceria, Rh. IV. 

Epigrammata, Verg. 17. 

Epirota, Gr. xvI. (bis). Of Epirus, 
a surname of Q. Caecilius. 

Eratosthenes, Gr. x. A famous 
scholar and writer, born at 
Cyrene in 276 B.C. A librarian of 
the great Library at Alexandria. 

Eros, Verg. 34; see also Staberius. 

Erycina, Cl. xxv. 5. A surname 
of Venus, from her shrine at 
Mt. Eryx in the western part 
of Sicily. 

Esius, see Aesius. 

Esquiliae, T. XV. 1; N. XXXI. 1; 
Hor.; Verg. 13. The largest of 
the hills of Rome, the Esquiline, 
in the western part of the city. 
Plural because it consisted of 
several different parts. ' 

e campus, Cl. XXV. 3; see 


note. 
essedarius, see gladiator. 
526 


Etruria, J. XXXIV. 


1; O. 1. 1; Pers. 

Etruscus, -a, -um, adj. to Etruria : 
lingua, A. XCVII. 2. 

Eulogius, Q., see Eglogus. 

Eunoe, J. Lui. 1. A Moorish queen. 

Eunuchus, Ter. 11. '' The Eunuch,” 
one of the plays of Terence. 

Euphorion, T. Lxx. 2. A Greek 
elegiac poet of the Alexandrine 
school, noted for his ornate and 
obscure style. He was born at 
Chalcis in 276 B.c. 

Euphrates, Cal. xiv. 3. The well- 
known river of Syria. 

Euripides, J. xxx. 5; cf. A. XXV. 4. 
The Athenian tragic poet. 

Eutychus, Cal. Lv. 2. A charioteer. 

Eutychus, A. XCVI. 2. A donkey- 
driver (see note). 


FABIANUS, -&, -um, adj. from Fabia 
(tribus) : tribules, A. XL. 2 


Fabius Africanus, Cl. rt. 1. Consul 
in 10 A.D. 
Fabius Labeo, Q., Ter. Iv. 


(Fabius) Maximus, Q., J. LXXX. 2. 

Fabius Persicus, Pers. 

Falacrina, V. II. 1. A village in 
the Sabine country north-east of 
Rome, near Reate. 

Fannius Caepio, A. XIX. 1; T. vin. 

Fannius Strabo, C., Rh. I. Consul 
in 161 B.c. 

Faunus, Vit.1.2. A mythical king 
of the Laurentes in Latium, 
father of Latinus, 

Faustus, see Perellius. 

Faustus Sulla, Cl. XXVII. 2; see also 
Sulla. 

Favonius, M., A. XIIL 1. 

Favor, V. XIX. 2. 

Felicitas, T. v. Good Fortune, as a 
goddess. 

Felix, Cl. xxvrm.; a freedman of 
Claudius: see also Sulla the 
Dictator. 

Fenestella, Ter. I. (bis). A writer 
of history who died towards the 
end of the reign of Tiberius. 

Ferentium,-0O. 1. 1; V. rl. A town 
of southern Etruria. 

Fidenae, T. XL.; Cal. XXXI. A 
town in the Sabine territory, a 
short distance north of Rome, 


a eee 


INDEX 


Fidius, see Dius Fidius. 

Flaccus, Verg. 14; see also Horatius, 
Norbanus, Persius, Pomponius, 
Veranius, and Verrius. 

Flaminia via, A. xxx. 1, C. 4. 
The road leading north by east 
from Rome to Ariminum 
(Rimini), built by C. Flaminius 
in 223 B.C. The part within the 
city, called the Via Lata, corre- 
sponded with the modern Corso. 

Flavia Domitilla, V. nr. Wife of 
Vespasian. 

(Flavia) Domitilla, V. m1. Daughter 
of Vespasian. 

(Flavia) Domitilla, D. xvir. 1. 
Wife of Flavius Clemens. 

Flaviales, D. Iv. 4 (see note). 

Flaviani, Vit. Xv. 3. Followers of 
Flavius Vespasianus (the em- 
peror Vespasian). 

Flavii, Vit. v. 2. 

Flavius, see Domitianus, Titus, 
Vespasianus. 

Flavius, -a, -um, adj. to Flavius, 
Flavii: gens, V. I|. 1; gentis 
templum, D. I. 1, V., xv. 2, 
XVII. 3; generis origo, V. XII. 


Flavius Clemens, D. xv. 1. Cousin 
of Domitian. 
Flavius Liberalis, V. nmi. Father- 


in-law of Vespasian. 

Flavius Petro, T., V. I. 2, 4. 

Flavius Sabinus, V. 1. 2, v. 2. Son 
of Flavius Petro and father of 

. Vespasian. 

Flavius Sabinus, Vit. xv. 2, 3; 
V. 1. 3; D. 1. 2. Brother of 
Vespasian. 

Flavius Sabinus, D. x. 4. 
of Domitian. 

Flavus, see Cassetius, Verginius and 


Cousin 


Sulpicius. 
Florales ludi, G. vr. 1. Games on 
the Floralia, the festival of 


Flora, goddess of flowers, held 
April 28. 
Florus (Flaurus), see Mestrius. 
Fonteius Capito, C, Cal. vi. 1. 
Consul in 12 A.D. 


Fonteius Capito (L), G. xr. 
Consul in 59 A.D. 
Formiani, Vit. vi. 2. The people 


of Formiae, a town of south- 


cestern Latium on the Appian 

ay. 

Fortuna, A. LXV. 1; N. xxii. 3; 
G. Iv. 3, XVIII. 2 (bis); Praenes- 
tina, D. xv. 2; Fortunae Antia- 
tinae, Cal. LVII. 3. 

Forum Appi, T. uw. 2. A small 
town of Latium south-east of 
Rome on the Appian Way, at 
the beginning of the Pomptine 
Marshes. 

Frugi, see Calpurnius and Licinius. 

Fucinus lacus, J. XLIV. 3; Cl. xx. 1, 
2, XXI. 6, XXXII. A lake in the 
country of the Marsi, east of 
Rome, drained by Claudius. 

Fulvia, A. XVII. 5, LXII. 1 (bis); 
Rh. v. Wife of Mark Antony. 

Fulvia Sisennia, Pers. 

Fulvius Nobilior, M., Ter. v. 
Consul in 159 B.O. f 

Fundanus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Fundi, T. v.; decurione, Cal. 
XXIII. 2; see also Galeria. 

Fundi, T. v.; G. Iv. 1, VII. 1. A 
cm of Latium on the Appian 

ay. 

Furiae, N. XxxIv. 4. The Furies, 
the Greek Eumenides. 

Furius, Ter., I. V. 

Furius Bibaculus, Gr. IV., IX., XI. 
A Roman poet born 103 B.c., 
Darodied by Horace, Serm. 9. 5. 


(Furius) Camillus, T. mur. 2, Cl. 
XXVI. 1l. Dictator in 396 B.c. 
(Furius) Camillus Arruntius, O. i. 

1. Consul in 32 A.D. 
Furius Camillus Scribonianus, Cl. 
XIII. 2, XXXV. 2; O. I. 2. 
Furius Leptinus, J. XXXIX. 1. 
Furnilla, see Marcia. 
Fuscus, see Cornelius. 
Fusius, Pers. 


GABINIUS, A., J. L. 1. 

Gabinius Secundus Cauchius (P.), 
Cl. XXIV. 3. 

Gadareus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Gadara, a town of Palestine, 
T. LVII. 1. 

Gades, J. VII. 1. A city of south- 
western Spain, modern Cadiz. 


527 


- INDEX 


Gaetuli, Ter. I. A people of 
north-eastern Africa. 

Gaetulicus, see Lentulus. 

Gaianus, -a, -um, adj. from Gaius, 
referring to the emperor: nez, 


Tit. 1 

Gaius (Caligula), the emperor: 
Caligula, Cal. IX.; Gaius, T. LIV. 
1, LXII. 3, LXXIII. 2 LXXV. 2, 
LXXVI; Cal. VIII. 3, 4, 5, xv. 3, 
XIX. 3, XXXVIII. 4, 5 2, LVII. A 
LX.; Cl. VII., IX. 1, x. 1, XI. 1, 3, 
XX. 1, XXXVIII. 3; N. VI. 3, XXX. 
1; G. vi. 3, VIL. 1; O. v1. 1; Vit 
IV., XVII. 2; V. N. 3; C. Caesar, 


VI. 2; Vit. HI. 5; V. V. 3; Pass; 
Caesar, Cal. XXIX. 1, XXE 2, 
XLI. 1, XLV. 3; Cl. Ix. ; optimus 
mazimus Caesar, Gal. XXII. I 
Jupiter Latiaris, Cal. XXII. 2. 

Galba, see Sulpicius. 

Galeria Fundana, Vit. VI. 

Galli, J. LXxvI. 3, Lxxx. 2 (bis); 
Cal. xxix. 2; Cl. Xxv. 5; NES 


III. 2, VI. 3; Vit. x. 1; D. mJ. a: 
Gr. VII., X.; Cisalpina, J. XXII. 
1, XXIX. 2; Citerior, J. xxx. 1, 
LVI. 5; Comaia, Transalpine 
Gaul, where the natives wore 
their hair long. J. XXII. 1; T. 
IX. 1; Togata, Gr. II., the Roman 
Province, where the toga was 
worn; Transalpina, J. XXIX. 


Galliae, J. XXII. 1, XXIV. 3, XXVIII. 
1, XLIX. 4; A. LXXIX. 1: F. XLI., 
XLIX. 2: Cal. XLVII. ; Cl. I. 3; 
N. XL. 4, XLIII. 1, 2: G. IX. 2, 


XII. 1. 
Gallicanus, -a, -um, adj. from 
allia: hominis, Vit. XVIII. ; 


homines, N. XLIII. 1. 

Gallicus, -a, -um, adj. from Gallia ; 
bellum, J. LVI. 1 (bis); bella, J. 
LXIX.; N. XXXVIII. 2; exercitus, 
N. m. 2; habitus, J. Lvl. 1; 
provincia, Cl. xxiv. 2; triumphus 


528 


J. XXXVII. 1, 2, XLIX. 4, LÍ.; 
vocabulum, J. XXIV. 2. 
Gallinas, ad., G. I. (see note). 
Gallius, M., T. VI. 3 (bis). 
Gallius, Q., A. XXVII. 4. 
Gallograecia, Cal. XXIX. 2. 


Gallus, -a, -um, adj. to Galli: 
miles, N. XLI. 2. 
Gallus, Gr. XI.; see also Afinius, 


Asinius, Cerrinius, Cestius, Cor- 
nelius, Plotius, Roscius, Sul- 
Gallus, A. LXVIII. 
Magna Mater (Cybe 
^ii en city of 
Judaea. 
Gebenna, see Cebenna. 
house on the south-western slope 
of the Palatine Hill, opposite the 
Geminus, see Janus ue 
Gemoniae NP . Ll. 2, LXI. 4, 
flight of $23 leading from the 
Forum to the Capitoline Hill, 
Concord and the Carcer. 
Genetrix, see Venus, . 
Ga, Cal. XXVII. 3. 
Georgica, Verg. 20, 22, 25, 27, 43. 
Gergovia, J. XXV. 2. The principal 
town of the Arverni, in the 
Germani, J. xxv. 2 (bis); A. XXI. 1, 
XLIX. 1; T. XVII. 1, XII; Cal. 
XXV. 4; N. XXXIV. l; G. xu. 2: 
Plin.; : sing. T. XXXVII. 4. 
T. VII. 3, XVI. 1, Xvi. 1, XVII. 1; 
XX., XXV. 1; Cal. 1. IV. , XIX. 3, 
V. IV. 15 Tit. Iv. 1; D. XVI. 1; 
Inferior, "Vit. VII. 1; Superior, 
Vit. VIIL. 2). 
Germaniae, D. 11. 1. 
The soldiers of the army in 
Germany. 


picius, 
P Ber of the 

Gamala, Tit. Iv. 
Gelotiana domus, Cal. xvin. 3. A 

Circus Maximus. 

LXXV. 1, 'Vit. xvi. 2. A 

probably between the temple of 
Genius : "Augusti, A. LX. (see note) ; 

The Georgics of Vergil. 

eastern part of Aquitania. 

XLV. 1, LV. 2, LVIII. 3; Cl. 1. 4, 
Germania, J. LVIII. 1; A. XXIII. 1: 
LI. 3; Cl. IX. 1; G wie 
G. XVI. 2; D. vi. 2 (cf. G . VI. 2; 
Germaniciani, T. xxv. 2; G. xx. 1. 
Germanicianus, -a, -um, adj. from 


| 


— 


INDEX 


Germania: exercitus, O. VIII. 1; 
V. VI. 2. 

Germanicus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Germania : um. T. IX. 1, 2; 
Cl. 1. 2; N. 4, : bella, A. XX.; 
expeditio, Cal. xum. : E rc CL. 
XXIV. 3; legiones, . 4; res, 
Vit. IX.; sermo, “Gale XLVII.: 
victoria, Y. II. 3. 

Germanicus Caesar, A. xxxiv. 2 
LXIV. 1, CI. 2; T. Xv. 2, xxv. 2, 
3, XXXIX., Li. 
LV. TEE 1, n M.; 
HI. 1, Vk; 1, Vill... 
XIII., sd. - Cl. I. 6, VII., 
nag 3, XXIX. 1; N. v. 2; O. 

8; Vit. II. Son of Drusus 

l and ‘brother of Claudius. 


Germanicus, see Britannicus, 
Claudius, Domitianus, Drusus, 
Vitellius. 


Germanicus mensis, Cal. xv. 2; 
D. XII. 3. 

Germanus, see Germani. 

Geryonis oraculum, T. XIV. 3. 

Gesoriacum, Cl. XVII. 2. A town 
of Belgic Gaul on the Fretum 
Gallicum (English Channel), also 
called Bononia; modern Bou- 
logne-sur-mer. 

Getae, A. Lxin. 2. A Thracian 
people on the southern bank of 
the Danube, which separated 
them from the Dacians, 

gigantum ossa, A. LXXII. 3. Bones 
2 huge sea-monsters, collected 

Augustus. 
aibbrio. see Acilius, 
gladiator, a professional fighter, 
trained for contests in the 
amphitheatre and elsewhere. 
The gladiatores had special 
names according to their 
armour and equipment; for 
full details see Friedlander, 
Roman Life and Manners, 
Eng. trans., iv. pp. 171 ff. The 
following are mentioned by 
Suetonius : 
essedarii, who fought from Gallic 
"yard e (essedae) : Cal. XXXV. 
8; Cl. XXI. 5. 
iibris see note on Claud. 


SON 


murmilliones, who fought with 
the Thraeces and with the 
retiarii. They derived their 
name from a kind of 
(poppúpos OF poppvdAos), an 
image of which they wore as 
a device on their helmets. 
Little or nothing is known 
about their armour: Cal. 
DET 2, LV. 2; N. xxx. 2; 
. X. 1. 
oplomachi, heavy armed gladi- 
ators; according to Lipsius, a 
. later ‘name for the Samnites, 
. derived from their large shield 
(ómAov) : Cal. xxxv. 2. 
paegniarii, Cal. XxvI. 5 (see note) 
retiarii, '' net- co peep who were 
lightly armed and fought with 
uncovered heads. They car- 
ried a net, in which they tried 
to entangle their opponents, 
and a trident and dagger, with 
which they slew them, if 
successful: Cal. xxx. 3: Cl. 
XXXIV. 1, 
secutores, the usual opponents of 
the retiarii. They were armed 
with a sword, a shield, one 
grave and a visored helmet : 
l. XXX. 
Thraeces, heavily armed gladi- 
Mom but distinguished from 
lomachi by the small 
Titae an buckler (parma) in 
place of the large shield. They 
wore greaves on both legs, & 
visored helmet, and a sleeve 
on the right arm, and carried 
& short curved or bent sword 
(sica). They fought with one 
another, with the oplomacht, 
and with the murm 
Cal. xxxv. 2, LIV. 1, LV. 2: 
Tit. vii. 2; D. x. i. 
Glycias, T. II. 2. 
Glyco, A. XI. A physician. 
Gnipho, see a 
Gracchi, T. 2. The celebrated 


tribunes, "Tiberius and Gaius 
Gracchus. 
Graecanicus, -a, 52m adj. from 
Graecia : toga, D 


adv. from Arati T. 


529 


Graece, 


INDEX 


LXXI.; Cal. XXXIX. 1, XLII. 1; 
N. vi. 2, XXXIX. 2; Tit. Ur. 2; 
D. Iv. 4, XIN. 25 Gr. vi; Rh. I. 
Graecia, J. XXVIII. T. XLIX. 2 
Cal. xxn. 2; Ui "XVI. 2 (pro- 
vincia); N. XXV. 1, XXVII. 2, 
XXXIV. 4, LIII. ; Ter. IL, III, V.3 


Verg. 35. 
Graeci, J. LII. 2, LXVII. 4; A. 
XOVIII. 3; T. XLVI.; Cala XXIX. 2; 
N. XXII. 3; Gr. I „IV. (bis); Rh. L 
(bis); Ter. IV.a, Ves .; semigraeci, 

Gr. IV. 

Graeculi, T. XI. 1, LvI.; sing., Cl. 
Xv. 4. Diminutive of Graecus, 
with à contemptuous or patron- 
izing force. 

Graecus, -a, -um, adj. to Graecia : 
appellatione, Kh. 1.3 bibliotheca, 
J. XLIV. 2; A. XXIX. 3; certamen, 
A. XLY. 2 (see note); cliens, A. XL. 
3; comoea we, Cal, IU. 2; Cl. XI. 2: 
consuetudine, Gr. iV. ; disciplinae, 
A.LXNNIX. 1; epistula, Cl. XXV. 3; 
eloquentiae, Kh. v.; ezercitationt- 
bus, Rh. IL; facundin, Cal. xx.; 
genus, A. XXXI. 1; grammaticum, 
Gr. XX.; habitus, A. XCVIII. 3; 
historiae, Cl. XLII. 2; inscriptio, 
n XLV.2; Kalendae, À. LXXXVII. 

- litterae, J. LXXXI. 1; Gr. X.; 

nos N. XII. 3; poemata, T. LXX. 2: 
proverbium, T. XXxvim.; N. XX. 
1, XXXIII. 1; pugiles, A. XLV. 2; 
rhetores, V. XVIL. ; res, Verg. 21; 
germo, A. XCVIII. 3; T. LXXI. 1; 
N. xx. 2; studia, "Cl. XLII. 1; 
verba, J. LXXXI. 1, versus, T. 
` LHI. 1; V. XXIII. 1; voz, Cl. XLIII. 
Graius, -à, -um: scriptores, Verg. 30. 


HADRIATIOUM MARE, T.Xvi.2. The 
Adriatic Sea. 
Hadrumetum, V. 1v. 3. A city of 
northern Aírica, near Carthage. 
Halosis Ilii, N. xxxvii. 2. ''* The 
Sack of Troy," a poem, perhaps 
of his own composition, sung 
by Nero during the burning of 
Rome. . 
Halotus, Cl. XLIV. 2; G. xv. 2 (bis). 
Hannibal, T. 11. 1; D. x. 3. 
Marpocras, Cl. XXVIII. 


530 


Hasdrubal, T. rr. 1. Brother of 
Hannibal. 

Haterius, Q., T. XXIX.; cf. XXVII. 

Heautontimoreumenos, Ter., I. 
“ The Self-tormenter,” a comedy 
of Terence. 

Hector, T. Lit. 2; N. XXII. 1. 


Hecuba, T. Lxx. 3. Wife of 
Hector. 
Hecyra, Ter. mn. ''The Mother- 


in-law," a comedy of Terence. 

Hekatebeletes, N. XXXIX.2. “The 
Far-darter,'" an epithet of Apollo. 

Helius, N. XXII. 1. A freedman. 

Hellespontus, J. LXII.; Cal. XIX. 3. 
The Hellespont, ‘the narrow 
strait connecting the Aegean 
Sea and the Propontis (sea of 
Marmora), 

Helvetii, V. 1. 3. A Gallic ope. 

Helvidius Priscus, V. xv.; D. x. 3 
filius, D. x. 3. 

Meu Cinna, J. LII. 3, LXXXV. ; 

Hercules, J. VII. 1 (Gadibus), LVI. 73; 
A. XXIX. 5 (aedes Herculis 
Musarum), LXXII. 2 (Tibur); 
Cal. vill. Z (Tiburi) ; N. XX1. 3 (ine 
sanum, à tragedy sung by Nero), 
LIII. (facia); V. Py ee Verg. 46. 

Herennius, WE 44. í 

Hermaeum, Cl. x. 1. 

Hermas, see Laelius: 

Hermogenes Tarsensis, D. x. 1. 

heroides, N. XXI. 3. 

heroum arma, A. LXXII. 3. Ancient 
armour, the “* arms of the heroes, '* 
collected by Augustus. 

Hiempsal, J. LXXI. 

Hieria, see Plotia. 

Hierosolyma, A. XCIII.; N. X1. 2; 


Tit. v. 2. Jerusalem. 
Hilario, A. CI. 1. A freedman of 
Augustus. 


Hipparchus, V. XIL. 

Hirtius, A., J. LVI. 1, 3; A. 
XI. (bis), LXVIII. ; T. Y.; Bh. i 
One of Caesar's generals, who 
wrote the eighth book of the 
Gallic War. He was slain at 
Mutina in 43 B.0., while consul. 

Hispani, J. LXXXVI. 4. 

Hispania, J. IX. 3, XXXIV. 2, XXXV. 
2, XXXVI., LIV. 1, LV. 4, LXXI.; A. 


ee ^ jp» i v & NT = - B "a - 
1e eeen p a a NERO E yo 


INDEX 


LXVIII.; T. rt. 1, XLI.; G. m. 1, 
2, IX. 2, XIV. 2, XVI. 2, XXIL, 
XXIII. ; Z'arraconensis, GQ. VIII. 13 
Ulterior, J. Vu. 1, XVIII. 1, LVI. 5. 

Hispaniae, J. XXVIII. 1; A VII. 1, 
2; T. XLIX. 2; N. XLII. 1; G. 
XI. 1. The Spanish provinces. 

Hispanicus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Hispania: verbo, A. LXXXII. 2; 
freto, Vit. XIII. 2. 

Hispaniensis, -e, adj. from His- 
pania : triumphum, J. XXXVII. 1; 
victoriam, J. XXXVIII. 2; belli, 
J. LVI. 1; ezercitu, V. VI. 2. 

Hispanus, -a, -um, adj. to His- 
pania, Gr. xx. 

Historia, see Cornelius Alexander. 

Histria, D. XII. 2. A country at 
the north-eastern end of the 
Adriatic Sea, south of Tergeste 


(Trieste). l 
Homericus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Homerus: versus, T. XXI. 6; 


Cl. XLII. 1; cf. A. LXV. 4; Cal. 
XXII. 1, 4; Cl. XLII. 1; N. XLIX. 
3; G. Xx. 2; V. XXIII. 1; D. XII. 
3, XVIII. 2. 

Homerius, -a, -um, adj. from 
Homerus : scyphi, N. XLVII. 1. 
Homerus, Cal. xxxiv. 2; N. XLVII. 
1; Verg. 21, 43, 46 (bis). 
Horatius Flaccus, Q., Gr. 

Hor. (quater). 
Hortalus, T. XLVI. Grandson of 
Q. Hortensius. 

Hortensianus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Hortensius : aedes, A. LXXII. 1. 
Hortensius, Q., T. XLVII. The 

celebrated orator of the time of 
Cicero. 
Hortulorum (collis), N. L. (see note). 
Hyginus, see Julius. 
An actor of 


Hylas, A. XLV. 4. 
Hyle, Gr. x. (see note). 


IX.; 


pantomimes. 


IACOUS, see Pescennius. 
Ianiculum, Vit. 1. 8. A long hill 
east of Rome across the Tiber; 
included in the modern city, 
but outside the Aurelian Wall. 
Ianuariae Kalendae, J. XL. 2. —— 
Ianus : geminus, N. XIII. 2; Quiri- 
nus, A. XXH.; marmoreus, A. 


XXXI. 5; f. D. xm. 2. An 
old Italic deity, represented with 
two faces fronting in opposite 
directions; also used for his 
temple, which was open in time 
of war and closed in time of 
peace; and in general for an 
arch. 

Icarus, N. XII. 2. Son of Daedalus, 
with whom he vin dcm to fly 
from Crete across the Aegean 
Sea. Since he flew too high, 
the sun melted the wax with 
which his wings were held 
together. He fell into that 
part of the Aegean which was 
called from him the Icarian Sea, 
and was drowned. í 

Icelus Marcianus, N. XLIX. 4; G. 
XIV. 2, XXII. A freedman of 
the emperor Galba. 

Idaeus, -á, -um, adj. from Ida, a 
mountain near Troy: Mater 
deum, T. II. 3. 

Idus, the fifteenth of March, May, 
July, and October, and the 
thirteenth of the other months; 
J. LXXX. 4, LXXXI. 2, LXXXIII.; 
A. XV., XXXV. 3; Cal. LVII. 2; 
V. vi. 3; Verg. 2; Hor. 

Ilerda, J. LXXv. 2, a town of north- 
eastern Spain. 

Jlias, Verg. 30. 

Ilienses, T. LII. 2; Cl. xxv. 3 (bis); 
N.ViH.2. The people of Ilium. 
Ilium, J. LXXIX. 3; N. XXXVIII. 2. 

Another name for Troy. 

Illyricum, J. XXII. 1, xxix. 2, 
XXXVI. (bis); A. XXI. 1, XXV. 2, 
Xcvi. 3; T. xiv. 8, xvi. 1, 2, 
XVII. 1, XXI. 1, xxv. 1; O. 1, 2. 
A country on the eastern shore of 
the Adriatic Sea, opposite Italy. 

Illyricus, -a, -um, adj. to Illyricum : 
exercitus, A. XIX. 2. 

Imperator, as a praenomen, J. 
LXXVI. 1; T. XXVI. 2; Cl. xm. 1. 

Inalpinus, -a, -um, adj. from ín, 
Alpes : gentes, A. XXI. 1. 

Incendium, N. xr. 2. “ The Fire,” 
& fabula togata, or Roman play, 
of Afranius, ; 

Incitatus, Cal. Lv. 3. The name 
of a horse ; see note. 

531 


INDEX 


Indi, A. xxr. 8. The people of 
India. 

Indignatio, Gr. XI. A work of 
Valerius Cato. 

Ineptiae, Gr. XXI. Title of à book 
of Gaius Melissus. 

Inferum mare, A. XLIX. 1. “The 
Lower Sea," & term applied to 
the Tyrrhenian (Tuscan) Sea; 
ef. Superum mare. 

Invictus, T. xvii. 2. A surname 
which the senate proposed to 
confer on Tiberius. 

Ioci, Gr. xxi. The title of a book 
of Gaius Melissus. 

Ionis villa, T. LXV. 2. The name 
of a villa at Capreae (Capri). 

Iosephus, V. v. 

Isauricus, see Selvilius. 

Isiacus, D.L2. A priest of Isis. 

Isidorus, N. XXXIX. 3. A cynic 
philosopher. 

Isis, O. X11.1. An Egyptian deity, 
whose worship was popular at 
Rome in the days of the Empire. 

a (sc. certamina), N. XXIV. 
2. The Isthmian games, cele- 
brated every five years at Corinth. 

Isthmus, J. XLIV. 3; Cal. XxI.; N. 
XIX. 2, XXXVII. 3. The Isthmus 
of Corinth. 

Italia, J. XXVIII. 1, XXXVIII. 2, 
XLH. 1, LIV. 2, LXXV. 4, LXXIX. 
3, LXXXI. 1; A. XIII. 3, XVII. 2, 
3, XLV. 4, XLVI., 
VIII., XVI. 2, XXXVII. 1; Cal. 
XVI. '3; Cl. xvi. 2, XXIII. s XXV. 
2; N. '" XXXI. 3, XXXIX. Vit. 
XIV. 4; V. VII. 1; Tit. V.3 du RA 
2, X. 3; Rh. vi.; Hor.; Verg. 39. 

Italici, V. Ix. 2; Ter. 1. 

Italicus, -B, -um, adj. from Italia : 
tirones, N. XIX. 2. 

Italus, -a, -um, adj. to Italia: res, 

or. 

Iuba, J. Xxxv. 2, LIX., LXVI., LXXI. 
Juba I, king of Numidia 'and a 
pe Mauretania. He sided with 

Fompey against Julius Caesar. 

Iuba, XXVI. 1. Juba II, son 
of the above, brought by J ulius 
Caesar to Rome, where he gained 
fame as a writer; afterwards 
restored to his kingdom. 


932 


LIX.; T. II. 2,. 


Iudaea, A. xci.; Cl. xxvimt.; G. 
XXII.; Vit. Iv. 5, v. 6; Tit. 
IV. 3, V. 2. 

Iudaei, J. LXXXIV. 5; T. xxxvI.; 
Cl. xxv. 4; V. IV. 5, vill. 1: 
sing. A LXXVI. 2. 

Iudaicus, -a, -um, adj. from Iudaea 
exercitus, Vit. xv. 1, V. vI. 3; 
fiscus, D. xn. 2; ritus, T. XXXVI.; 
triumphus, D. 11.1; : vita, D. XII. 2. 

Iugurtha, J. XI. King of Numidia. 
He waged war with the Romans 
from 112 to 106 B.C., when he 
was conquered by Marius. 

Iulia, J. vi. 1 (bis). Aunt of Julius 
Caesar and wife of Marius. 

Iulia, J. LXXIV. 2; A. IV. 1, VIII. 1. 
Sister of Julius Caesar. 

Iulia, J. I. 1, XXL, LXXXIV. 1; A. 
xov. Daughter of Julius Caesar. 

Iuiia, A. XIX. 2, LXIII. 1 (bis) 2 
LXIV. 1, LXV. 1, CI. 3; T. vii. 2 
(bis), 3, XI. 4, L. 1; Cal. virt. 1, 
XXIII. 1. Daughter of Augustus. 

Iulia, A. LXIV. 1 (bis), LXV. 1, 4, 
LXXII. 3, CI. 3. Granddaughter 


of Augustus. 

Iulia, Cl. XXIX. 1. Granddaughter 
of Tiberius. 

Iulia, D. xvn. 3. Daughter of 


Titus. 

Iulia Augusta, see Livia Drusilla. 

Iulia Drusilla, Cal. VII., XXIV. 1, 2; 
Cl. XXIX. 1. Sister of Caligula. 

Iulia Drusilla, Cal. xxv. 4. Daugh- 
ter of Caligula. 

Iulia Livilla, Cal. vir. ; Cl. XXIX. 1. 
Daughter of Germanicus, 

Iuliae, A. LXV. 1, 4, of 3; Cl. 
XXIX. 1. 

Iulianus, -a, -um, us from T s 
Caesar) : milites, LXXV. 

Iulii, J. VI. 1. 

Iulius, -a, -um, adj. i Iulius : 
basilica, Cal. XXXVII. Pass.; 
curia, Cal. LX.; familia, liy, II. 1; 
lez, J. LXXXI. 1; A. IV. 1; N. 


Iulius Caesar, C. the Dictator : i 
Caesar, J. 1. 3, Ix. 2 Oea 
(bis), 2, XVII. P XX. ? en. 
XXVIII. 3 (bis), xn. 1, XXX. 5, 
nm XLIX. 1, 4 (quater queen D . 2, 
LII. 2 (ter) 3, LIL, LV. 1, 3, 


INDEX 


LVI. 1, 4, LXXIX. 2, 3 (rez), 
LXXX. 2, 3, LXXXI. 1, 2, LXXXII. 
2, LXXXV. (bis, LXXXVI. 1l, 
LXXXVIII LXXXIX.; A. VIII. 1. 
2, X. 1, 2, XIII. 1, XVII. 5, XXXV. 
L LXVII., XCIV. 9, 11, 
. IV. Pm N. XXXVII. 
3 Lue.; : Caesar 


Gaius Caesar, J. XXX. 4; A. Iv. 1, 
XXXI. 5, XCIV. 9; T. IV. 1; N. 
B 2; Ter. vs Tulius Caesar, 
Wy. 2; Tulius, J. Xx. 2; Divus 

Cia . XCVI. 1; Divus Iulius, 
A. II. 1, XV., XVII. 5, XXXI. 2, 
XCIV. 11, OC. 3; Cal. XXXVII. 1; 
Cl. xvn. 1, xx. 1; Vit. vit. 1: 
V.v.7; Gr. VII; Rh. 1. 

(Iulius) mensis, J. LXXVI. 1. 

Iulius Hyginus, C., Gr. xx. 

Iulius Marathus, A. LXXIX. 2, 
XOIV. 3. 

Iulius Modestus, Gr. xx. 

Iulius Montanus, Verg. 29. 

Tulius Saturninus, A. xxvil. 2. 

Iulius Vindex, N. XL. 1, XLI. 1, 2, 
XLV. x ot XLVI. 3; G. Ix. 


Iulius, see Antonius. 

Iunia Calvina, V. XXII. rà 
Iunia Claudilla, Cal. xit. 1, 2. 
Iunius Novatus, A. LI. ~ 
Iunius Rusticus, n X. 3. 
anios) Silanus, D., J. XIV. 1. 


Tunius) Silanus, Appius, Cl. XXTX. 
1, XXXVII. 2 (ter). 

(Iunius) Silanus, L., Cl. XXIV. 3, 
XXVII. 2, XXIX. 1, 2. 

(Iunius) Silanus, M., Cal xim. 1, 

Iuno, D. zm 4. 

ie da J. LXXXI. 3; A. LXX. 1, 

, 9; Cal. XXXIII. (simula - 

MS LVI. 1 (simulacrum Olym- 
piae), LVII. 1, 3, LVIII. 2; G.T, IX. 
2, XII. 1; D. Tv. 4, xv. 3; Optimus 
Maximus, J. LXXIX. 2; A. 
XXII. 2, XOIV. 6, 8; Vit. Xv. 3; 
V.v > Capitolinus, J. LXXXIV. 
3; . em 3, X 2, XCI, 2, 
XOIv. 8; T. LIII. ; Cal. XXII. 4; 
N. x. 2: D. IV. h VI. 1, VIM. 5: 
Cassius, N. XXII. 3; Custos, D. 
v.; Latiaris, Cal. XXI. 2; 


Olympius, A. LX.; Cal. XXII. 2; 
Tonans, A. XXIX. 1, 3, XCI. 3 
(bis) ; Tragoedus, A. LVII. 1. 

Iuvenalis, -e, adj. from iwvenis : 
dies, Cal. XVII. 2; a day added 
to the Saturnalia by Caligula; 
ludi, N. XI. 1; games instituted 
by Nero to commemorate the 
first shaving of his beard. 


KALENDAB, the first day of the 
month. 


LABEO, see Antistius, Fabius. 

Laberius, D. J. xxxix. 2. A 
celebrated Roman writer of 
mimes (105—43 B.C.). 

Labienus, T., Cal. xvi. 1. 

Lacedaemonii, T. vr. 2. The 
people of Lacedaemon (Sparta). 

Lacedaemonius, -a, -um, adj. from 
pete een medici, Pers. 

Laches, V. xxi. 1. 

Laco, see Cornelius. 

Laelius Archelaus, Gr. II. (bis). 

Laelius Hermas, Gr. X. (bis). 

Laelius (Sapiens) C., Ter. I. (ter), 
II, III. (ter), Iv., V. A friend of 
the younger Scipio and a distin- 
guished patron of literature; 
consul in 190 B.C. 

Laetorius, C., A. v. 

Laetus, see Suetonius. 

Laevius Melissa, Gr. III. 

Lamia, see Aelius. 

Lamianus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Lamia : " horti, Cal. LIX. "Gardens 
on the Appian Way, near Aricia. 

Lampadio, see Octavius. 

Lanuvinus, -a, -um, adj. 
Lanuvium : Gr. rr. 

Lanuvium, A. LXXII.2. An ancient 
city of Latium, south of Mons 
Albanus. 

Laodiceni, T. vil. The people of 
Laodicea, a city of Phrygia on 
the river "Lycus. 

Lares, N. XLVI. 2; Vit. IF. 5; 
cubiculi, A. VII. 1; D. XVII. 2: 
compitales, A. XXXI. "4: familiares, 
Cal. v. ‘Tutelary deities of a 
house or city, worshipped at the 
hearth or at the cross-roads. 

Latiaris, see Juppiter. The tute- 


533 


> 


from 


INDEX 


lary deity of the Latin League, 
with a temple on the summit of 
Mons Albanus (Monte Cavo). 
Latine, A. LXXXIX. 1; T. LXXI.; 
Cl. XLII. 1; N. VII. 2, XXXIX. 2; 
Tit. I. 2; "D. 1v. 4; Gr. X. VIL, 
XvI.; Rh. i; II. Adv. from Latinus. 
Latinitas, A. XLVII (se note). 
Latinus, -a, -um, adj. from Latium, 
meaning “of Latium," or 
“ Latin" in various senses: 
bibliotheca, J. XLIV. 2; À. XXIX. 
3; carmen, N. XII. 3; coloniae, 
ee A pod V. ril. ; eloquen- 
v. facundia, Cal. XX. 
eriae, ar Latin Festival, cele- 
eel in April at the Alban 
Mount in honour of Jupiter 
Latiaris, J. LXXIX. 1; Cl. Iv. 3; 
N. vi. 2; genus, A. XXXI. 1; 
grammaticus, Gr. X.; (litteris), 
Gr. X.; oratio, T. LXX. 1; pugiles, 
A. XLV. 2; res, Verg. 215 rhetores, 


V. XVIIL.; " rhetoras, Rh. L; ; Siren, 
Gr. XL; 'germo, Cl. I. 2, XVI. 2; 
Gr. VIL, XXH.; (verbum), Gr. 


XXII. ; cf. Verg. 43; vor, Ter. V; 
via, D. XVII. 3, a road branching 
off to the eastward from the via 
Appia half a mile south of the 
porta Capena, and joining it again 
at Casilenum, a town near Capua. 
It passed through the Aurelian 
wall by the porta Latina. 
Latium, Vit. I, 2. 
Latius, -a, -um, adj. 
historiae, Verg. 38. 
Laureolus, Cal. LVII. 4 (see note). 
The name of a mime, or farce. 
Lavicanum (se. praedium), J. 
LXXXIH. 1. An estate of Juliug 
Caesar's at Lavicum (Labicum). 
& town of Latium east of Rome. 
Lenaeus, see Pompeius. 
Lentulus, Cn., G. Iv. 1. Consul 
in 3 B.C. 
Lentulus Augur, Cn., T. XLIX. 1. 
Lentulus Gaetulicus, Cn., Cal. 
VIII. 1,2; Cl. Ix. 1; G. VI. 2 (bis). 
Leontinus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Leontini, a city of eastern 
Sicily: campus, Rh. V. 
Lepida, T. XLIX. 1. Wife of 


us, 
534 


£ 


to Latium : 


Lepida, G. v. 1 (bis). Wife of 
alba; see also Aemilia and 

Domitia. 

Lepidus, see Aemilius and Domitius. 

Leptinus, see Furius. 

Tancada, Ter v. 

Liber, XCIV. 5. The Italic god 
entities with the Greek Diony- 
sus, god of wine; the name is 
used of the Greek Dionysus. 

Liberalis, see Flavius and Salvius. 

Libertas, A. XXIX. 5. Liberty 
worshipped as a goddess. , 

Libitina, N. XXXIX. 1 (see note). 

Libo, see Scribonius. 

liburnica (sc. nora A. XVH. 3; 


Cal. XXXVII. 2 (see note); N. 
XXXIV. 2. 
Licinianus, see Calpurnius Piso 


Frugi. 

Licinius, Ter. v. 

Licinius Calvus, C., J. XLIX. 1, 
LXXIII.; A. LXXII. 1. A cele- 
brated Roman orator and poet, 
a contemporary of Catullus and 
often mentioned with him by the 
Romans, 

Licinius Crassus, L., N. 11. 2; Rh.I. 

oo Crassus, M., J. IX. 1 
(bis), 2, xix. 2, XXI., XXIV. 1; 

L.1; A. XXI. 3; T. Ix. 1; Verg. 2. 
Triumvir with Caesar ànd Pom- 


pey. 

(Licinius) Crassus Frugi, M., Cl. 
XVII. 3. 

Licinius Mucianus, V. VI. 4, XIII. 

Licinus, A. LXVII. 1. A freedman. 
See also Clodius. 

Liguria, Cl. xvir. 2. A district of 
Cisalpine Gaul, about the modern 
city of Genoa. 

Livia Drusilla, A. LX. 2; T. Iv. 3; 
Drusilla, A. LXIX. 2; "Livia, A. 
XXIX. 4, XL. 3, LXIII. d. LXIX. 1, 
LXXXIV. 2, XCIX. 1 (bis), CI. E 


Cal. x. 1, xv. 2, XXIII. 2; G. v. 
2; 93 I. 1; Iulia August, Cal. 
' XVI. : Augusta, Cl. II. 2, XI. 2. 
Livia Medal Camilla, cr XXVI. 


1. 
Livia Ocellina, G. III. 4, IV. 1. 


INDEX 


Livia Orestilla, Cal. xxv. 1. 

Livilla, T. LXH. 1; Cl. 1. 6, rir. 2. 
Daughter of Drusus. 

Livilla Cal. vr. Daughter of 
Germanicus; see Iulia. 

Livii, T. m. 1; Livii Drusi, T. m. 
1; cf. Drusus. 

Livius (Andronicus), L., Gr. I. A 
Greek slave from Tarentum, 
whose comedy and tragedy, put 
upon the stage in 240 B.c., mark 
the beginning of Roman literary 
history. 

Livius, T. Cal. XXXIV. 2; Cl. XLI. 
1; D. X. 3. Livy, the celebrated 
i historian (59  B.C.-17 
A.D.). 

Livius Drusus, T. m. 2. The first 
of the name. 

(Livius) Drusus, T. vir. 1. Grand- 
father of Tiberius. 

Livius Salinator (M.), T. III. 1, 2. 
Consul in 219 B.C. and with L. 
Aemilius Paulus victor over the 
Illyrians. He was found guilty 
by the people of having unfairly 
divided the booty among the 
soldiers and condemned; but he 
was made consul again in 207 
B.C., when with C. Claudius Nero 
he defeated Hasdrubal at the 
D CONES river, and censor in 
204. 

Livius mensis, T. XXVI. 2. 

Locri (Epizephyrii), A. XVI. 3. A 
town in the country of the Bruttii 
in southern Italy. 

Lollia, J. L. 1. 

Lollia Faune Cal. xxv. 2; Cl. 


XXVI. 3. 
Lollianus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Lollius : c , A. XXIII. 1 (bis). 
Lollius, M., T. xm. 2, XIII. 2. 
Longina, see Domitia. 
Longinus, see Cassius. 

Luca, J. XXIV. 1. A city of nor- 
thern Etruria, modern Lucca. 
Lucanus, M. Annaeus, Luc., Pers. 

(bis) ; see also Terentius. 
Lucceius, L., J. XIX. (bis). 
Lucilius, C., Gr. II., XIV. (book of 

Curtius Nicias on); Pers. The 

are Roman satirist (168-103 

B.C. * 


Lucretius, "Verg. 6. The great 
Roman poet (c. 94-55 B.C), 
author of the De Rerum Natura. 

Lucretius, Q., Verg. 35. 

Lucrinus lacus, A. XVI. 1. A small 
lake near the seacoast of Cam- 
pania in the neighbourhood of 
Baiae and Cumae. 

Lucullanus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Lucullus : villa, T. LXXIII. 1. 

Luculleus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Lucullus : lanceae, D. x. 3. 

Lucullus, L., J. xx. 4. A con- 
temporary of Caesar, famous for 
his victories over Mithridates and 
later for his luxury. 

Lucullus, see Sallustius. 


Lucusta, N. XXX. 2, 3, XLVII. 1. 
Lugdunum, Cal. xvir 1, Xx.; 
Cl. n. 1. A prominent city at 


the confluence of the Rhone aud 
the Arar (Aar) the modern 
Lyons. : 

Lunensis, -e, adj. from Luna, a 
city in northern Etruria, famous 
for its marble: ara, N. L. 

Lupercale sacrum, A. XXXI. 4. 
Another name for the Luper- 
calia. 

Lupercalia, LXXIX. 2; A. XXXI. 4. 
An ancient Roman festival of 
obscure origin, celebrated in 
February. The name of the 
festival was connected with the 
Lupercal, the cave at the south- 
west corner of the Palatine hill 
and with a mythical Lupercus, 
but the god in whose honour it 
was celebrated was unknown to 
the Romans themselves. As a 

art of the ceremony the 
uperci, girt with the skins of 

sacrificed goats and with strips 
of the skins in their hands, ran 
about the base of the Palatine, 
striking the women whom they 
met, or who put themselves in 
their way, that they might 
* shake off their sterile curse." 
(Shaks. Julius Caesar, 1. 2. 9). 

Luperci, J. LXXVI. 1. Two colleges 
of priests for the celebration of 
the Lupercalia, q.v. 

Lurco, see Aufidius. 


535 


INDEX 


Luscio, D. 1. 1. The name of a 
poem of Nero. 

Lusitani, J. LIV. 1; G. m. 2. The 
people of Lusitania. 

Lusitania, O. III. 2. A country in 
the western part of the Spanish 
peninsula, modern Portugal. 

Lutatius Daphnis, Gr. II. 

Lycia, A. LXV. 1; V. vili. 4. A 
district of south-western Asia 
Minor. 

Lycii, Cl. xxv. 3. The inhabitants 
of Lycia. 

Lycius, A. XLIII. 3. 

Lydia, Gr. xi. (ter). 


A poem of 
Valerius Cato. 


MACEDONES, Cal. LVII. 4. The 
people of Macedonia. 

Macedonia, J. XXXV. 1; A. III. 1, 
Iv. 1; T. XIV. 3, XVI. 2; Cl. xxv. 
3; Gr. IX. A country north of 
Greece, at the north-eastern end 
of the Aegean Sea. 

Macer, see Clodius and Pompeius. 

Macro, Cal. xir. 2 (bis), XXIII. 2, 
XXVI. 1. Prefect of the prae- 
torian guard. 

Maecenas, A. LXVI. 3, LXXII. 2, 
LXXXVI. 2; Gr. XXI. ; Hor. (sexies) ; 
Verg. 20, 27, 37, 44. 

Maecenatianus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Maecenas : hortos, T. Xv. 1; Verg. 
13; turre, N. XXXVIII. 2(seenote). 

Maecius, D. xx. 

Maenianum, Cal. xvu. 3. The 
projecting balcony of & house, 
named from its originator, one 
Maenius; commonly used in the 
plural, 

, N. XXXIV. 4. A body of 
learned men among the Persians; 
also used generally in the sense 
of *' magicians.” 

Magnes, Pers., of Magnesia, a city 
in western Asia Minor (Lydia), 
on the river Hermus. 

Magnus, see Alexander, Mithridates, 
Pompeius, 

Mago, D. X. 3. The name of a 
brother of Hannibal, applied to a 
slave. 

Magus, Verg. 1. 


536 


Mallia, A. Lxx. 1 (see note). 

Mallonia, T. XLV. 

Mallotes, Gr. n. An inhabitant 
of Mallos, a city of Cilicia. 


Malum Punicum, ad, D. I. 1; see 
note. 

Mamercus, see-Aemilius. 

Mamurra, J. LXXII. A Roman 


ie of Formiae; see Catullus 


Manes, dii, T. LXXV. 1; Cal. m. 2; 
N. XXXIV. 4; O. vn. 2. The 
deifled shades of the dead. 

Mantua, Verg. 2, 36. A city of 
Cisalpine Gaul on the Mincius, 
modern Mantua. 

Mantuanus, -a, -um, adj. 
Mantua : Verg. 1. 

Marathus, see Iulius, 

Marcellae, A. LXIII. 1. 

Marcelli, A. XXIX. 4, XLIII. 5. 
Marcellianus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Marcellus : theatrum, V. XIX. 1. 
Marcellus, see Asinius, Claudius, 

Pomponius. 

Marcellus, C., J. XXIX. 1. 

Marcellus, C., xxvi. 1. Husband 
of Octavia. 

Marcellus, M., A. XXIX. 4, XLII. 5, 
LXIII. 1, LXVI. 3; T. VI. 4, X. 1; 
Verg. 32. Son of Octavia. 

Marcia Furnilla, Tit. Iv. 2. 

Marcianus, see Icelus. 

Marcii Reges, J. VI. 1. 

Marcius, Ancus, J. vr. 1. Fourth 
king of Rome. 

Marcius Censorinus, C., Hor. Con- 
sul in 9 B.C. 

Marcius Philippus, A. VIII. 2, XXIX. 
5. Stepfather of Augustus, con- 
sul in 56 B.c. 

Marii, J. I. 3. 

Marius, C., J. xi; T. LIX. 2. The 
famous popular leader, seven 


from 


Marobodus, T. XXXVII. 4. 

Mars, A. I. (bis), XVIII. 2, xxix. 1, 
2; Vit. X. 3 (in colonia Agrippi- 
nensi); V. v. 2; Verg. 34, 42; 
Martis , Cal. XLIV. 2; Cl. 
XIII. 1, XXXIII. 1; delubrum, Vit. 
vil. 1; templum, J. XLIV. 1; 


a——— — ——— BREED. 


INDEX 


+ 


villa, Ter. V., Mars Ultor, A. XXI. 
l, XXIX. 1; Cal. XXIV. 3. 

Marsi, Cl. XX. 1. A warlike people 
of central Italy, nearlake Fucinus. 

Marsicus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Marsi: bellum, A. XXIII. 2. The 
Social War, 90-89 B.O., in which 
the Marsi played a prominent 


art. 
Marsus, see Domitius. 
Martiae Idus, J. LXXXVIII. ; see Idus. 
Martialis, -e, adj. from Mars: ludi. 
Cl. 1v. 1, 3; games in honour of 
Mars Ultor, whose temple was 
dedicated August 1, 2 B.C. 
Martius campus, XXXIX. 3, 


, . 1; 
Cal. XXXIV. 1; Cl. I. 3; N. L.; 
Campus, J. LXXX. 4, LXXXIV. 1; 
A. C. 3. . 

Marullus, see Epidius. 

Masgaba, <A. xovin. 4 (ter). 
Ihm gives this name as Masga- 
bas, but it occurs only in the 
oblique cases, and the analogy of 
other Numidian names (see Livy, 
45. 13), such as Iugurtha, Masin- 
issa, and the like, as well as 
Mazgaba in C.I.L. 1v. 1917, point 
to Masgaba. 

Masintha, J. LXXI. 

Massilia, J. XXXIV. 2, LXVIII. 4; 
A. LXV. 1; Cl. xvi. 2. A city 
in the southern part of Gaul; 


modern illes. 

Massilienses, N. 11. 3. The inhabi- 
tants of Massilia. 

Mater deum, A. LXVIII. ; O. VIII. 3; 

, TP. U. 8. The Great 

Mother of the Gods, Cybele, 
worshipped near Mount Ida in the 
Troad 


Matianus, -a, -um, adj. from Matius, 
a Roman name : malum, D. XXI. 
(see note). 

Matius, C., J. Lit. 2. 

Mauretania, Cal. Lv. 1. 
Morocco. 

Maurus, -a, -um, 
* Moorish "; “of 
Eunoe, J. Lu. 1; 
LXXXIII. 


Modern 


adj. meaning 
Morocco " ; 
pueros, À. 


Mausoleum, A. c. 4, OI. 4; Cal. xv.. 
1; N. XLVI. 2; Vit. X. 3; V. XXIII. 
4. The Mausoleum of Augustus, 
in the northern part of the 
Campus Martius, near the Tiber. 

Maximi ludi, N. XI. 2. 

Maximus, D. XVII. 2. A freedman. 

Maximus, see Fabius. 

Mazaces, N. Xxx. 3 (see note). A 
people of Numidia, in northern 


ica. 
Mediolanum, A. xx.; Rh. vrl; 
Verg. 7. A city of northern 


Italy; modern Milan. 

Medullina, see Livia. 

Megara, Verg. 35. A city of 
Megaris in Greece, between 
Corinth and Attica. 

Meleager, T. XLIV. 2. The Aetolian 
hero who slew the Calydonian 


boar. 
meleagrides, Cal. XXII. 3. Guinea- 
fowl, named from the sisters of 


Meleager, who after his death 
were changed into these birds. 

Melissa, see Laevius. 

Melissus, C., Gr. xx1.; Verg. 16. 

Memmius, C., J. Xxrigy. 1, XLIX. 2, 
LXXIII.; Gr. XIV. (bis); Ter. m, 

Memmius, C., Cal. Xxv. b. Consul 
in 30 A.D. 

Memphis, Tit. v. 3. A city of 
Egypt on the lower course of 
the Nile. . 

Menander, Ter. IL, V. (ter). The 
most distinguished, writer of the 
Athenian New Comedy, born in 
342 B.C. 

Menas, A. LXXIV. A freedman. 

Mendes, A. XCIV. 4. A town of 
Egypt in the Nile delta. 

Menecrates, N. xxx. 2. A lyre- 
player. 

meridianus, see gladiator. 

Mero, see Biberius. 

Messala, see Valerius. 

Messalina, see Statilia and Valeria. 

Messana, Cal. LI. 1. A city of 
north-eastern Sicily, modern 
Messina. 

Mestrius Florus (Flaurus), V. XXII. 

Metellus, see Caecilius. 

Mettius Pompusianus, V. 


XIV.; 
D. x. 3. 


537 


INDEX 


Mettius Rufus, D. Iv. 2. 

Mevania, Cal. XLIII. A city of 
Umbria on the via Flaminia near 
the Clitumnus river. 

Mida (Midas), Pers. A wealthy king 
of Phrygia, whose touch was fabled 
to turn everything into gold. 
Because he alone did not accept 
the decision of Tmolus, who 
awarded the prize to Apollo in 
a musical contest with Pan, 
Apollo changed his ears into 
those of an ass. Midas concealed 
them from all except the slave 
who cut his hair. The latter 
dug a hole in the ground and 
whispered into it: * King Midas 
has ass’s ears," A reed grew 
up on the spot and betrayed the 
secret to the world. 

Miletus, Cal. XX1r. A city on the 
western coast of Asia Minor. 
miliarium aureum, O. VI. (see note). 
Milo, J. xxx. 3. The slayer of 

Clodius, 

Minerva, Cal. xxv. 4; Vit. XIII. 2. 
(moAcovXov, see note); D. 1v.4 (his), 
XV. 3. 

Minos, T. LXX. 3; G. II. The 
famous king of Crete, because of 
his integrity made a judge in the 
Lower World. 

Misenensis, -e, adj. from Misenum ; 
classi, Plin. 

Misenum, A. XLIX. 1; T. LXXII. 3, 
LXXIV; LXXV. 3; Cal. XIII.; N. 
XXXI. "3; Verg. 34. A promon- 
tory and town at the northern 
end of the Bay of Naples, an 
important naval station. 

Misenus, Verg. 34. 

Mithridates (also Mithradates), J. 
Iv. 2, XIX. 2; N. XXIV. 2; Magni, 
J. XXXV. 2. 

Mithridaticus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Mithridates : bello, T. XXXVII. 3. 

Mnester, Cal. XXXVI. 1, LV. 1, LVII. 
4. An actor of pantomimes. 

Modestus, see Tulius. 

Moesia, T. XLI. ; O. IX. 3; V. VI. 3. 
A country north of Thrace and 
Macedonia, modern Servia and 
Bulgaria; Moesiae, Vit. Xv. 1, the 
Moesian provinces. 


538 


Moesiacus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Moesia : exercitus, V. VI. 2. 

Molo, see Apollonius, 

Montanus, see Iulius. 

Morbovia, V. XIV. (see note). 

Mucia, J. L. 1. Wife of Gnaeus 
Pompeius. 

Mucianus, see Licinius. 

Mummia Achaica, G. II. 4 (bis). 
Granddaughter of Catulus. 

Mummius, G. Im. 4. The 
Roman consul who took and 
sacked Corinth in 146 B.c. 

Munatius Plancus, L., A. vu. 2, 
XXIX. 5; T. V.; Cl. xvi. 1; N. Iv.: 
Rh. VI. (bis). "Consul in 42 B.C. 

(Munatius) Plancus, L., A. CI. 1. 
Consul in 13 A.D. 

Munda, A. XCIV. 11. A town of 
Spain, the scene of Caesar's final 
victory in the Civil War. 

Mundensis, -e, adj. from Munda; 
proclium, J. LVI. 5. 

Murena, see Varro. 

murmillo, see gladiator. 

Musa, see Antonius. 

Musae, Gr. VI.; see also Hercules. 

Mysium (Museum), Cl. xul. 2. 
An institution at Alexandria for 
the advancement of learning and 
the support of scholars, contain- 
ing a lecture hall, a common 
dining-room, cloisters, etc. 

Mutina, A. X. 2, LXXVII. A city 
of Cisalpine Gaul; modern 
Modena. 

Mutinensis, -e, adj. from Mutina : 
acies, A. XII.; bellum: A. IX. 1, 
LXXXIV. 1; Rh. I. 

Mylae, A. XVI. 1. A promontory 
and town in the north-eastern 
part of Sicily, not far from 
Messana. 

Mytilenae, J. ; A. LXVI. 

X. 1. "hhe chief city of takos. 
a large island off the western 
coast of Asia Minor. 


NAEVIA, see Ennia. 

Naevius (Cn.), Gr. 1.3 Ter. v. The 
early Roman epic "and dramatic 
poet (269-190 B.C.). 

Nais, see Servilia, 


INDEX 


Narbo, T. IV. l. A city of southern 
Gaul; modern Narbonne. 

Narcissus, Cl. XXVIII., XXXVII. 2; 
Vit. n. 5; V. Iv. 1, 2; Tit. II. 
Freedman of Claudius. 

Naso, see Actorius. 

Naturalis Historia, Plin. 

Naulochus, A. XVI. 1. A town in 
the north-eastern part of Sicily, 
near Mylae. 

Nauplius, N. xxxIX. 3. Nauplius, 
king of Euboea and father of 
Palamedes. To avenge the un- 
just execution of his son before 
Troy, he caused the wreck of the 
"returning Greek ships by false 
beacons. 

Neapolis, A. XCVII. 5; T. Iv. 2, 
vI. 2; N. XX. 2, 3; XXV. 1, XL. 4; 
Verg. 11, 36. Modern Naples. 

Neapolitani, A. xci. 2. The 
inhabitants of Neapolis (Naples). 

Neapolitanus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Neapolis : certamen, Cl. x1. 2. 

Nemausenses, T. xin. 1. The 
inhabitants of Nemausus, a city 
of southern Gaul; modern Nimes. 

Nemorensis, -e, adj. from nemus, 
* grove," applied to the grove 
of Diana at Aricia, J. XLVI.; 


rex, Cal. XXXV. 3. The priest - 


of Diana of Aricia (see note). 

Neoptolemus, Cal. LVII. 4. A tragic 
actor. . 

Nepos, see Cornelius. 

Neptunus, A. XVI. 2, XVIII. 2. The 
ltalic god identified with the 
Greek Poseidon, god of the Sea. 

Nero, & word of Sabine origin, T. 
i. 2; see Claudius, Salvius Otho, 
Tiberius, Titus. 


Nero, T. Liv. 1 (bis), 2 (bis); Cal. 
vii. (bis); Cl. IX. 1. Son of 
Germanicus. 


Nero, the Emperor : Ahenobarbus, 
N. VII. 1, XLI. 1; Augustus, N. 
XLVI. 3; Nero Caesar, Vit. II. 23 
Rh. 1.; Pass.; Nero, €. XXVII. 2 
(bis), XXXIX. 2, XLIII., XLV. ; N.I. 
2, V. 1. 2, VI. 2, VII. 1, XXII. 1, 
XXXIX. 2, in Greek (bis) and in 
Latin, 3, XL. 2, XLI. 1, XLVIII. 
2 (bis, 3, XLIX. 3 (in Greek) 
LVI. 2; Q. 1. (bis), I., VI. 1, 


vill. 1, 2, IX. 1, 2, x. 1, 5, XI., 
XII. 2, XV. 1, 2, XXIL; O. n. 2. 
III, 1, IV. 1, VI. 1, X. 2; Vit. IV. 
XI. 2; V. Iv. 4, v. 1, 5, 7, vi. 3, 
IX. 1, XIV., XXV.; D. I. 1, XIv. 4; 
Pers. (ter); Luc. (ter; Pass. 
(bis, once tor Gaius) ; Caesar, Luc. 

Nero falsus, N. LVII. 2. 

Nerones, T. Iv. 3. 

Neroneus, -a, -um, adj. from Nero: 
agona, N. XXI. 1; mensem, N. LV.; 
certamini, Vit. IV. 

Neronia, N. XII. 3. 

Neronianus, see Patrobius. 

Neronianus, -a, -um, adj. 
Nero : cantica, Vit. XI. 2. 

Neropolis, N. tv. A name which 
Nero proposed to give Rome. 

Nerulonensis, -e, adj. from Nerulum, 
a town of Lucania on the road 
from Capua to Rhegium: A. Iv. 2. 

Nerva, D. 1. 1 : Nervae forum, D. v.; 
see note. 

Nicanor, A. 
Saevius. 

Nicias, see Curtius. 

Nicomedes, J. IL, XLIX. (sexies). 
Nicomedes IV, king of Bithynia. 

Nicon, A. xcvi. 2. “ Victor," the 
name of a donkey. 

Nicopolis, A. XVIII. 2. 

Niger, see Aquilius and Novius, 

Nigidius, P. A., xciv. 5. P. 
Nigidius Figulus, a  contem- 
porary of Caesar and Cicero, 
called by Gellius (4. 9) the most 
learned of the Romans next to 
Varro. 

Nigrinus, see Pontius. 

Nilus, A. XVIII. 2. The Nile. 

Nioba, N. XxI. 2. Niobe. 

Nisus, Verg. 42. 

Nobilior, see Fulvius. 

Nola, A. xcvilI. 5, c. 2; T. xr. 
A city of Campania, north-east 
of Naples. 

Nomentana via, N. XLVIII. 1. A 
road running through the porta 
Collina north-east to Nomentum 
in the Sabine country. 

Nonae, the seventh day of March, 
May, July aud October, and the 
fifth of the other months. 

Nonianus, see Servilius. 


from 


LXXXIX. 1; see also 


539 


INDEX 


Nonius Asprenas Torquatus (C.), 
A. XLIII. 2, LVI. 3; Cal. xxxv. 1. 

Nonnius, Hor. 

Norbanus Flaccus, Vit. In. 2. 
Consul in 15 A.D. 

Noricum regnum, T. xvi. 2. A 
country of central Europe, 
between Cisalpine Gaul and the 
upper course of the Danube. 

Novaria, Rh. vi. A town of 
Transpadine Gaul, 

Novariensis, -e, adj. from Novaria : 
Rh. VI. 

Novatus, see Iunius. 

Hoyember mensis, J. XL. 2; A. 


XXXII. 

Novius Niger, J. XVII. 1, 2. 

Novocomensi; S adj. from Novum 
Comum : 

Novum Comum: J. XXVII. 3. A 
town of Cisalpine Gaul on lacus 
Larius (the Lake of Como); 
modern Como. 

Nuceria, Vit. 1.3, 10.2. A residence 
of the Vitellii, probably the town 
of Campania, south-east of 
Naples. 

Nucerinus, -um, adj. 
Nuceria : Rh. Iv. 
umidae, Ter. 1. The people of 
Numidia in northern Africa. 

numidicae (sc. aves), Cal. XXII. 3. 
A kind of Guinea-fowl. 

Numidicus, see Metellus. 

Numidicus, -8, -um, adj. from 
Numidia: lapis, J. LXXXV. A 
handsome are marble from 
Numidia, pipes o antico. 

umor erg. 43. 

Nursia, I. 3 (bis). A town in 
the MR Sd north-east of 
Rome on the Nar. 


from 


Nursini, A. xm. The people of 
Nursia. 
Nymphae, T. XLII. 2. 


Nymphidius Sabinus, G. XI., XVI. 1. 
Prefect of the Praetorian Guard. 

Nysa, J. XLIX. 3. Daughter of 
Nicomedes. 


OCEANUS, Cal. XLVI. (bis), XLVII.; 

C1. 1. 2; septemtrionalis, Cl. XVII. 8. 
Ocellare cognomen, G. Iv. 1. 
Ocellina, see Livia. 


540 


- 


Octavia, maior, A. IV. 1. Sister 
of Augustus, 

Octavia, minor, J. XXVII. 1; A. 
1, XXIX. 4, LXI. 2, LXIII. 1; T. 
VI. 4; Verg. 32. Sister of 
Augustus. 

Octavia, Cl. PANT: 1, 2; N. vu. 2, 
XXXV. 1 (bis), 3 , XLVI. 1, LVII. 1. 
denter of the Emperor Clau- 

ius 

Octaviae porticus, A. XXIX. 4; 
Gr. XXI. A colonnade between 
the circus Flaminius and the 
theatre of Marcellus, built by 
Augustus in place of the porticus 
Metelli, and named from his 
younger sister Octavia. 

Octavii, A. I., II. 2, 3. 

Octavius, -a, -um, adj. to Octavius : 


IV. 


gene A.I.; vicus, A. I. A street 
f Velitrae. 
Gavia. A. I. A general of 
Velitrae. 


Octavius, see Augustus. 

Octavius, J. XLIX. 2. 

(Octavius), C. and Cn., A. 1.2. 

Octavius, C., A. m. 1, 2, vu. 1, 
SAID 1, XCIV. 4, xov. 5 (bis), 

1. Father of Augustus. 

Octavius Avitus, Q., Verg. 45. 

Octavius Lampadio, C., Gr. r1. 

Octavius Rufus, C., A. It. 1. 

Octavius Teucer, Gr. IH. 

October mensis, A. XXXV. 3; T. 
XXVI. 2; D. XII. 3; Verg. 2. 35. 

Oculatae, D. vin. 4. Two sisters, 
Vestal virgins. 

odium (odeum), D. v. A building 
for musical performances in the 
Campus Martius; the exact site 


is unknown. 

Oedipus, J. LVI. 7. A youthful 
tragedy of Julius Caesar: er- 
caecatus, N. XXI. 3; eveul, N. 


XLVI. 3. Tragedies sung by Nero. 

Oenone, D. X. 4. Phrygian 
nymph, beloved and deserted 
by Paris; subject of an ezodium. 

Olympia, "Cal. LVI. 1; N. Xn. 4, 
XXII. 1. The famous city of 
Elis, the scene of the Olympic 

games, 

olympia (sc. certamina), N. XXIV. 

2, LIII. The Olympic games, 


INDEX 


Olympiacus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Olympia : corona, N. XXV. 1. 
Olympius, -a, -um, adj. from 
Olympus, see Iuppiter. 

Onesimus, G. XIII. 

Onysius, Hor. 

Opilius, see Aurelius. 

oplomachus, see gladiator. 

Oppius, C., J. Lir. 2 (bis), LII., 
LVI. 1, LXXII. A friend of Caesar 
and a writer of biographies and 
other works. 

Oppius Chares, Gr. III. 

Oppius Sabinus, D. vI. 1. 

Orbilius Pupillus, L., Gr..IV., VIII., 


IX. (ter), XIX. T 

Orbilius, Gr. IX. Son of Orbilius 
Pupillus. 

Orcivi senatores, A. XXXV. 1 (see 
note). 

Orcus, N. XXXIX. 3. The Lower 


World, abode of the dead; also 
its king Pluto. E 
Orestes, N. XXI. 3, XXXIX. 2. 
Son of Agamemnon, who killed 


Oriens, A. xi. 3; T. IX. 1, XII. 2; 
. 2; N. V. 


Tit. v. 3; D. 11. 2; V. 35. 

Origines : 
tori work of M. Porcius Cato 
Censorinus, which discussed the 
origins of the various peoples of 
Italy and their history down to 
his own time. 

Ostia, T. x. 2, XI. 1; Cal. xv. 1, 
LV. 1; Cl. XII. 3, XVII. 2, xx. 3, 


XXV. 2; N. XVI. 1, XXVII. 3, 
XXXI. 3; XLVII. 1; V. vir. 3; 
Rh. I. The seaport of Rome, 


at the mouth of the Tiber. 

Ostiensis, -e, adj. from Ostia: 
portum, Cl. XX. 1; promncu, 
Cl. XXIV. 2. 

Ostienses, Cl. XXXVII. 1, XL. 3. 
The people of Ostia. 

Otho, see Salvius. 

Ovidius (Naso, P.), Gr. xx. The 
famous Roman poet, 43 B.O. to 
17 A.D. 


PACIS TEMPLUM, V. ix. 1. Begun 
by Vespasian in 71 A.D. and 
completed four years later. It 
lay behind the basilica Aemilia 
and south-east of the forum of 
Augustus. 

Paconius, M., T. LXI. 6 (bis). 

Pacuvius, M., J. LXXXIV. 2. An 
early Roman writer of tragedies 
220-132 B.C), a nephew of 

nnius, 

Padus, Verg. 19. 

Paean, N. XXXIX. 2. An epithet 
of Apollo as the Healer. 

peres see gladiator. 
aetina, see Aelia. 

Paetus Thrasea, N. xxxvi. 1; 
D. x. 3; Pers. (bis). 

Palaemon, see Remmius, 

Palatinus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Palatium : Apollo, see Apollo; 
atriensis, Cal. LVII. 3; bibliotheca, 
Gr. II., XX.; domus, A. XXIX. 3, 
LVII. 2; Cl. XVII. 3; V. XXV.; 
D. xv. 2; ludi, Cal. LvI. 2. 

Palatium, A. V., XXIX. 1, LXXII. 1; 
T. V., LIV. 2; Cal. XIV. 2, XXII. 2, 4, 
XLI. 1, XLVI, LIV. 2; Cl. xvin. 2; 
N. VIII., XXV. 2, XXXI. 1, XXXIV. 
1; G. XIV. 2, XVIII. 1; O. I. 3, 
VI. 1, 2, VII. 1, VIII. 2; Vit. XV. 2, 
XVI.: Tit. 1.: Gr. IL, XVII. (bis). 
The Palatine hill; applied also to 
the Palace of the Caesars on that 
hill; cf. Palatina domus. 

Palfurius Sura, D. xm. 1. 

Pallas, Cl. XXVNI.; V. I. 5. A 
freedman of Claudius. 

Palumbus, Cl. XXI. 5. A gladiator. 

Pan, Gr. nr. The Greek god of 
flocks and shepherds. 

Pandataria (Pandateria), T. LIII. 
2; Cal. xv. 1. A small island 
off the coast of Latium, used as 
a place of imprisonment, 

Paneros, N. xxx. 2. 

Panisci, T. XLIII. 2. Diminutive 
of Pan; rural gods, 

Pannonia, A. XXI. 1; O. IX. 3; 
Vit. XV. 1. A country north ol 
Illyricum. 

Pannonicus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Pannonia : T. XVIL 2; bellum, T. 
IX. 1, 2; bella, A. XX. 

541 


INDEX 


Pannonii, T. XVII. 1. The people 
of Pannonia, 

Pannonius, -a, -um, adj. to Pan- 
nonia : ducem, T. Xx. 

Pansa, A. X. 3, XI. (bis); T. V.; 
Hh. I.; see also Crassicius. 

Paphia, Tit. v. 1. A surname of 
Venus, from her temple at 
Paphos in western Cyprus. 

Papia Poppaea lex, Cl. XIX., XXIII. 

;N.X.1. <A law passed by the 
eonsuls M. Papius Mutilus and 
Q. Poppaeus Secundus (9 A.D.), 
regulating the relations of the 
sexes, 

Papus, see Aemilius. . 

Parilia, Cal. xvi. 4. The festival 
of Pales on April 21, also the 
traditional date of the founding 
of Rome. 

Paris, D. X. 4. Son of Priam; the 
subject of an exzodium. 

Paris, N. LIV. An actor. 

Paris, D. rm. 1, X. 1. An actor 
of pantomimes. 

Parmensis, -e, adj. from Parma, 
& city of Cisalpine Gaul: see 
Cassius. : 

Parrasius (also Parrhasius), T. 
XLIV. 2. A celebrated painter 
of the early part of the fourth 
century B.C. He was born at 
Ephesus, but practised his art 
chiefly at Athens. 

Parricidium, J. LXXXVIII. 

Parthenias, Verg. 11. 

Parthenius, T. Lxx. 2. A Greek 
poet and grammarian, an in- 
structor of Vergil. 

Parthenius, D. XVI. 2, XVII. 2. 

Parthenope, Verg. 36. Another 
name of Neapolis (Naples). 

Parthi, J. XLIV. 3, LXXIX. 3; A. 
vIII. 2, XXI. 8, XLIII. 4; T. Ix. 1, 
XVI. 1, XLI, XLIX. 2, LXVI.; 
Cal. v., XIV. 3, XIX. 2; Cl. xxv. 
4; N. XLVII. 2, LVI. 2 (bis); Vit. 
II. 4; V. XXII. 4; D. 1.2; 8ng., 
N. xxxix. 2; V. vI. 4. The 
Parthians, a warlike nation 
dwelling south of Armenia and 
the Caspian Sea. 

Parthia, Vit. xt. 2. The country 
of the Parthi. 


542 


* 


Parthinus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Parthia: gens, A. XIX. 1. 

Parthus, see Parthi. 

Pasicles, see Crassicius. 

Pasiphaa (Pasiphae), N. xm. 2; 


G. II. ife of Minos and mother 
of the Minotaur. : 

Passienus Crispus, N. vr. 3; Pass. 

Patavinus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Patavium : see Cassius. 

Patavium, T. xiv. 3. A city of 
northern Italy; modern Padua. 

Patris patriae, J. LXXVI. 1; A. LVIII. 
1; T. XXVI. 2, LXVII. 2; N. vil. ; 
V. xm. A title bestowed on 
Julius Caesar and various of the 
Roman emperors. 

Patrobius Neronianus, G. xx. 2. 

Paulina, see Lollia. 

Paulus, see Aemilius, 

Pax, see Pacis templum. 

Pedia lex, N. 111. 1 (see note); G: 
IH. 2. A bill of Q. Pedius out- 
lawing the assassins of Caesar. 

Pedianus, see Asconius. 

Pedius, Q., J. LXXXIII. 2. Grand- 
nephew of Julius Caesar, consul 
in 43 B.C. 

Peloponnesus, A. XVII. 3. The 
southern part of Greece, the 
modern Morea. 

Penates dii, A. XCII. 1; N. XXXII. 4. 
Gods of the household, and of 
the community as a collection 
of households. 

Perellius Faustus, Verg. 44. 

Pergamenus, -», -um, adj. from 
Pergamum in north-eastern Asia 
Minor : A. LXXXIX. 1. 

Pergamon, Verg. 38. The citadel 
of Troy, a term used by the poets 
of the city as a whole. 


Perialogos, Gr. IX. A work of 
L. Orbilius Pupillus, 

Persicus, see Fabius. 

Persius Flaccus, Pers. The father 
of the poet. 

Persius Flaccus, Aulus, Pers.; 
Flaccus, Pers. (ter). 

Perusia, A. XIV. XV., XCVI. 2; 


T. IV. 2. A city in Umbria; 
modern Perugia. 

Perusinus, -a-, um, adj. from Perusia: 
bellum; A. IX.; murum, A. XIV. 


E INDEX 


Pescennius Iaccus, Gr. mi. 
Petreius, M., J. XXXIV. 2, LXXV. 2. 
Petro, see Flavius. 

Petronia, Vit. vr. Wife of the 
emperor Vitellius. 

Petronianus, Vit. vit. Son of the 
emperor Vitellius. 

Petronius Aristocrates, Pers. 

Phaethon, Cal. Xt. Son of Helios, 
the Sun god, and Clymene. He 
attempted to drive his father's 
chariot and all but set the world 

Phag a Corneli 

, see Cornelius. 

Phalaris see Falacrina, 

Phaon, N. XLVIII. 1, 3, XLIX. 2. 
A freedman of Nero. 

Pharmacussa (Pharmacusa), J. IV. 
1. A small island at the en- 
trance of the Bay of Iassius, near 
Miletus. 

Pharnaces, J. XXXV. 2. 

Pharsalicus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Pharsalus, a town of central 
Thessaly, the scene of Caesar’s 
defeat of Pompey: aeies, J. 
XXX. 4, LXII., LXXV. 2; N. II. 3; 
V. 1. 2; proelium, J. XXXV. 1. 

Pharus, Cl. xx. 3. An island near 
Alexandria and the lighthouse 
upon it; hence in general “a 
lighthouse,’’ T. LXXIv.; Cal. XLVI. 

phasianae (sc. aves), Cal. XXII. 3; 
Vit. XIII. 2. Pheasants, so-called 
from Phasis, a river of Colchis. 

Philemon, J. LXXIV. 1. The name 
of a slave. 

Philippensis, -e, adj. from Philippi: 
acies, A. XCI. 1; bellum, A. IX., 
XIII. 1, XXII., xxix. 2; T. v.; 
Hor.; victoriam, Verg. 19. 

Philippi, A. XCvI. 1; T. XIV. 3. A 
town on the borders of Mace- 
donia and Thrace, the scene of 
the defeat of Brutus and Cassius 
in 42 B.C. . 

Philippicae (orationes), se Tullius 
Cicero, M. 

Philippus, Cal. LVII. 4. Philip I, 

ing of Macedon, father of 
Alexander the Great, assassinated 
in 330 B.C. 
Philippus, see Marcius. 
Philocomus, see Vettius. 


Philologus, Gr. x. (bis); see also 
Ateius. 

Philopoemen, see Vinius. 

Philus, Ter. 1. 


Phoebe, A. LXV. 2 (bis). A-freed- 
woman. 
Phoebus, A. LXX. 1. An epithet 


of Apollo as god of light. 

Phoenissae, J. XXX. 5; cf. A. XXV. 
4. “The Phoenician Women,” 
a tragedy of Euripides. 

Phrygius, -a, -um, Verg. 38. 

Phyllis, D. xvit. 3. 

Picenum, J. XXIV. 1. A district on 
the eastern coast of central Italy. 

Pictor, see Carvilius, 

Pinarius, L., J. LXXXIII. 2. Grand- 
„nephew of Julius Caesar, 

Pinax, Gr. VI.; see note. 

Piso, see Calpurnius. 

Pisonianus, -a, -um, adj. from Piso : 
„coniuratio, N. XXXVI. 1; Luc. 
Pitholaus, J. LXXV. 5. A rhetori- 
cian and poet of the time of 

Julius Caesar. 

Pius, T. xvir. 2; Cal. XXII. 1. A 
surname conferred or several 
of the Roman emperors. 

Placentia, J. LXIX.; O. IX. 2. A 
town of Cisalpine Gaul on the 
Po; modern Piacenza. 

Plancus, see Munatius. 

Plato, Cal. XXXIV. 2. The Greek 
philosopher. 

Plautia Urgulanilla, Cl. xxvi. 2 
(bis), XXVII. 1. Wife of the 
emperor Claudius. 

Plautius, A., Cl. xxiv. 2; V. IV. 1. 

Plautius, A., N. XXxv. 4. 

Plautius Rufus, A. xIX. 1. 

Plautus (T. Maccius), ‘Ter. v. 

Plinius Secundus, (€), Cal. VIII. 1, 2, 
3 (bis); Plin. Pliny the elder, 
author of the Natural History. 
He lived from 23 to 79 A.D. 

Plotia Hieria, Verg. 9. 

Plotius, -a, -um, adj. to Plotius : 
rogatio, J. v. 

Plotius Gallus, Rh. rr. (bie). 

Plotius Tucca, Verg. 37, 38, 40. 

Plotus, see Voltacilius. 

Poeni, T. 1. 1. The Phoenicians 
and (usually) the Carthaginians, 
as descendants of the Phoenicians. 


343 


INDEX - 


Polemo, N. xvii. 
Polla, see Vespasia. 


Pollentinus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Pollentia, & town of Liguria; 
modern Pollenza: plebs, T. 


XXXVII. 3. 
Fonie: see Asinius, Clodius, Ves- 
1; T. XX.; Cal. XXII. 


polas 3 
dr. of Castor. 

Polus, A. LXVII. 2. A freedman. 

Polybius, A. cr. 1. A freedman 
of Augustus 

Polybius, Cl. XXVII. A freedman 
of Claudius. 

Polycrates, Cal. xxr. The cele- 
brated tyrant of Samos, famous 
at first for his good fortune, but 
betrayed and crucified in 522 B.C. 

Polyhistor, see Cornelius Alexander. 

Pompeia, J. VI. 2, LXXIV. 2. 
Daughter of Q. Pompeius, 

Pompeia, T. VI. 3. Sister of Sex. 
Pompeius. 


Cl. XXI. 1; as i tg T. LVII. 2 
Pompeii, Gr xv. The Pompey 
family. 


Pompeii, conjecture in Cl. XXII. 1. 
The Campanian town. 
Pompeius, T. uvi. 2. A Roman 
knight. 
Pompeius Lenaeus, Gr. II., Xv. 
Pompeius is Magnus, Cn. I; . XIX. 2 
bis), XX XXI. (bis), XXIV. 1, 
XXVI. 1l is) XXVII. 1, XXVIII. 
2, XXIX. 2, XXX. 2, XXXIV. 2, 
XXXV. 1,2 (bis), XXXVI, XXXVII. 
XLIX. 2, L 1 (bis), LIV. 3, 
LXVIII. 2, 3, LXIX., LXXV. 1 (bis), 
; À. T. 1 eens 


Magnus Pompeius) ; Rh. L, II.; 
erg. 2; Luc.; Pompei. curia, 
J LXXX. 4, LXXXIV. 3 Pompei 
theatrum, A. XXXI. bal. XXL; 
Cl. xr. 3; N. XLVI. Ü Pompey's 
theatre, the first permanent 


544 


theatre in Rome, built in the 
campus Martius in 55 B.C. 
pone Magnus, Cn., Cal. xxxv. 
Cl. xxvi. 2 (bis), XXIX .1, 2. 
us band of Antonia, daughter 
of Claudius. His surname Mag- 
nus was inherited. 


Pompeius, Sextus, A.IX., XVI. 
ter), XLVII., LXVII., LXXIV.: 
. IV. 3, VI. 7. Son of Pompey 
the Great. 

Pompeius, Sex., A. 0. 1. Consul 
in 14 A.D. 

Pompeius Macer, J. LVI. 7. 

Pompeius (Rufus), Q., J. VI. 2. 

Pompilius Andronicus, M. Gr. 


VIII. 

Pomponius, M., Rh. I. 

Pomponius Flaccus, T. XLII. 1. 

Pomponius Marcellus, M., Gr. XXII. 

Pomptinae paludes, J. XLIV. 3. 
The Pomptine Marshes in Latium. 

Pompusianus, see Mettius. 

Pontia, T. LIV. 2. An island off 
s coast of Latium, used as a 
pee ce of imprisonment ; plur., 

XV. 1, referring to Pontia 
and the neighbouring islands. 

Ponticus, "A,  -um, j. from 
Pontus: triumphus, J. XXXVII. 


1, 2. 

Pontius Aquila, J. LXXVII. 2 (ter). 
Tribune of the commons. 

Pontius Nigrinus, C., T. LXXII. 1. 
Consul in 37 A.D. 

Pontus, J. XXXV. 2, XXXVI., XLIV. 3 5 
N. xvi. A country in the 
north-eastern part of Asia Minor. 

Popillius, M., Ter. Iv. 

Poppaea, see ’ Papia. 


Poppaea Sabina, N. XXXV. ‚l, 3, 
4, 5; O. m. 1. Wife of the 
emperor Nero. 

Poppaeus Sabinus, C. V. I. 1. 


onsul in A.D. 9. 

Porcius (Licinus) Ter. I, V. A 
writer of epigrams, who flourished 
about 100 B.c. 

Porius, Cal. xxxv. 3 (see note). 

Posides, Cl. XXVIII. 

Postumia, J. L. 1. 

(Postumius), M., Gr. v. 

Postumius, see Saevius, 

Postumus, see Rabirius. 


~ 


INDEX 


Praeconinus, see Aelius. 

Praeneste, A. LXXII. 2, LXXXII. 1; 
T. Iv. 2; Gr. XVII. An important 
hill town of Latium, east of Rome, 
the modern Palestrina. 

Praenestinus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Praeneste : sortium, T. LXIII. 1; 
see also Fortuna, 

Priamus, T. LXII. 3. 

Priapea, Verg. 17. 

Priapus, Cal. LVI. 2; Gr. XI. God 
of fertility and of gardens and 
vineyards; represented in an 
obscene form. 

Primus, see Antonius, 

Princeps, Gr. IV. A grammarian. 

Priscus, see Caesonius, Helvidius, 
Tarquinius, 

Probus, see Valerius. 

Proculus, see Acerronius, Aesius and 
Valerius. 

Propertius, Sex., Verg. 30. The 
famous elegiac poet of the 
Augustan Age. 

Proserpina, N. XLVI. 2. Latin 
form of Persephone, carried cff 
by Dis (Pluto), and made queen 
of the Under World. 

Psylli, A. XVII. 4. Snake-charmers 
and healers of  snake-bite. 
Originaly the name of an 
African people, whose bodies, 
according to Pliny, N.H. 7, 14, 
contained a poison deadly to 
serpents, and gave out an odour 
which put serpents to flight; cf. 
N.H. 8. 93. Dio, 51. 14, adds 
that they had the power of 
sucking out all the poison of 
every reptile, and gives other 
details, 

Ptolemaeum, A. XVIII. 1. The tomb 
of the Ptolemies. 

Ptolemaeus (Auletes), J. LIV. 3; 
Cl. xvi. 2. 

Ptolemaeus, J. xxxv. 1. 
Auletes. 

Ptolemaeus, Cal. XxvI. 1, XXxv. 1, 
LV. 1. Son of king Juba. 

publicani, J. XX.; A. XXIV.; Cal. 
XL.; Vit. xiv. Farmers of the 

ublic revenues, usually Romun 
ghts, who bid for the privilege 
of collecting the taxes and im- 


Son of 


VOL. IT. 


pests in the provinces, as a 
business enterprise. 

Pulcher, see Claudius, 

Punicus, -a, -um, adj. from Poeni : 
bellum, Aug. II. 2; Gr. II. (bis) 
Ter. I.; Bellum, the epic poem of 
Naevius, Gr. IL.; bella, T. Xvi. 
1; N. xxxvii. 2; Malum Puni- 
cum, see Malum. 

Pupillus, see Orbilius. 

Puteolanus, -a, -um, from 
Puteoli: sinum, A. XCVIII. 2; 
moles, Cal. XIX. 1; (praedio), Ter. 
III.; via, Verg. 36. 

Puteoli, A. XLIV. 1; Cal. XXXII. 1; 
Cl. xxv. 2; Vit. XIL; V. vii. 8; 
Tit. v. 3. A town near Naples. 

Pylades, A. XLV. 4. 

Pyrallis, Cal. XXXVI. 1. 

Pyrenaeus saltus, J. xxv. 1. The 
Pyrenees, 

Pyrgi, N. v. 2. A small town of 
southern Etruria, modern Santa 
Severa. 

pyrrhica, J. XXXIX. 1 (see note); 
N. XII. 2. 

Pyrrus (Pyrrhus), T. rn. 1. King 
of Epirus, 

Pythius, -a, -um, adj. from Pytho im 
Delphi) when games were cele- 
brated every fourth yearin honour 
of Apollo: corona, N. XXV. 1. 


QUINDECIMVIRI, J. 
note); Gr. VII. 
Quinquatrus (Quinquatria),A. LXXI. 
3; N. XXXIV. 2; D. Iv. 4. The 
festival of Minerva, so called be- 
cause it came on the fifth day 
after the Ides of March. When 
it was extended to five days the 
name was associated in the popu- 
lar mind with its duration. 

Quintilius Varus, (P.), A. XXII. 2; 
T. xvi. 1. Consul in 13 B.C. 
In 9 A.D. he was disastrously 
defeated by the Germans and 
his entire army was destroyed. 
See Dio, 56. 18 ff. 

Quirinius, T. XLIX. 1. 

Quirinus, see Ianus, 

Quirites, J. Lxx.; Cl. xIX.; N. 
XXXIX. 2. A name applied to 
the Romans as citizens. 


adj. 


LXXIX. (see 


545 


NN 


INDEX 


RABIRIvS, C., J. XII. 

Rabirius Postumus, Cl. XVI. 2. 

Raetia, A. XXI. 1. A country 
north of Cisalpine Gaul, between 
Noricum and Transalpine Gaul. 

Raeticus, -a, -um, adj. from Raetia : 
bellum, T. IX. 1, 2; Cl. I. 2: 
vinum, A. LXXVII. 

Ravenna, J. XXX. 15; A. XX., XLIX. 

; T. xx. <A city in the eastern 
part of Cisalpine Gaul, near the 
head of the Adriatic. 

Reate, V. I. 1. A town in the 
centre of the Sabine territory, 
north-east of Rome, 

Reatinus, -a, -um, adj. from Reate : 
conditores, V. XII.; municeps, 
V. I. 25; oppidum, V. I. 4; rura, 
V. XXIV 

Rebilus, see Caninius. 

Reges, see Marcii, 

Regilli, T. 1. 1. A town of the 
Sabines, also called Regillum or 
Regillus, the location of which 
is unknown. 

Regillianus, see Claudius, 

Regium, A. XVI. 3; Tit. v. 8. A 
town in the south-western ex- 
tremity of Italy; modern Reggio 
di Calabria. 

Remmius Ee E Q., Gr. XXIII. 
(bis); Pers. 

retiarius, see gladiator. 

Rhascuporis, T. XXXVII. Ta 

Rhenus, J. XXV. 1, 2; A. SE 
xxy. 2* T. IX. 9, XVIII. ER 2; 
Cal. XLV. 1, LI. 2: Cl. I. 2; D. 
vi. 2. The 'Rhine.' 

Rhianus, T. LXX. 2. A Cretan 
poet of the Alexandrine school, 
who lived in the third century B.C. 

Rhodanus, J. XXV. 1. The Rhone. 

Rhodiensis, -e, adj. from Rhodus: 
hospes, T. LXII. 1. 

Rhodii, T. XXXII. 2, Lv1.; Cl. XXV. 
3; N. VIL 2. The inhabitants 
of Rhodes. 

Rhodius, -a, -um, adj. 
Rhodus : eas, Cl. XXI. 

Rhodus, J. IV. , 2; T. XI. 1, XII. 
1, 2, XIN. 1, c 4, XXXII. 2, 
LIX. 1; N. XXXIV. 1; V. vil. 4. 
The island of Rhodes, south-west 
of Asia Minor. 


546 


from 


Roma, J. III., V., IX. 3, X. 2, XXXIV. 
2, XXXVIII. 2, XLII. 2, LXX.; A. 
VH. 2, XIII. 1, XVII. 1, XXV. 2, 
XXVI. 3, XLIV. 1, XLVI., LII., 
LVII. 1, LX., XCII., XCIV. 3, 
XOVII. 3; T. I. 1, IO. 3, IV. 3, 
Ys VIL 3, X. 2, XV. 1, XVI. 1, 
XXXII. 2, XXXVII. 1, XXXIX (bis), 
LIX. 2, LXII. 1, LXIII. 1, LXV. 2, 
LXXII. 1, LXXv. 3; Cal. IL. VI. 1 
(bis), XV. 1, XXIII. 2, XXXII, 2, 
XXXIX. 1, XLIV. 2, XLVII., LVII. 
1, 2; Cl. III. 4, VI. 1, XVII. 2, 
XXV. '4, 5; N. V. ', XII. 3, XXI. 1, 

3, xxv. 1 (bis), XXVII. 2, 

XXXIX. 2, 


3, VIII. 3; D. VI. 2; Gr. I., IX., 
XIV., XX., Lie XXIV.; Rh. L, 
vL; Ter. I, IV.; Verg. 11, 13, 
35; Pers. 


Romani, J. XXV. 2; A. XL. 5, 
XCVIII. 3; Tib. LXI. '3; Ter. I. 
Romanus, “a, -um, adj. from Roma: 
civis, cives, J. XI.; T. XXXVII. 3; 
Cl. XXIV. 1; G. IX. 1; V. Oi. 
(fem.); civitas, Cal. XXXVIII. 1; 
Cl. xxv. 3; N. XII. 1, xxiv. 2: 
civitates, A. XL. 3; G. XIV. 3; dis- 
ciplina cultusque, J. aco 23 duz, 
Ter. 1.; duces, Cl. 1. 1; Ter. 1.; 
eques, equites, J. XIV. 2; XXVI. 3; 
XXXIX, 2, XLVII.; A. XXIV. 1, 
XXVII. 3, XL. 1, XLII. 3, LVII. 1; 
T. VIL 2, XXXV. 1, XLII. 2, LVII. 2; 
Cal. xv. 2, XVI. 2, XVIII. 2, 


Tit. Iv. 2, VI. 1; D. vu. 2, CUI 
. 9; Gr. HI. (bis); 
Ter. V.; Verg. 19, 21, 30; bibull 
Pers. (bis); Forum, A. LXXII. 1 
gens, Cl. XXV. 3; habitus, A. 
XOVIII. 3; imperator, V. IV. 5; 
litterae, Gr. X. ; nomina 
9; plebs, J 


veuses 


INDEX 


XLIX. 2; Cal. IV., XI, XII., 
XXIII. 1, XXX. 2; Cl. II. 2, VI. 2, 
XXV. 3, 5, XLIII.; N. XXXVII. 3; 
G. X. 1. XV. 2; res, Gr. X.; Verg. 
19; scriptores, Verg. 30; sermo, 
A. XCVIII. 3; signa, Cal. XIV. 33 
urbs, Verg. 21. 

Romulus, A. VII. 2, xov.; T. I. 1, 
LIX. 2; Cal. XXv. 1. 

Rubico, J. XXXI. 2, LXXXI. 2. The 
river Rubicon, in north-eastern 
Italy, forming the boundary be- 
tween Umbria and Cisalpine Gaul, 

Rubria, N. XXVIII. 1. A Vestal 
virgin. 

Rufilla, A. LXIX. 2. 

Rufio, J. LXXVI. 3. 

Rufrius Crispinus, N. XXXV. 5. 
Stepson of the emperor Nero. 
Rufus, see Cluvius, Mettius, Octa- 
vius, Plautius, Pompeius, Ruti- 

lius, Salvidienus. 

Russus (?), see Claudius, 

Rusticus, see Iunius. 

Rustius Caepio, D. IX. 2. 

Rutilius Rufus, (P.), A. LXXXIX. 2; 
Gr. VI. A celebrated orator and 
writer, consul in 105 B.C. 


SABBATA, A. LXXVI. 2; T. XXXII. 2 
(see note). The Sabbath of the 
Jews; the seventh day of the 
week, Saturday. 

Sabina, see Poppaea. 

Sabini, T. I. 1; Vit. I. 2; V. I. 4, 
II. 1; Tit. X. 1. The Sabines, a 
people of central Italy, dwelling 
in the region north-east of Rome 

Sabinus, -a, -um, adj. from Sabini : 
lingua, T. I. 2; ruris, Hor. 


Sabinus, see Asellius, Cornelius, 
Flavius, Nymphidius, Oppius, 
Poppaeus., 


Sabratensis, -e, adj. from Sabrata, 
& town of northern Africa, south- 
west of Carthage : V. III. 

Sacra via, J. XLVI., LXXX. 4; 
Vit. xvii. 1. The oldest and 
most famous street of Rome, 
running from the Colosseum 
valley to the summit of the 
Velia (marked by the arch of 
Titus), and thence across the 
Forum to the temple of Saturn 


and the beginning of the clivus 
Capitolinus, 

Saeculare carmen, Hor. An ode 
written by Horace for the 
Saeculares ludi of Augustus. 

Saeculares ludi, A. XXXI. 4 (bis); 
Cl. XNI. 2; Vit. II. 5; D. Iv. 3. 
Sacrifices to the gods of the 
Lower World, made in the 
Tarentum, a part of the campus 
Martius near the Tiber. In the 
year 210 B.C. they were made 
& national festival, to be cele- 
brated every one hundred years. 
Augustus celebrated them in 17 
B.C., Claudius in 47 A.D. and, 
Domitian in 88 A.D. 

Saepta, A. XLIII. 1, 4; T. XVIIL. 2 
(see note); Cal. XVII. 1, XXI; 
Cl. XXI. 4; N. XII. 4. A large 
enclosure in the campus Martius, 
divided into smaller sections, 
where the comitia centuriata 
voted. 

Saevius Nicanor, Gr. v. (bis); M. 
Saevius Postumius, Gr. v. 

Salaria via, N. XLVI. 1: V. XII. 
The road leading from Rome 
north-east to the Sabine terri- 
tory. It derived its name from 
the trade in salt, 

Salassi, A. XXI. 1. A people 
dwelling in the western part of 
Transpadane Gaul, 

Salii, Cl. XXXII. 1 (see note). An 
ancient college of priests who in 
the early part of March made 
solemn processions in honour of 
Mars, in which they danced, sang 
& hymn, and carried the sacred 
shields (ancilia) ; cf. O. VIII. 3. 

Salinator, see Livius. 

Sallustius Crispus (C.), A. LXXXVI. 
3; Gr. X. (quater), xv. The 
famous Roman historian (86-34 


B.C.). 

Sallustius Lucullus, D. x. 3; of. 
Luculleus. 

Salus, A. XXXI. 4. Safety, wor- 
shipped as a goddess. The augur- 
(um Salutis (salutis, Wissowa, 
Rel. u. Kult? 133) was an inquiry 
whether prayers might be offered 
for the welfare of the State. It 


547 


. ~ 


INDEX 


could be made only in time of 


paac 
Salvia Titisenia, A. LXIX. 2. 
Salvidienus Orfitus, N. XXXVI. 1. 
Salvidienus Orfitus, D. X. 2. 
Salvidienus Rufus, A. LXVI. 1. 
Salvito, J. LIX. (see note). 
Salvius Cocceianus, D. x. 3. 
Salvius Liberalis, V. XIII. 
Salvius Otho, M., O. 1.1. Grand- 
father of the emperor Otho. 
Salvius Otho, L., G. VI. 1; O. I. 2. 
Father of the emperor Otho. 
Salvius Otho, M., the emperor: 
M. Salvius Otho, G. XVIL ; M., 
O. 1. 3; Otho, G. VI. 1 


1; 

(Salvius) "Titianus, L., O. I. 
Brother of the emperor dior 
Sameramis (Semiramis), J. XXII. 3. 

The famous Assyrian queen, 

Samniticus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Samnites, a people of central 
Italy : bellum, Vit. 1. 3. 

Samus (Samos), A. XVII. 3, XXVI. 33 
T. xir. 2; Cal. XXI.; V. VII. 4. 
An island off the coast of Asia 
Minor between Ephesus and 
Miletus. 

Sandalarius, see Apollo. 

Santra, Gr. XIV.; Ter. IV. 

Sardi, J. Lv. 2. The people of 
Sardinia, 

Sardinia, A. XLVII.; Gr. V. 

Sarmatae, T. XLI.; ' D. vi. 1 (bis). 
The people of Sarmatia in nor- 
thern Europe, east of the Baltic 


Sea. 

Sarnus, Rh. IV. A river of Cam- 
pania, near Pompeii. 

Satur, D. XVII. 2. 

Saturae, Hor. Horace's writings 
in hexameter verse, including 
the Sermones and Epistulae. 

Saturnalia, A. LXXV: Cal. XVII. 
25 v.; V. XIX. 1l. The 
principal festival of the Romans, 
beginning on Dec. 17 and 
lasting for several days, in honour 
of Saturn. It was a time of 
general merry-making; see notes 


548 


' Scribonia, 


on the passages cited and cf. 
Sigillaria. 

Saturninus, L., J. XII. A popular 
leader and 'demagogue of the 
time of Marius, thrice tribune of 
the commons. 

Saturninus, see Aponius and Iulius. 

Saturnus, T. LIX. l. An ancient 
Italic deity : aedes, A. XXIX. 5; 
O. vi. 2, his temple at the western 
end of the Forum; aerarium, Cl. 
XXIV. 2, the state treasury in the 
temple of Saturn. 

Scaeva, see Cassius. 

Scalae anulariae, A. LXXII. 1. A 
stairway in Rome, perhaps 
leading from the Forum to the 
Palatine behind the temple of 
Castor. 


Scantinia lex, D. vill. 3. A law - 


of uncertain authorship T date, 
providing for the punishment 
of unnatural crimes. 

Scaptiensis, -e, adj. from Scaptia, 
the name of one of the Roman 
tribes: tribules, A. XL. 2 (see 


note). 

Scelerata Castra, Cl. I. 3, 

Scipio (P. Cornelius Africanus 
Aemilianus): Scipio, Ter. I. 
III. (bis), IV., V.; P. Scipio, Ter. I; 
P. Africanus, Ter. II. ; Africanus, 
Ter. I. Scipio Africanus, Ter. I. 
The younger Scipio, who de- 
stroyed Carthage in ze B.C. 

Scipio, P. (Cornelius), J. XXxv. 2, 
XXXVII. 1, LIX. (bis); T. Iv. 1. 

A. LXII. 1, LXIII. 1, 

LXIX.; Gr. XIX. Wife of Augustus, 

Scribonianus, see Furius. i 

Scribonius, T. XIV. 

Scribonius AOs, Gr. XIX. 

Scribonius Libo, L., T, XXV. 1, 3; 
Gr. XIX. 

Scutarius, A. LVI. 4. 

Scythae, A. XXI. 8. The people 
of Scythia, north of the Black 
and Caspian Seas. 

Scytobrachion, see Dionysius, 

Secundus, see Gabinius and Plinius, 

secutor, see Gladiator. 

Seianus, see Aelius, 

Selene, Cal. XXVI. 1. Daughter 
of Mark Antony and Cleopatra. 


-—— ree ce ce — rere ee 


INDEX 


Seleucus, Cl. xxv. 8. King of 
Syria. 

Seleucus, T. LVI. A grammarian. 

Seleucus, O. Iv. 1. vi. 1. An 
astrologer. 
semigraeci, see Graeci. 

Semiramis, see Sameramis, 

Seneca, L. Annaeus, Cal. LIM. 2; 
N.vII. 1 (bis), XXXV. 5, LII.; Verg. 
29; Pers. "he well- known philo- 
sopher and tutor of Nero (c. 4 
B.C.-4.D. 65.). T. LXXIII. 2 per- 
haps refers to his father, Seneca 
Rhetor. 

Senones, T. 2; Cl. I.3. A 
Gallic people le dwelling i in northern 
Umbria and the adjacent part 
of Cisalpine Gaul, 

Sentius, Cn., Verg. 35. 

September mensis, A. XXXI. 2, 
XXXV. 3, C. 3; T. xxvI. 2; Cal. 
XV. 2; D. XII. 3. 

Septimius. Hor. 

Septimontale sacrum, D. Iv. 5. 
The *'Festival of the Seven 
Hills," celebrated in December in 
commemoration of the inclusion 
of seven hills within one wall. 

Septizonium, T. I. (see note). 

Serapis, V. VII. 1, 2. One of the 
principal Egyptian deities. 

Sermones, Hor. See Saturae. 

Sertorius (QJ), J. v. One of 
Marius's generals, who after 
the death of his commander 
carried on war in Spain against 
the party of 

ears. He was finally assassinated 
in 72 B.C 

Servilia, J. L.2 (bis). Mother of 
M. Brutus. 

Servilia Nais, N. III. 2. 
Servilianus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Servilius : korti, N. XLVII. 1. 

Servilius Caepio, J. XXI. 

Servilius Isauricus, J. III. 

Servilius Isauricus, P., A. LXII. 1; 
T. v.; Rh. IV. (bis). 

Servilius Nonianus, Pers. 

Servius Tullius, see Tullius. 

sestertius (semis tertius, sc. num- 
mus), a Roman coin, originally 
of silver but later of bronze, 
equal to 24 asses. or one-fourth 


Sulla for some 


. of a denarius. It was equal to 
2łd. or 5 cents, and is the unit 
in which sums of money were 
most commonly reckoned by 
iie Romans. Itwasabbreviated 

= 24. In reckoning thou- 
em of sesterces the original 
gen. pl. sestertium was often 
used as & neuter singular; e.g. 
Tib. XLII. 2 ducenta sestertia = 
200,000 sesterces; but cf. Calig. 
XXXIX. 2 ducentis milibus. In 
reckoning larger sums the nu- 
meral adverb was commonly 
used, either with the gen. pl. 
sestertium, or with the case of 
sestertium demanded by the 
context. In such instances cen- 
tena milia is understood: e.g. 
Jul. L. 2 sexagiens (centena milia) 
sestertium margaritam mercatus 
est (= 6,000,000 sesterces, or 
$300.000); Tib. XLVIII. 1, pro- 


posito milies (centena milia) 
sestertium (= 100,000,000 ses- 
terces). Suetonius has 23 cases 


of the former construction and 
apparently always used it. The 
latter, however, is not uncom- 
mon; see, for example, Tac. Ann. 
2. 37 liberalitate deries sestertit, 
and for a full discussion of the 
subject, Howard. Harvard Studies 
in Classical Philology, vit. 210 ff. 

Sestilia, V. mr. 1. Mother of 
the emperor Vitellius. 

Severus, see Cassius, 

Sextilis mensis, A. XXXI. 2. The 
month afterwards called Augus- 
tus (August). 

Sextius, Q., Gr. XVIII. A celebrated 
Stoic philosopher, a contem- 
porary of Julius Caesar, 

Sibyllini libri, A. XXXI. 1. Pro- 
phetic books supposed to have 
been sold to King "Tarquinius 
Priscus, or Tarquinius Superbus 
by a sibyl. She at first offered 
him nine. When he refused to 
purchase them she burned three 
and offered the remaining six 
at the same price. On his 
refusing, she burned three more, 
and the king finally purchased 


549 


INDEX 


three at the price of the original 
nine. They were kept under- 
ground in a stone chest in 
charge of a college of priests, 
at first two in number, then 
ten, and finally fifteen (see 
quindecimviri), and were con- 
sulted in case of prodigies, calam- 
ities, and danger. ‘They were 
burned with the Capitolium in 
82 B.C. and a new collection was 
made, which was revised by 
Augustus; see Aug. XXXI. 1. 
Sicilia, A. Ir. 2, XVI. 3, xxv. 8, 
XLVIL, LXXXV. 2; T. II. 1, 2, 
Iv. 2, VI. 2, 3; Cal. Xx.; Cl 
XXV. 5; Rh. v.; Verg. 13. 
Siciliensis, -e, adj. from Sicilia : 
bello, A. LXX. 2; pugnam, Aug. 
XCVI. 2; peregrinatione, Cal. LI. 1. 
Siculus, -a, -um, adj. to Siculi, an 
ancient people of Sicily, hence 
** Sicilian " : bellum, A. IX., XVI. 


1, XXIL; classis, Cl. XXI. 6; 
fretum (Siculum), T. mu. 1; 
victoriae, Cal. XXIII. 1. 
Sigambri, A. XXI. 1. A people 


of Germany. 

Sigillaria, Cl. v., XVI. 4; N. XXVIII. 
9. Seenoteson the passage cited. 

Silanus, see lunius, 

Silius, C., A. LXXI. 2, CI. 1. 

Silius, C., Cl. XXVI. 2, XXIX. 8, 
XXXVI. 

Silo, Verg. 14. 

Silus, see Albucius. 

Silva, Gr. XXIV. (see note). 

Silvanus (M. Plautius), Cl. Iv. 3. 

Sinuessani, Vit. VII. The people 
of Sinuessa, & town on the via 
Appia, near the borders of 
Latium and Campania, 

Siren, Gr. XI.; plur., T. LXX. 3. 

Sisennia, see Fulvia. 

Smyrna, also Zmyrna, Gr. VI. 
A celebrated city of Ionia in 
western Asia Minor. 

Sol, N. Lu. The sun, as a deity. 

Sosius, C., A. XVII. 2. 

Spartacus, A. ul. 1. A Thracian 
gladiator who carried on a servile 
war with Rome from 73 to 71 
B.c. He was finally defeated by 
M. Crassus, the triuinvir. 


550 


Spelunca, T. XXXIX. 

Sphinx (Sphynx), A. L. 

Spiculus, N. XXX., 2, XLVII. 8. A 
murmulo, 

Spoletium, V. I. 3; Gr. XXI. A 


town of southern Umbria, 
modern Spoleto. 
Sporus, N. XXVIII. 1, 2, XXIX., 


XLVI. 2, XLVIII. 1, , ALIX. 3. 


Spurinna, J. LXXXI. 2, 4. <A sooth- 
Sayer. 

Staberius Eros, Gr. XII. 

stadium, XXXIX, D. v. A 


building for holding foot-races 
and athletic oontests in the 
Greek fashion. Caesar and 
Augustus erected temporary struc- 
tures for the purpose, and the 
first permanent stadium seems 
to have been built by Nero in 
connection with his gymnasium 
(Nero, XII. 3). Nero's gymna- 
sium was destroyed by lightning 
in A.D. 62, but Domitian built 
& stadium on the same site, 
which was restored by Alexander 
Severus. The modern Piazza 
Navona preserves the shape and 
size of Domitian’s stadium 
almost exactly; see Platner, 
T'opog. of Rome, p. 365. 
Statilia Messalina, N. xxxv. 1; 


O. X. 2. 

Statilius Capella, V. m1. 

Statilius Corvinus, Cl. XIMI. 2. 

Statilius Taurus, A. XXIX. 5; Cal. 
XVIII. 1; N. xxxv. 1. One of 
the generals of Augustus, who 
in 30 B.C. built the first per- 
manent amphitheatre at Rome. 
It was in the campus Martius 
and was the only amphitheatre 
in the city until the building of 
the Colosseum. 

Statura, sce Calpurnius. 

Stellatis campus, J. XX. 3. A 
district of northern Campania, 

Stephanio, A. XLV. 4. 

Stephanus, D. XVII. 1, 2. 

Stilo, see Aelius. 

Stoechades, Cl. xvii. 2. Islands 
on the southern coast of Gaul, 
near Massilia (Marseilles). 

Strabo, Caesar, J. Lv. 2. An 


INDEX 


orator and writer of tragedies, 
who died in 87 B.C. See aiso 
Fannius. 

Stymphalus, Ter. L, V. A town of 
Arcadia, near a ' mountain and 
lake of the saine name. 

Subura, J. XLVI. A street in 
Rome, in the valley formed by 
the Quirinal,Viminal, and Oppian 
(Esquiline) hills. 

Suebi, A. XXI. 1. A nation of 
north-eastern Germany. 

Suetonius Laetus, O. x. 1. The 
father of C. Suetonius Tran- 
quillus. 

Sulla, Cal. LVII. 2. An astrologer. 

Sulla, Faustus, J. XXVII. 1, LXXV. 
3; Gr. xu. Son of the dictator. 

Sulla, Faustus, Cl. Xxvit. 2. 

Sulla Felix, L. Cornelius, the Dic- 
tator, J. I. 1, 2, HL, V., XL, XLV. 
3, LXXIV. 1, LXXV. 4, LXNVII.; 
T. LIX. 2; Gr. Nit. (bis). 

Sulla, P., J. IX. 1 (bis). 

Sullanus, -a, -um, adi. from Sulla, 
referring to the Dictator: tem- 
poris, Gr. XI.; temporibus, Gr. 


Sulpicii (Galbae), G. rrr. 1 (irr. 3). 
Sulpicius, Cl. Iv. 5. 
Sulpicius, Ser., J. XXIX. 1, L. 1. 
Sulpicius Carthaginiensis, Verg: 38. 
Sulpicius Camerinus, Q., V. IL 1. 
Consul in A.D. 9. 
Sulpicius Flavus, Cl. XLI. 1. 
Sulpicius Galba, G. rr. 1. The first 
of the name, consul in 144 B.C. 
(Sulpicius) Galba, C., G. rir. 4 (bis). 
Brother of the emperor Galba. 
(Sulpicius) Galba, Ser, G. II. 2. 
Great- grandfather of the em- 
, | peror Galba. 
Sulpicius Galba, Ser. the Em- 
peror: Ser. Galba imperator, 
G. IV. 1; STULU, G. III. 4, IV. 1; 
Caesar, G. ; O. v. 2; L. ' Livius 
Ocella, G. iv. P Galba, 'N. XXXII. 
4, XL. 3, XLII. i, XLVII. 2, XLVIII. 
2, XLIX. 3; G. IL, IIJ. 3, IV. 2, 


Sulpicius Gallus, C., Ter. Iv. 

Superum mare, J. XXXIV. 1, XLIV. 
3, A. XLIX. 1. * The Upper 
Sea,” a name applied to the 
Adriatic; cf. Inferum mare. 

Sura, see Palfurius. 

Suria, see Syria. 

Surrentum, A. LXV. 1. A town 
at the southern end of the Bay 
of Naples, modern Sorrento. 

Syracusae, T. LXXIV.; Cal. XX., XXI., 
XXIV. 2. The celebrated city of 
eastern Sicily ; applied by Auguse 
tus to his study, A. LXXII. 2. 

Syria (Suria), J. XXII. 2 (Suria), 
XXXV. 2; A. XVII. 3; T. XIV. 3, 
XXXIX., XLI., XLII. 1, XLIX., 2, 
LII. 3; Cal. IL; N. XXXIX. 1; 
Vit. II. 4, 5; V. Iv. 5, VI. 3, XV. 

Syria dea, N. LVI. (dea Syria); 
see note. 

Syriacus, -a, -um, adj. from Syria : 
legionibus, T. XLVIII. 2; expedi- 
eon Cal. X. 1; exercitum, V. 
VI 


Syriaticus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Syria: exercitus, Vit. Xv. 1. 
Syrus, -a, -um, adj. meaning 


“Syrian”: Gr. VIII.; pueri, A. 
LXXXIII. 

Syrus, Ter. III. . 

TALARIUS, Cal. VIII. 4 

Talentum, J. Iv. A Greek weight 
and sum of money. The latter 
varied according to whether it 
was of gold or silver, as well as 
in different states of Greece. 
The Attic talent, which is most 
frequently meant, contained 6000 
drachmae, and was equal to 
nearly $1200. 

Tanusius Geminus, J. IX. 2 (bis). 
A writer of history and the 
author of an epic poem (Annales), 
slightingly referred to by 
Seneca (Epist. 93. 9). 

Tarentinus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Tarentum, the city of southern 
Italy: Gr. XVII. 

Tarichaeae. Tit. Iv. 3 (see note). 

Tarpeius, -a, -um, adj. from 
Tarpeia, who betrayed the 
Roman citadel to the Sabines : 


551 


INDEX 


monté, J. XLIV. 1; culmine, D. 
XXIII. ?. Applied to the Capi- 
toline hill and to the temple of 
Jupiter Capitolinus. 


Tarquinius Priscus, A. II. 1. The 
fitth king of Rome. 
Tarracina, T. xxxiX.; G. Iv. 1. 


A town of Latium on the via 
Appia, modern Terracina. 
Tarraco, A. XXVI. 3. A town of 


north-eastern Spain, modern 
‘Tarragona, 
Tarraconenses, G. XW. 1. The 


people of Tarraco. 

Tarraconensis, -e, adj. from Tar- 
raco: Hispania, G. VIII. 1, one 
of the provinces into which 
Spain was divided under the 
empire. 

Tarsensis, -e, adj. from Tarsus, a 
city of Cicilia : D. x. 1. 

Tatius, T. r. l. A Sabine king 
who, according to tradition, 
shared the throne with Romulus. 

Taurus, see Statilius. 

Tedius Afer, A. XXVII. 3. 

Tegea, V. VII. 3. A city of Arcadia. 

Telegenius, Cl. XL. 3 (see note). 

Telephus, A. XIX. 1, 2. 

Tellus, Gr. xv. *' The Earth," 
worshipped as a goddess, 

Teminites, see Apollo. 

Terentia, see Albia. 

Terentia, A. LXVI. 8. Wife of 
Maecenas, 

Terentilla, A. LXIX. 2. 

Terentius Afer, P.: Ter. 1.3 Ter- 
entius, Ter. 111. (bis), IV., V; (ter) 
Afer, Ter. IV. 

Terentius Lucanus, Ter. I. 

(Terentius) Varro, M., see Varro. 

Terpnus, N. XX. 1; V. XIX. l. A 
lvre-player. 

Terra mater, T. LXXV. 1; cf. J. vir. 

Tertia. J. L. 2. Sister of M. Brutus. 

Tertulla, J. L. 1. Wife of M. 
Crassus, 

Tertulla, A. LXIX. 2. 

Tertulla, V. II. 1. 
of Vespasian. 

Tertulla, see Arrecina. 

Tetrinius, Cal. XXX. 2; plur., id. 

Teucer, see Octavius, 

Teutoni (Teutones, J. XI. A 


552 


Grandmother 


people of northern Germany, 
neighbours of the Cimbri, with 
whom they invaded Italy. They 
were vanquished by Marius. 

Thallus, A. LXVII. 2. A slave. 

Thasius, -a, -um, adj. from Thasos, 
an island in the northern part 
of the Aegean Sea: lapis, N. L. 
A kind of marble, 

Theodorus Gadareus, T. LVII. 1. 


Theogenes, A. XCIV. 12. An as- 
trologer. 
Theologumena, A. XCIV. 4 (see 


note). 

Thermus, M., J. II. (bis). 

Thessali, T. VIII.; Cl. XXI. 33 sing., 
A. XCVI. 1. The people of 
Thessaly in northern Greece. 

Thoranius, see Toranius. 

Thracia, J. XLIV. 3; A. XCIV. 5; 
T. xvi. 2; V. n. 3. 

Thraex (also Thrax), Thraeces, 
see gladiator. 

Thrasea, see Paetus. 

Thrasyllus, A; XCVIII. 4; T. XIV. 4, 
LXII. 3; Cal. XIX. 1. 

Thurinus, A. VII. 1 (ter). A sur- 
name of Augustus; see Thurinus, 
adj. 

Thurinus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Thurii, a town of southern 
Lucania: pago, A. Hn. 3; agrum, 
A. III. 1; regione, A. VII. 1. 

Thyatireni, T. vir. The people 
of Thyatira, a town of northern 
Lydia. 

Tiberianus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Tiberius: scorta, Vit. m. 2; 
domo, Vit. Xv. 3. 

Tiberinus, -a, -um, adj. from Tiber : 
vadum, T. II. 3. 

Tiberis, J. XLIV. 3, LXXXII. 4, 
LXXXIII. 2; A. XXX. 1, XXXVI, 
XLIII. 1, C. 4; T. LXXII. 1, LXXV. 
1; Cal. xv. 1; Cl. xxxvii. 1; 
N. XXVII. 3, XLVII. 3; O. VII. 3; 
Vit. XVII. 2; V. XIX. 2; D. 1. 2, 
Iv. 2. The Tiber. 

Tiberius, the Emperor: Tiberius 
Claudius Nero, T. XLII. 1; 
Tiberius Nero, T. Iv. 3; Ti. 
Caesar, T. ni. 1, XXII.; Cal. 
XXXVII. 3; Cl. xxi. 1; D. xx; 
Caesar, T. XXXI. 2, LIX. 1; Gr. 


Ti 
Ti 
Ti 
Ti 
Ti 


INDEX 


XXII.; Pass.; Tiberius, A. XL. 3, 
LI. 3 (bis) LXII. 2, LXV. 1, 
LXXI. 2, 3, LXXVI. 2, LXXXV. 1, 
LXXXVI. 2, XCII. 2, XCVII. 1, 3, 
XCVIII., 4, $ (bis), C. 3 (bis), 
cI. 2 Qis; T. Iv. 1, V., XXI. 
5, 6, XXII. (bis), 'IXXY. 
1, 9: Cal” I. 1, IL, IV., VI. 1, 2, 
VI., X. 1, XI., XII. 2? 3, XIII., 
XIV. 1, 3, Xv. 1, XVI. 1, 3, XIX. 3, 
XXI., XXVII., XXX. 2, XXXL, 
XXXVIII. 2; CL IV. 1, V., VI. 2, 
XI. 3, XXV. 3: N. V. 2, VI. L, 
XXX. 1; G. I. 4, IV. 1, V. 2: 
O. 1. 2; Vit. I. 2; Tit. VIII. 1; 
Gr. XVII. XXII, XxIIL; Hor.; 
Pass.; Augustus, T. XXVI. 2; 
Pannonicus, Invictus, Pius, T. 
XVII. 2. 
Tiberius, see Claudius, the Emperor. 
Tiberius, T. LIV. 1, LXII. 3, LXXVI. ; 
Cal. xv. 2, XXIII. 3 (bis). Grand- 
son of the emperor Tiberius, 
Tiberius Alexander, V. VI. 3. 
Tiberius Nero, A. LXII. 2; T. IV. 1. 
Former husband of Livia and 
father of the emperor Tiberius. 
Tiberius mensis, T. XXVI. 2. 
Tibullus, Albius, Tibull. (bis). 
Tibur, A. LXXII. 2, LXXXII. 1; 
Cal. vir. 1, 2; Cl. XXXIV. 1l. A 
hill town on the Anio, north-east 
of Rome. modern Tivoli. 
Tiburnus, Hor. One of the three 
mythical founders of Tibur. 
Tiburni luculus (lucus), a grove 
sacred A d him; cf. Hor. Odes, 
1. 7. 13. 
Tiburs, -tis, adj. Tibur : 
regione, Cal. XXI. 
Tiburtinus, -a, -um, adj. 
Tibur: ruris, Hor. 
Ticidas, Gr. Iv., XI. 
Tigillinus, G. Xv. 2 (bis). 
Tigranes, T. IX. 1. 
Tillius Cimber, J. LXXXII. 1. 
Tiridates, N. XION. 1, XXX. 2. 
Tiridates I, king of Armenia, 
brother of Vologeses I. 
Titianus, see Salvius. 
Titii sodales, G. 
note. 
Titinnius, M., Rh. 1r. 
Titisenia, see 'Salvia. 


from 


from 


vir. 1; eee 


Titurianus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Titurius : clades, J. LXVII. 2. 
Titurius (Sabinus), J. XXv. 2. One 

of Caesar's generals, 

Titus, the emperor: Titus, V. III., 
XXII. 3; Tit. I. (cognomine 
paterno), II.; D. x. 2, XVII. 3, 
XXII. ; alius "Nero, T. vir. 1. 

Tityrus, Verg. 43. 

Togata (fabula), N. XI. (see note); 
Gr. XXI. ; cf. togatarius, À. XLV. 4. 

Tolosa, it. XVII. A city of 
southern Gaul, modern Toulouse, 

Tonans, see Iuppiter. 

Toranius, A. LXIX. 1. 

Toranius, C.. A. XXVII. 1. 

Torquatus, see Nonius. 

Torquatus, L., Hor. 
65 B.C. 

Tortor, see Apollo. 

Trabeatae, Gr. XXI. (eee note). 

Trachia (Trachaea) Cilicia, V. VIII. 

name applied to the 
western part of Cilicia. 

Tragoedus, see Iuppiter. 

Tralliani, T. vix. The people of 
Tralles, a city in western Asia 
Minor (Caria), 

Transalpina, see Gallia. 

Transalpini, J. XXIV. 2. 

transitoria domus, N. XXXI. 1. 

Transpadani, J. IX. 3. 

Transpadanus, -a, -um, adj. from 
trans, Padum : regio, V. 1. 4. 

Trebatius, C., J. LXXVIII. 1. 

Trebiani T. XXXI.1. The people of 
Trebia, a town of Umbria, modern 
Trevi. 

Treveri, Cal. voi. 1. A tribe of 
the Belgians. 

Triton, Cl. XXI. 6. A sea-god. 

Troia, Troy, Verg. 38. 41. Also a 
game described by Verg. Aen. 
5. 596 ff., and consisting of evolu- 
tions by two troops of mounted 
youths; J. XXXIX. 2; A. XLIII. 
2; T. y 4; Cal. xvin. 3; Cl. 
XXI. 3; N. Vi. 1. 

Tubero, Q., J. LXXXIII. 1. 

Tucca, see Plotius. 

Tullius, Servius, A. II. 1. The 
sixth king of Rome. 

Tullius Cicero, M., A. v.; M. Cicero 
A. III. 2 (Epist. ad Q. Fr.); Gr. 


353 


Consul in 


, 
-— 
the 


INDEX 


VII., XIV. (Epist. ad Dolabellam; 
ad Att.), XCIV. 93 Gr. xiv. (Ep. 
ad Att.) : Cicero, J. IX. 2 (Ep. ad 
Axium), XVII. 2, XX. 4 (Orat. de 
Domo), XXX. 5 (De Of.), XLII. 3 
(frg. inc), XLIX. 3 (Ep. ine.), 
L. 2, LV. 1 (Brut), LV. 1 (Ep. ad 


Nep.), LVI. 1 (Brut.), LVI. 6; 
T. Ir. 4, VII. 2; Cl. XLI. 3; Gr. 
IX, XVL; Rh. IL, I. (Ep. ad 
Tit), V. (Phil.), Ter. v. (Limo). 

(Tullius) Cicero, Q., J. xiv. 2; 
Cicero, A. HI. 2. Brother of the 
orator. 

Tusculanus, -a, -um, adj. from 
'Tuseulum : Fortuna, G. XVIII. 2; 


praedium, Gr. XI.; villa, Gr. XI. 

Tusculum, G. IV. 3, XVIII. 2; Gr. 
XvI. Anancient town of Latium, 
south-east of Rome. 

Tuscus, N. XXXV. 5. 

Tyrius, -a, -um, adj. from Tyrus; 
classis, J. XXXIX. 4; coloris, 
N. XXXI. 3. Tyrian purple, 

Tyrrhenicon Historiae, Cl. XLII. 2 
(bis). 

Tyrus, N. XXXI. the 
Phoenician city. 


ULIXES stolatus, Cal. XXIII. 2. 

Ultor, see Mars. 

Umbria, J. XXXIV. 1, V. I. 4. A 
district in the north-eastern part 
of Italv. 

Urgulanilla, see Plautia. 


VALERIA MESSALINA, Cl. XVII. 3, 
XXVI. 2, XXVI. 1, XXIX. 3, XXXVI., 
iur 2, XXNIX. 1; N. VI. 4; 
Vit. 1. 5. Wife of the emperor 
Claudius. 

. *Valerius Cato, Gr. I., IV. (bis), X., 
XI. (quinquies). 

Valerius Catullus (C.), J. LXXII. 
The celebrated Roman poet. 

Valerius Catullus, Cal. XXXVI. 1. 

Valerius Messala, M., Rh. I. 
Consul in 161 B.C. 

Valerius Wen xu M. G. IV. 1. 
Consul 

Valerius Messala Barbatus, Cl. XXVI. 


4. Tyre, 


Valerius Me Corvinus, (M.), 
A. LVIII. 1, 2, LXXIV.; T. LXX. 1; 
Cl. xm. 2; Gr. 1V.; Tibull, 


554 


Valerius Probus, M., Gr. xxiv. 
Valerius Proculus, Verg. 37. 
Vargunteius, Q., Gr. II. 
Varianus, -a, -um, adj. from Varus : 


clades, A. XXIH. 1 (bis; see 
Quintilius yane XLIX., 1; 
T. XVII. 2, XVII. 1; Cal. Il. 2, 


XXXI. 

Varius, L. Verg. 10, 37, 38, 39, 40, 
41, 42. A famous Roman poet, 
a contemporary of Vergil. 

Varro, M. (Terentius), J. XXXIV. 2, 
LXIV. 2; Gr. XNIIL; Ter. n. 
The famous scholar and ency- 
clopaedic writer (116-28 B.C.). 

Varro Murena, A. XIX., 1, LVI. 4, 
LXVI. 3; T. VIIL: ; Gr. IX. (bis). 

Varronilla, D. vut. Pu 

Varus, see Alfenus and a uae 

Vaticanus, -a, -um (coll is), 
Cl. XXI. 2. The Vatian hill. 

Vatinius, -a, -um, adj. to Vatinius: 
^f J. XXII. 1; rogatio, J. XXVIII. 


Vectis, V. IV. l. An island off the 
south coast of Britain, the Isle 
of Wight. 

Veientanus, -a, -um, adj. from Veii: 
(praedium), G. I. An estate of 
Livia’s near Veii, called ad 
hae lee 

Veii, N. XXXIX. 2 (bis) A city 
in the southern part of Etruria. 

Velabrum, J. XXXVII. 2; N. xxv. 2. 
The valley between the Palatine 
and Capitoline hills, 

Veliterni, A. XOIV. 2. The people 
of Velitrae. 

Velitrae, A. I., VI., XCIV. 2. A 
town of Latium, south-east of 
Rome. 

Venerius, -a, -um, adj. from Venus: 
loci, T. XLIII. 2; fes. Hor. 

Veneta factio, Vit. VII. 1, XIV. 3. 
“ The Blues," one of the factions 
in the Circus ; see notes on 
Calig. LV. 2 and Dom. vn. 1. 

Venus, J. VI. 1, XLIX. 3; Cal. LI., 
LVI. 2; Capitolina, Cal. VII. 
G. XVIII. 2; Coa, V. XVIII; 
Erycina, Cl. xxv. 5; Genetriz, 
J. LXI., LXXVII. 1, LXXXIV. 1; 
Paphia, Tit. v. 1; a throw at 
dice, A. LXXI. 2 (see note). 


| 
f 


Vi 


pum i wt 


\ 


INDEX 


Venusinus -a, -um, adj. from 
Venusia, a small town on the 
borders of Lucania and Apulia: 
Hor. 

Veranius Flaccus, A. LXXXVI. 3 

Vergilius (Maro, P.), Cal. XXXIV. 2, 
XLV. 2; N. LIV.; D. IX. 1: 


Gr. XVI. XXIH.; Verg. 1, 5, 7, 
29, 38, 43, 46, 48; Tibull.; Luc., 
cf. A. XL. 5; N. XLVIL 2. 
Verginius Flavus, Pers. 
Verrius Flaccus, M. Gr. XVI., 
XVIII., XIX. 


Vespasia, V.1.3. A placein Umbria. 

Vespasia Polla, V. I. 3 (bis), v. 2. 

Vespasianus, the Emperor : Caesar, 
V. v. 2, XIIL; Vespasianus, 
XLV.; G. XXIII; Vit. xv. 1, 2, 
XVIL. 1; V. I. 3. II. 1, v. 7, VI. 
3 (bis), 4, MI 3, XV., XXII.; D. 
I. 3, II. 2, 

Vespasianus, D. xv. 1. 
Flavius Clemens. 

Vespasii, V. I. 3. 

Vespasius Pollio, V. I. 3. 

Vestae aedes, T. L., 3; N. XIX. 1. 
The temple of Vesta in the 
Roman Forum. 

Vestalis virgo, T. II. 4; N. XXVIII. 1; 
virgo maxima, J. LXXXII. 1; 
D. VII. 4; plur. Vestales virgines, 
J.I. 2; A. XXXI. 3, XLIV. 3, CI. 1; 
T. LXXVI.; N. XII. 4; Vit. XVI.; 
D. vii. 3. 

Vestinus Atticus, N. XXXV. 1. 

Vesuvius mons, Tit. vin. 3, 4; 
Plin. (Vesubius). 

Vettius, L., J. xvi. 1 (bis), 2; 
cf. XX. 5. 

Vettius Philocomus, Gr. Ir. (bis). 

Vibius Crispus, D. III. 1. 

Vicetinus, -a, -um, Gr. XXIII. 

Victoria, A. 0. 2; G. X. 4. Victory 
worshipped as a goddess. 

Vidius, Gr. XIV. 

Vienna, Vit. IX., XVII. A town of 
southern Gaul on the Rhone, 
modern Vienne. 

vigintiviri, A. IV.; cf. J. Xx. 

Vindelici, A. XXI. 1; Hor. A 
people "dwelling in the northern 
part of Raetia. 

Vindelicus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Vindelici: bellum, T. 1x. 1, 2. 


Son of 


Vindex, see Iulius, 

Vinicianus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Vinicius : coniuratio, N. XXXVI. 1 

Vinicius, A. LXXI. 2. 

Vinicius, L., A. LXIV. 2. 

Vinius, T., G. xiv. 2; Vit. vm. 1. 

Vinius Philopoemen, T ^h XXVII. 2. 

Vipsanius, M., Verg. 4 


Viriatinus, “a, -um from 
Viriatus (Viriathus), a " leader 
of the Lusitanians: bellum, G. 


III. 2. 

Viselliensis, -e, adj. of uncertain 
origin; Pass. 

Vitellia colonia, Vit. I. 3. 

Vitellia, Vit. I. 2. A goddess. 

Vitellia via, Vit. I. 3. 

Vitellianus, -a, -um, adj. from 
Vitellius : ded D. rir. 2; 
milites, V. VIII. 

Vitellii, Vit. 1. 1, A 9. 

Vitellius, A., Vit. II. 2. Uncle of 
the emperor. 

Vitelius, A., the Emperor. A 
Vitellius, L. filius, imperator, 
Vit. IIl. 2; imperator Vitellius. 
Vit. 1. 1; Augustus, Vit. VIII. 
Caesar, Vit. VIII. 2; Pills, 
Oo. i 1 VU i 1; "Vit. vil. 
XVII. VI. 2, 4, VII. i 
XIV.; nine Vit. VIII. 2, 
XIV. '4; Concordia, Vit. XV. 4 

Vitellius, L., Vit. 11. 2, 4, mI. 2; 
Pers. Father of the emperor. 


Vitellius, Vit. II. 2. Grand- 
father of F the mpar: i 

Vitellius, P., Vit. u. 2, 3. Uncle 
of the’ emperor. 

Vitellius, Q., Vit. 1. 2. Uncle of 
the emperor. 

Vitellius, see Petronianus, 

Volaterrae, Pers. (bis). A town of 


Etruria. 

Vologaesus, N. LVII. 2; V. VI. 4; 
D. IL 2. Vologaesus. I, king of 
the Parthians. 

Voltacilius Plotus, L., Rh. 

Vonones, T. XLIX. 2. 'A king of the 
Parthians 

Vulcatius (Sedigitus), Ter. m. 

IV., V. 


XENON (commonly Zenon), T. LVI. 


555 


INDEX 


Xenophon, J., LXXXVII. (Cyrop.). 
Xerxes, Cal. XIX. 3 


ZENODOTUS, Gr. XI. 

Zmyrna, Gr. XVIII. (bis); An epic 
poem of C. Helvius Cinna, a cone 
temporary of Cicero and Caesar, 
on the subject of the love of 


Myrrha, or Zmyrna, for her father 
Cinyras. Although the poem was 


- of small compass he spent nine 


years in elaborating it, and it 
abounded in obscure mythological 
allusions and pedantic learning; 
so that many graminariang ac- 
quired fame by writing commen- 
taries on it. 


Richard Clay and Sons, Ltd., London and Bungay. 


MAY 24 1915 


eT kf 


Digitized by Google 


Digitized by Ca oog le 


